Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Albucasim begins his words.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh children, grant me permission to complete this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, for it leads to your health and through its explanations and statements, I see that I must fulfill my task in providing this treatise, which forms part of the medical operation and is akin to surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the medical operation is confined in our region and time to private practice, which poses great risk to its science, and its legacy remains; it would not have survived without some small descriptions in ancient books, which correct many misunderstandings leading to errors and misinterpretations that extend the effort of learning and practice.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I should revive this order of this treatise according to the method of exposition and declaration, as well as abbreviation; and to include in the descriptions of the tools like the cautery and other equipment for work, as well as preparation which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The reason why skilled craftsmen in their own trade do not exist in our time is that the art of medicine is long and complex. One must be acquainted with anatomy to practice this science properly; understanding the youth of body parts, their forms, their connections and separations; knowing about bones, nerves, lymph nodes, their number, and their location; knowledge about pulsating veins and those that are still, and the places where they are found.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And it is for this reason that Hippocrates said that in his name, work exists, but more so in the craft of hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	May we have already said in the introduction to this book; whoever does not know what we have explained about anatomy cannot avoid falling into error which could lead to the death of people, as I have seen too many cases of such individuals who are educated in this science but abandon it for another field of study and experimentation.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	I have seen a doctor who has treated an erysipelas (a type of skin infection) on the neck of a woman and incised some neck arteries causing much bleeding that led to the woman's death in her later years.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I have seen another doctor who was about to swallow an omen (a sign indicating future misfortune) on the face of a man whose condition had progressed into its final stages, and the omen was large. It came towards him, and he used a piece of the bladder to remove that omen from his body; it resulted in that man dying on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I already had to remove that (the omen), and I saw that due to the size of the omen and the position of the patient beneath it, he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I have seen another doctor who took a reward from the Duke of our land for surgery. He operated on a black prisoner whose leg had been broken; he showed off his lack of knowledge by removing the fracture, covering it with cotton and bandages made of strong fabric, and did not allow air to escape the wound.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And he then proceeds according to his desires, he heals, and he waits several days to clean the wound as instructed; and this is also true when the bone is treated with erysipelas, it leads to ruin.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I had him treated, and equipped to remove the bone, achieving peace and alleviation of his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, the corruption was confirmed in the member, so I could not prevent that, and the corruption continued to wander within the body of the patient, which posed danger.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I have seen another doctor who drilled an abscess and was infected some days later; during this time, the wickedness in him increased towards his lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The reason is that the juvenile cauterization is pure of melancholic humor; therefore, it does not allow it to spread throughout, but rather it is a part that suffers from being affected by everything.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, children, it is necessary that medical operation be divided into two aspects: one associated with health during the operation itself, and one where there is great risk in major dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already established this throughout this book in discussions about operations where mistakes and fear occur. Therefore, it is necessary for you to remember this and avoid deception, so that the pages do not accuse you of speaking ill of others or misbehaving.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore, take your weapons in the service of God and protection, and your patients to happiness and strength.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way through God's grace to seek salvation and a commendable succession, and leave your terrible patients with difficult recovery. Keep your weapons from what makes you afraid, so that stability is in your faith and your name does not disappoint: for this remains as an honor to you, more in this world and later at your sanctification.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gualia already mentioned some wise teachings:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not treat the sick wrongly, for bad doctors are not named."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have completed this book according to three main topics.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The division of the book begins, and this is the start of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is ordered within the foot, regarding the forms of tools and cautery equipment, as well as what is necessary in an operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, concerning dryness and piercing, as well as suction blisters, plagues, the extraction of arrows, and similarity to those, all detailed and organized with regard to the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, concerning restoration and dislocation, as well as the treatment of torsion and similarity to those; an ordered chapter about the head in relation to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	About the cautery with fire and the use of acute medicine, remembering the operation procedure.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	This is how we begin the treatise on all freedom.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I will tell you about the quality of those cautery elements and their products, and in which condition it is prohibited to use cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	So I say that the discourse on the quality of the cautery's product and its aftermath is lengthy and verbose, subtle in knowledge, and concealed; many wise men have spoken about this extensively, and they disagree with each other. However, it suffices for me to consider one aspect of their discussions, as they fear protractedness.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And so I say that cautery agrees with the entire body universally in terms of substance or its constituents, except for two components, which are the tail substance's complexes.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the complex of tail and dryness, there is matter that will be dried out; some argue that cautery should be used with this kind, while others contend against it, stating that cautery isn't suitable for illness in terms of quality and dryness. As nature is about quality and dryness, it's inconvenient to use cautery on a tail and dry ailment when aiming for healing to occur from being dried out and made dry again.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And it is argued against that which you said, stating that with cautery, youth is applied to all tail and dry illnesses that occur in human bodies. When comparing the body of a person and its humidity to the complexity of fire, you find that the body burns.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	I say through the discourse of those who have already discovered this through experience several times.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, I do not delve into what has already been explored and practiced in the chapter on cautery for subsequent exercises, understanding the diversity of body composition and the disposition of illnesses in their parts, as well as the causes of those ailments, the occurrences related to them, and the duration of time for these.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other complexes, you have nothing to fear, especially in damp and wet ailments; all doctors are familiar with those issues, there's not much disagreement among them. As for using cautery on youth, this is a topic they do not dispute about.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, children, that concerning the secret of healing through cautery with fire and the goodness thereof, there is a burning medicine for cautery; as fire is simple, its action only affects the member being cauterized and does not spread to other parts unless it's adjusted very slightly with minor harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	The action of the burning medicine reaches that far into the members from which it spread, and gently brings about difficulty in healing and makes them hard to treat.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	The fire, due to its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do this except that it overflows. We have known this through experimentation and a long period of service studying the art based on the truth of causes; thus, I justify myself for the length of my discourse. If it were not that this is not contained in my freedom as it's hidden to you concerning fire, and the quality of its operation within bodies and its expulsion through which you expel illnesses, a philosophical demonstration would be necessary to clarify these points, one that would benefit your understanding.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, children, that they disagree about the time when it's best to perform cautery and choose the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	I say that cautery is convenient at all times; because the harm due to accidental time lapses is submerged in the youth of what was subjected to cautery, and especially if cautery is for pain or necessary pains, strong aches and swellings, which do not tolerate delays as feared by those who might suffer from malice, which is greater than minor harm occurring over time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And this does not concern your understanding or, children, those who only value the common people and laymen doctors, for it's that when an illness is healed with cautery, it doesn't warrant doing so at all times, thus they refrain from such actions.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the reason is not just this concern about it, for cautery is merely like medicine that alters composition and dries out humidity which causes pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	However, unnecessary cautery in addition to medicine due to its effectiveness and the virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it's possible that its illness may return at some point in time, according to the composition of the illness and the location of the patient's ailment, as well as its virtue, and what is prepared within their body due to the accumulation of excesses, and what they consume or are exposed to from those causes; otherwise, if cautery was applied to an illness, it might have been a subtle illness with few excesses and humidity. Thus, it's possible that such pain doesn't recur in them, but rather, actions like this occur gradually.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	A common medical term is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it's a professional term, not something I understand from them, as they believe it's not a cure that improves through medicine or any other cause leading to cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the reason is contrary to that; and I understand that cautery is the last remedy of medicine but it's only when administering the methods of treatment in some diseases, and those medicines don't work, then at the end of the cause, one administers cautery, improving towards that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here, it's clear that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to my understanding which aligns with common beliefs among doctors and many people.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they would say that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they wouldn't say this otherwise due to the equality of gold and its inferiority in substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they would say that the location of cautery doesn't cause pain, but this isn't absolutely true, for I have already tested it and found that it doesn't do this in most cases, rather when using a metal rod. Cautery with gold is good and better than iron as they claim; however, yet when you apply cautery over fire with gold, it's not as described, as it melts according to the amount of gold desired for its heat, and one needs to prepare to receive the flame. And if you adjust it on the flame, then the gold melts in the fire, and sometimes a few layers are produced so that the craftsman can work based on the shape of that metal piece.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And because of this, when doing cautery with iron, you should do it more lightly and more precisely according to the nature of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already organized this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have organized those pertaining to the feet under them because they often request this treatment from you.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Regarding cautery for headache due to coldness and dampness.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery treatment involves applying heat to the head and neck area as a remedy for humidity and coldness causing various inflammatory reactions such as swelling in the joints, head movement disorders, and symptoms like fluid flow from the ears and throat, sleep disturbances, tooth pain, and stomach discomfort. It is universally effective against any illness caused by coldness, whether it manifests as paralysis, edema or stroke, and seems similar to those conditions.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The method of this cautery is as follows: initially instruct the patient to take a restorative medicine on their head, either for three or four nights, according to what suits the patient's condition and age, and their usual practice.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then you instruct them to wash their head with water and shave it. Next, make the patient sit on a lowered chair and place their backside on their seat.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then put your palm's edge close to the nose tip between their ears.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, when you have determined the right spot, mark that area with a test, and then heat up an olive cautery as follows:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that over the marked spot on the test area in such a way that it descends slowly, ensuring your hand is slightly constricted gradually, and you rotate it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then raise your hand slightly and observe the spot. If you see any part of the bone being revealed, like oil droplets, do so similarly to how sugar crystals are formed, lift your hand if you don't see it return to that iron, or another one, when it is cold. When doing this, ensure what I have told you is visible from the mouth.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it on that spot, leaving it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place your heated finger over the spot and leave it until the burnt skin is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with tetrathymol ointment until it heals.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they would say that when a wound is opened like the Romans did, it heals better and faster, which makes it preferable and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they would say that the jawbone is treated with cautery inside the mouth, and that the cautery should be applied until a part of the bone's texture becomes adhered.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then remove what has stuck to the bone like this, and then treat it accordingly.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And they would say that when the cautery reaches the back, it should cause strong pressure in the mouth so that the bone falls out, and this is how to treat small ulcers:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they expect from that area the release of vapor from the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if the wound remains open for a long time, then it should be treated until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	And for myself, I have not seen these two types of head cautery at all, but rather in some people according to their fear; leave it alone, my lord, better is with health when possible. When the head heals through the continuity of its own juices as we have testified in other parts, and especially when the head of the patient has a dry nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is better and safer for me; from that one, I do this work with health.
Capitol segon.	The second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	Regarding head cautery.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When a chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the entire head and this lasts in the patient's body over time, and if they use head massages, hot baths, cold baths, hair rinses, bandages, pillows, and similar remedies, particularly when it has already been treated with an iron cautery that doesn't exacerbate these causes, then consider whether the head of the patient is robustly formed according to their nature; and if not dry but somewhat sensitive to heat, then this head should be treated differently. Apply another type of cautery, allowing a few days for it to take effect.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then apply the cautery on that spot above his forehead in the middle where the pulse has split.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Incise the pulse and reveal the amount which we have recounted, then apply the cautery on that spot behind the head in the place which is called gout - and that is the place where suction takes place.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And comfort your hand in ashes, and do not expose the hole, for the patient experiences great diverse pain due to this method compared to all other head cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I direct this cautery in its place, for it appears that among the cauterizations of the horns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cautery than that which is applied to the middle area of the head; this is how it should be done.
Capitol ters.	Head high.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Regarding the non-ancient cautery for migraine.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When pain is concentrated in the split of the head, or when pain is confined to the neck, it should be treated with medicines that cool and soothe the head. Then apply other treatments as directed for diseases; if this does not relieve the condition, then cautery on you is done in two ways: either with the application of an acute medicine-cauterizing treatment, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Cauterizing with a burning medicine involves taking one dol of aloes, boiling that, and cutting off the ends of it on both sides of the head.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then pierce the pain area on the temple with a scalpel near where it is done in you, within which the pulse is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And apply strength on you stopped by downward constriction, and let it pass through the spaces of three hours; and spread it out with the aloe, and leave the wound for two or three days, and place your hand under water in which the spot makes white.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with ointment where it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you see, do this with some burning medicines which I have written in the detailed treatise on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	The cautery with iron according to this method: heat it until this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	And it is called iron key, where the head of which is thus as a form of a thorn, and in its middle part there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place your hand over the pain spot, and hold your arm - so that the heat of the iron which is left does not burn you - and move the small piece of iron little by little at speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount that gets burned by the sensitivity of the pulse thus much is more than half of you, raise your hand in such a way that the artery which is left does not get burned, so that no bleeding comes about.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak your hand in salt water and place it over the area, and leave it for three days; and then dip your hand in water again, and after that treat with ointment when it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see, cauterize at the end of the surgical blade according to cautery, and watch out for cutting into the artery in this non-ancient migraine.
Capitol quart.	Head fourth.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Regarding the treatment of ancient migraines with cautery.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat migraines as we have said about the treatment previously, and as we said in the divisions of diseases, if this does not fully heal and due to the disease that is not enough for you what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then it appears that you should ignite the surgical knife until it whitens, since you place your hand over the pain area on a line of length which is the most of what was said, or move there; and pause your hand for once and strengthen that while you pierce into the artery and go inside the skull.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which causes chewing loss, and that the tongue not get burned and the nerves which make that happen, and that no spasms occur.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it's concerning the care and caution of blood flow from the cut artery, which causes fear especially for those who don't know what they're doing and aren't studious or careful; leave the operation with you at its beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will return to the recall of the procedure for blood flow accidents involving an artery according to its method, in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this disease does not satisfy this cautery and sees the tolerable body of the patient, apply this cautery in the middle of the head as we have recounted, and treat the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter on streich of arteries with a cautery having two needles, and this is better cautery and more compatible.
Capitol .v.	Head V.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Regarding the treatment of earache with cautery.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear due to cold and with other treatments which I have mentioned in the division, if this pain does not subside, then heat the cautery, and it is this one called needle-pointed, where this is its form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And if necessary, make a small incision near the navel, and guide it around the entire ear area like a wheel is turned, or in the circuit of any time periods where pain occurs.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Continue with the application of the ear candle cautery gradually, step by step, until you have found the right spot and tried.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery is applied at all points of the ear, and you find that way, then treat the areas inside where they heal.
Capitol .vi.	Capital VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Regarding the treatment of torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Torture which is cured with cautery; it is not a matter of the specific types that come through phlegm, as we have said in our divisions of illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid the cautery for the type that requires it due to drying or nerve spasm.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that type of torture with jujubes, purging herbs and tonics, and if you don't confirm your treatment, then understand that when you treat the patient with three cauterizations: one on the navel, another a little below their groin at the lower belly temperature area, and the third at the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause your cautery on the opposite side of the affected part, where only healing occurs in that healthy area.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cautery is to apply it near the tip of the ear on the lower side a bit above the edge of the head, and at another point in the belly area whose length corresponds to the length of this hand, then place your hand with the cautery where the amount of tissue of the disease burns.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the method for cautery, which is a specialty of surgery, the shape of which is on the front side.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it's somewhat subtle that one does this with a few touches; and understand that if you apply it in the place of excessive fatness, then just a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And adjust your treatment for the area where it is in front of the process until it heals.
Capitol .vii.	Capital VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Regarding the treatment of old apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it with what we've said, but if the patient does not respond to your treatment and they do not have fever, then apply four cauterizations: over all parts of their head; and at the middle part of the head as we've said; and apply it on the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method for applying cautery is done according to what was described above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And once it's cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and rather behind that; and adjust your treatment according to how you proceed.
Capitol .viii.	Capital VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Regarding the treatment of forgetfulness caused by phlegm.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	And if you give them to the patient at the beginning with large jujubes and pellets that help digestion.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then scrape the entire head of the patient and pause on their neck, covering it with plaster as described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And pause there for a few touches, that is the method of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to that order of methods which I have already described.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And so if it results in good health; otherwise, then do this for them three times on the last part of their head, which should descend from the part more above the head to the part more below the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause between each cautery for as long as this dictates, and adjust your treatment according to how the cautery proceeds.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	And if your addition and the patient tolerates it, then apply cautery in the middle part; and if you have a greater addition, then apply cautery over both parts.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And adjust your treatment until it is healed; and let the olive oil be applied according to the method given beforehand.
Capitol .ix.	Capital IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Regarding the treatment of gout and the soothing of all the body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	And if you proceed in digestion of the head with jujubes and as we have said; then scrape the patient's head, and apply cautery at the middle part of the head, and apply it over all parts of the head, and apply it on the last part of their neck, and apply three cauterizations on the cervical vertebrae.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the illness of soothing throughout the body for many parts and the patient tolerates it, but the illness is strong, then apply cautery at four points on both cervical vertebrae, and pause with your hand where the entire neck burns, and lift up your own hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And adjust this until it is healed, and let this be olive oil cautery.
Capitol .x.	Capital X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Regarding the treatment of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not treated with cautery for epilepsy, only this type that comes from phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And if you are digesting the brain at the beginning of your treatment with jujubes and another treatment which we have described in the division when the patient can tolerate the exclusion of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not tolerate the medicines, then administer tonics and chewables that help digestion, before that for several days, with proper food digestion.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the patient's head, and then apply a cautery to that spot on the middle of the head according to the previous method, and apply another cautery on the back of the head, and over each corner of their head, they apply a cautery.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then apply those cauteries as I said, while having a paralytic effect on the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And apply an olive oil-based cautery as previously described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is a child, then use a subtle cautery method according to this way.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the treatment of melancholy with cauterization.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and weak with moisture, then apply those cauteries over the areas that we have mentioned in having paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is an excess that leads to melancholy, and the patient's body is moistened, then have them drink what cleanses the brain according to what was previously discussed in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the head of the patient, and then make a decent tortoise shape from it around the circle, and then place that in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And if the patient is sixty years old, and has been treated from every part.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a liniment; it is worthy to be used as an old sheep's remedy.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that over the fire for a well-measured warmth, which gives them satisfaction as it increases in them.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then place that in the middle of the head on the circle, and let him stay inside until it has cooled.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this for the patient throughout a week once, following his other regimen until he is healed; or if you want, apply this to make small punctures according to his best interest, otherwise place your hand on a cautery as ordered: this is the type of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then let that cooked piece of meat rest in a broth or in the grease of blubber.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the application of water-based cauterizations to the nose.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is confirmed that the water treatment begins in the nose according to the symptoms I have mentioned in the division, then start and give the patient what cleanses their head, and protect them from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And let that sugar dissolve slowly in water for a few days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And command the patient to wash their head, and apply a cautery over the middle of the head; and then apply two cauterizations on each temple if it is the beginning of water descent in both noses, or one on either side if it is the beginning of water in one nose.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Apply the cautery to all veins and arteries that are left in the chain; and make these cauterizations quite far from the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And watch out for bloody discharges when it is being cauterized; and if you see his bloody discharges from him, give him some medicine, which may be within your reach.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will come with knowledge about the extraction of arteries and removal of those, along with caution for bloody discharges.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some times it is cauterized in the neck between two bones by two cauterizations placed directly behind each other.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the treatment of ancient tears (i.e., long-standing or chronic eye issues).
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the noses are gently ancient and exist through veins and arteries in the outward location of the head manifesting above the face, and it has been confirmed that this is an excess of phlegm, then apply a cautery with the cautery we have recounted for the beginning of water treatment affecting the noses, and apply a cautery in the middle of the head, two cauterizations on each temple, and two cauterizations on each bone near the neck.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you feel the need for addition (meaning there is more work to be done), then apply a cautery over the entire length of the nostril on the outer edge of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the treatment of nasal odor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you are treating it with what we have discussed in the division and do not improve your treatment, then prepare and give to the patient three nights of almond milk; and then shave the head of the person, and apply an olive oil-based cautery over this.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then apply a thorn-based cautery, and two small cauterizations on each eyebrow leaving a little hair.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And watch out not to ignite that artery.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is how the thorn cautery should be performed.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the treatment of eyelid softening in the nose area.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the nose becomes softened due to disease or moisture, then apply that eyelid with this moon-based cautery; and this is how you should do it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, cauterize that above both eyebrows slightly between two points in all parts, and make them extend up to the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard on your hand at the cautery, rather according to how much of the inner eyelid is heated.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On the cautery of the eyelid when the skin is converted to parts inside and around the hand.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the skin of the eyelid is converted to parts inside and around it, when I touch the eyelid, I do the cautery in two ways, which type of cautery or whether with medicine that burns.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If it's a cautery you're performing with fire, instruct the patient in front of this so that they feel their skin as those who are being shaved do, let them be extended and made equal; and if you hold onto that place, then strengthen the eyelids with your hand so that they don't get burned when their hair grows back under their skin.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	So when they are grown and made equal, then place the patient's head on your shoulder, and over the eyelid of their eyes apply a tentative touch, mark the one according to the shape of a maple leaf, and make the start of the mark near the hair.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And place about a pinch in beaten egg white or pus from scabies on the eyelid.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And apply heat to the cautery of which this is its form for you.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And apply the cautery to the figure which you marked, little by little in spots seen, while burning the surface of the skin that is like a maple leaf, altogether appearing quite precisely.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And as a sign of your work's health is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs of it raised above the point of the eyelid.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and leave that for three days, and place over it a pinch inside so that the scar is raised.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And place healing balm on it while it heals.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	And if for any reason returns the hair at their origin and the eyelid becomes soft, then do another layer of cautery over that just as you did first.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	And if the hairs are on the eyelid remaining, then cauterize that until it rises to its natural place and is made equal so that the hairs do not burn the eyelid.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And the cautery with burning medicine is that you command the patient to feel their skin until it's extended and made equal, and then have done on linen cloth the shape of a maple leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take some well-known soap and a live ash stick. .1., o does this, and mix those ashes well in water; do it quickly so that it doesn't cool down. Then spread this over the linen cloth made as a maple leaf shape, place this on one eyelid or both; put a pinch of beaten egg white on this, and have the patient's head on your shoulder.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place the same on the medicine and press that gently but don't burn it while the patient feels the sensation of the medicine's bite, which bite is in them as if from fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when this persistent biting sensation continues, then feel the medicine and remove it from your shoulder; once this biting sensation ceases, then again apply the medicine by washing it off with water; then consider if the eyelid has already risen as if washed of its scabs by fire or incision, which is now done. And if it doesn't return to that place on the spot where you applied the medicine and doesn't disappear until your operation is equalized and the eyelid is contracted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place over it a pinch inside until the scar of the adjustment is eradicated, and afterwards treat that with ointment or another while it heals.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And for this, you must keep watch over your operation with diligence so that no part of the medicine falls into the eyelid. If the eyelid softens after some days and any hair causes burn in the eyelid, then apply your medicine to that place on the eyelid which has softened, precisely like you did at the beginning, and surround it until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the shape of a maple leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	Know that men's eyelids vary according to their size and thickness, thus according to this you will perform your contraction.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And let there be no concealment of the path to rectitude towards that which is studied in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cautery for a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula with what we've discussed in the divisions of illnesses and don't apply your treatment, then you should perform this method when cauterizing it: command the patient to place their head on your shoulder, and have one of their servants between your hands in such a way that neither their head is burned nor disturbed under their own head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And place heat in an oil bath or on fat over their stomach.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And apply the hot cautery of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	Which should be heated, like when it takes the shape of a cane or a goose quill pen, from one end where the cautery is applied.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see, it should penetrate into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to come out like when it is tested.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, the heated one is better for the country's work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And if there is an abscess, press it if it has opened, and cleanse him of it and dry that area.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it hasn't opened, then open it and remove the pus from him.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And apply over him the heated cautery which should be very hot, and hold it to his stomach until your hand or the patient doesn't get agitated, then leave the cautery on the gray area of the stomach and let that one cool down.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And so, if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the mouth, it's good; otherwise, then reapply the cautery once or twice if needed; and leave that one for three days, then apply a heated point around it and inside him apply an exsiccating oil to heal him.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	And if it has passed ten days and he is not healed, then apply the sharp corrosive medicine inside where the bone appears and scrape him according to what seems appropriate in his manual.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another method for the cautery of an abscess that some initially described: go to the place of the abscess and open it up and apply there a fine line of what is like him, And then put in that place half a unit of melted lead; and hold your hand firmly, so you don't hurt the patient because the melted lead doesn't penetrate into his stomach; and when you hold over the stomach of the patient heat as if immersed in oil bath or water, where the lead adheres to the abscess site and heals it through a miraculous cure.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the abscess is healed as we've said about the cautery and the cure, it's good; otherwise, then it's necessary to administer through the nose and reduce the abscess to the body of the nose according to where it naturally fits.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cautery of the fissure in the foot.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Red spots often occur on fissures in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Then as you treat those fissures with what we have told you in the divisions and do not deepen your treatment, then heat up the small cautery knife according to this form that is used:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let the size of his cavity match the subtlety of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	And then hold that initial cautery within those fissures where the cautery reaches the inside of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with plaster until he is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cautery of abscesses in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the uvula or on the palate or in the back of the throat there's pus and you feel warmth, then it bursts, heals old wounds, you bleed them, and form an abscess; when this happens, you should treat that without deepening the treatment, then take the cautery until its heat reaches inside the abscess cavity, place the heated part in the mouth of the abscess canal, and hold your hand so that the heat of the fire penetrates to its root, do it once or twice; then cure that with what we have told you about healing until he is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And so, if the healing has been removed and he is healed, it's good; otherwise, then it's necessary to find the location and extract the infected bone according to what seems appropriate in its manual.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the cautery of teeth and the alleviation of mucous membranes.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are painful, if you treat those with medicines and do not apply hot substances, then hold the patient's head in its usual position, and heat up the cautery according to what will be roughly similar for this task. Make sure that you place the point of the cautery on each tooth while applying it immediately, holding your hand close so that the heat from the flame reaches inside the tooth cavity.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand, and reapply the cautery a few times according to what you desire.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then let the patient gargle with salt water for an hour and leave it in that state. Once this process is done, if the toothache is reduced and the gum softness is strengthened, and the moisture is dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cautery for tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to coldness or there's pus or worms present, and you don't apply treatment with medicine, then perform the cautery in two ways for that: either by applying heat on cow's sides, or by applying heat using fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Applying heat on cow's sides involves taking cow's horns and heating them in iron, then taking a point and wrap it around the end of the horn, immerse that heated point into hot water, and hold that over the painful tooth until it is cooled.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then iterate that several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you see, immerse wool or cloth in the heat above that, then place that over the painful tooth, and place the heated iron there until the heat reaches inside the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	May however be cautious with the use of fire in cauterization, wait for the smell of flesh or iron, and if there's any pus or infection in the patient's body, ensure that the heat of the fire doesn't reach inside the tooth cavity.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then heat the tip of the cautery to its desired form, place that over the tooth and put your hand inside as long as the cautery heats up; do this several times until the pain is intensified either on that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And understand that because of this heated cautery, the patient's mouth fills with a good warmth and keep that for one hour then drink something; this is how the process of using a cautery works.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And apply heat to whatever you see is extreme, according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the way of inserting an intravenous line:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the treatment of protrusions by cautery.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When protrusions are due to phlegm and cold fluids that do not respond well to digestion through medicines, if you notice the digestion of those is slightly improving, then heat up the tip of the cautery to its usual shape, having two outward extensions so that you can release the smoke from one extension when heating it for the other. Place the heated end on the protrusion once, and another time if needed until it reaches the root of the lesion.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and apply it for three days, then take a rest with a cloth in heat for several hours until what was burnt by the fire returns.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that area with ointment and wraps, trying to heal it until it's cured.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The way of using an intravenous line or applying the cautery is like this:
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On treatment of a sore throat and constriction in the chest through cautery.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When moisture enters the bronchial channel, especially when this is due to cold constitution, understand that the patient needs to be relieved at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then apply cautery to heat up the root of the esophagus in the area where it's being squeezed.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And watch out that you do not apply the cautery to the esophagus or burn at the root of the patient's neck, just a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And apply the cautery there using another tip aimed at the junction of the throat with the lower part of the spine.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The application of the cautery to the patient's collarbone should be done in accordance with the previous method.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that area with what was previously applied until it heals.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On treatment of lung disease and coughing through cautery.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung trouble are due to moisture, if the patient doesn't have a fever or rash and has old coughing issues, then apply cautery using two tips on the sternum at the lowest parts of the ribs and collarbones; and another tip in the middle of the chest between the breasts; and for the collarbone application follow the previous method.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, use point-like cautery which is called puncture, with the form described in the puncturing of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points inside each; and then treat that area with the medicine that was previously applied until it heals.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And by the time the cautery has three phases of treatment as this: you can do three applications in this manner:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On treatment of a tickling sensation at the tip of the tongue.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the tip of the tongue is displaced due to slippery moisture and does not return to its usual position within the time it takes for its return, understand that you need to reduce the displacement first, then have the patient lie down on their back or on their left side; and then raise the neck which is located in the inner part of the tongue at the junctions above your left hand's fingers, if the junction is displaced inward.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat up two tips of the cautery; and this is how to perform it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then apply the cautery to the neck until it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the treatment will come this way using four tips of the cautery.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and he administers it according to the amount of the mixture; this is how it works:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And in some cases, adjustments are made according to this count and why they use cauteries for eight times.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place on the cautery salted flesh, and make sure to adhere the patient to being sewn up tightly, and ensure that the member is not swollen for any time until it is comfortable.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in parts above and below the knee, then apply cautery to the muscle over a bone or with point cauteries, where the joint is confirmed and moisture is reduced and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On performing cautery to the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold and moisture are inside the stomach, causing swelling of its content, and if you continue with your curative methods without rest, then it may happen that the patient will be on their knees, spreading out their arms and other parts. Then apply cautery three times: first, let the feet remain as wide as one finger's width for a point cautery on a bone, and in two cauteries spread over both sides of the stomach area where the triangular shape of the cautery will appear; extend those who are not adjusted to perform preparation.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the chain's knot.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, perform with large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; here is a cautery according to the circular shape as follows:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach is pricked at the point where it's frightened by this cautery: and you prick over the stomach with salt according to the amount you want in mixture, and then apply the cautery at that point; and treat it with the cure that precedes until it heals.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On performing cautery to the pelvic region.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the pelvic region due to cold or moisture or excessive wind causing its usual composition to be disturbed by an excess egress, and if the patient is treated as we have said without rest, then it may happen that the patient will be on their knees with their head up, applying three cauterizations according to this form; one and a half times the quantity of mixture over the pelvic region where the hips are, under the position when lying down for men.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and make the cauterizations according to the length of the right body.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And don't touch the salt with your fingers on the cauterization places.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of salt absorbed is as much as the thickness of a chain's knot, and it's not properly adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they're not standing, then lie down, which already has spread its limbs, and raise your arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is how it looks for the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And if you have the skill and prudence in this art, it is possible to perform these cauteries with knife-cautery.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And remember not to overdo the cautery process, ensuring that the salt is absorbed by the entire chain for the whole body's absorption and reaching into the intestines, where this chain is delicate. Know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On performing puncturing of a boil in the pelvic region with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is irritation or a boil in the pelvic region and you want to know if that boil is within the flesh of the pelvic area or the lining of the patient, then if it's inside the pelvic flesh, the patient shows significant weight loss and pain intensity increases.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it's within the lining of the pelvic region, then the pain is intense and frequent, often tiring out the doctors in treating the patient.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	And it may happen that the patient will be lying on their head; then mark the location of the boil with salt; and light the cautery which resembles a reed, as its shape was described in the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And apply cautery at that point and in the area where the entire chain becomes warm, reaching up to the kidneys, until it heals.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And treat that with healing for other boils until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this form of cautery but the one that extends over what is studied in the art of medicine, and on which many patients have suffered. But some cases may involve intense burning with this method, however, follow my advice here, it's better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On performing cautery on ulcers.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Ancient cauteries for the veins in ulcers were made by rubbing according to this method, and here's what you should do with the veins of aristology. Take a long slender vein that can be found, one as thick as your finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse that in oil and heat it over the fire, then apply cautery at that point which is between the continuation of the sternum and the neck; with two smaller points at that place where it declines towards the part behind the chin, and two cauterizations thereon declining a little behind the fifth rib and thirteenth vertebra, one declining slightly behind; and another cautery in the middle of the chest; and another on the stomach, and three cauterizations from behind; and one cautery at that point which is between the shoulders, and two cauterizations from each side of the chest, let the cautery be between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not let your hand touch the cautery, but be in the sight of the patient during its use.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And it has been said by some ancient men and some of the people who use a metal rod that resembles fire and heat, placing that inside the place which is between the backbones, going from there to there until it reaches that spot, then it heals healthily. As we have mentioned about that in the case of the wound of the leg, so too here.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	There is no fear in this kind of incision with the cautery; it's just that it often happens when you burn at that spot which does not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the application of the cautery to the gum.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat gum disease with what we have said about treatment in the division and without combining your treatment with others', then when applying the cautery to it, do so according to three methods. All of these are surgical techniques; one of them is to make three or four lines along the length of the gum as per the shape of the leg's cautery marks, which I have already described.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery mark, allow a thickness of one or two inches, and the technique for applying the cautery is the same method we described in the application of the leg's cautery marks equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not let your hand touch the cautery; and place the patient's legs on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way to apply the cautery, that being you ignite the cautery with two streams of fire; this we have described in the chapter about muscle dislocation, and raise the patient so they can extend their left leg without it getting stuck.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be such that you raise the body according to the length of the person's body, so that the cautery applications are done according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And move both streams inward, ignite the flame, in that place where those penetrate from the other side of the body.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cautery; and thus it is done by making four cautery applications.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see fit, apply the cautery with three streams of fire.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you treat the application of the cautery because it has been too long without getting rid of heat for too many days; more so than other previous causes in treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the application of cautery to dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Apply the cautery not in dropsy but correctly, specifically.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat dropsy with the methods of treatment that we have described in the division and without combining your treatment with others', then it's necessary to apply the cautery in four places: on the circuit of the kidneys, above the stomach, on the leg, between the shoulder blades, one on the right side of the back, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery should be proportionate to the thickness of the skin.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then smooth out the application of the cautery in such a way that it releases heat for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And when you don't evacuate the patient of treatment near the cautery as it tends to cause two misunderstandings, and this is done with the help of healing aids.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery to which it is applied on the belly should be like a hook as it follows that shape before, and this is how it is done when applying the cautery to the back in accordance with its previous form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the application of cautery to feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen with dropsy and full of watery fluid, it is necessary to apply the cautery to the feet on the back of the leg as far as from the wrist to the finger, while holding your hand over the cautery but not twisting it; then raise your hand without turning that part completely so that the watery fluid drains out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The application of the cautery is as follows: Apply two cauteries on each thigh, and in every case apply a cautery at the end of the knife-like instrument.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And make the cauteries according to the length of the thigh: lay down one on the outer side and the other in the middle of the thigh; and apply two cauteries on each thigh.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And let the opened wound be treated for a long time, so that some water can drain from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then treat those causes that we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the application of cautery to abdominal regions.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdominal region is due to friction and dampness causing dislocation, these are digestive and retentive qualities, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is treated according to the methods of treatment without combining them, and sometimes the patient suffers from the application of heat as an indication of their condition, so apply a large cautery over their stomach as described previously for abdominal region cauterization, on the circle's cautery, and four cauterizations in the subtle circuit of the kidneys, with a subtle hook-like cautery; and apply a cautery over the liver area on the side with a larger area or two cauterizations.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you notice excessive moisture and the patient tolerates it, then apply the cautery over the navel and over the intestines, and strengthen your adjustments of two cauterizations on the stomach and near the groin area, which is a complete cure from childhood with which you will not go wrong.
Capitol .xxxiv.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the treatment of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they occur naturally and cause old hemorrhoids or ones from thick humors or corrupted moisture, and these are treated as we have said in the division, but do not yield to your treatment, then you should apply three cauteries to the pus left on each of the two small and triangular spines, and to a point above the umbilical cleft by two digits.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that the stomach of the patient is cooled and their food has not spoiled, and their face is hot, then apply this with a large cautery as it precedes; and apply one to the chest, and another to the back, and another over the belly. Let the cauteries remain for some time after application, and soon treat them so that they can heal properly.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the treatment of abscesses close to the testicles.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove the testicle, then you should ignite the cautery that is assembled like a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Place the ignited cautery inside that testicle abscess, and finish your work so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the disease flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this one or two times, if there are too many abscesses, then you should cauterize each according to what we have described, and soon treat those with the treatment that yields from your ointments until they heal.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the testicles, it will last longer in youth.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the treatment of fistulas that occur naturally in the patient's parts.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not comply with the work we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, they should be treated with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when any has a fistula naturally and it is old, from the patient's health and corrupted moisture, then that pus which deserves to be removed you should introduce with a subtle probe, and then know the depth of that area where the previously mentioned probe was placed.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Place the cautery that resembles a ray and ignite it.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And place the ignited cautery in this fistula, according to the depth where the probe entered.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And apply this cautery repeatedly until those corrupted parts are burned out at least once or twice or three times, according to the amount of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful not to burn nerves or veins; if the fistula goes into the bladder or the intestine's cavity, then avoid all those places; do this treatment only when the fistula is in a muscular area and you think it doesn't go deep.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And treat that area until it heals.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed, and all materials have been removed from it, and it continues like this for a long time, then know that it has healed completely.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not entirely removed from him, then know that it is penetrating or in his stomach, or there comes a remembrance of those causes in its location.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the treatment of sores.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in sores there is pain due to cold or by excessive heat, and the thigh of the leg becomes reddened, then remove that which requires cauterization from the sores with a cautery on each sore, and apply it with a small point as you remember its location.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And apply the cautery gently at first, as there should come three linear cauterizations, and so they will last longer in youth.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the treatment of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When bladder inflammation and weakening occur due to cold and moisture, such that the leg does not retain urine, then you should apply the cautery in the area left above the bladder, as it begins at the skin of the thigh. Apply one cautery on the right side and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And make the length of each cautery according to the size of your patient's foot; apply this with a cautery on the lower part of both sides; or if necessary, use two cauteries.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And make the cauteries small as they are described to proceed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On the treatment of the arm.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is cold and moisture in the arm, thus it is prohibited to engage in coitus, and menstruation becomes disturbed in the patient, and the stimulation of their organs is delayed. Pain in the elbows occurs, then know that this location should be treated with three cauterizations around the navel region; as we have described for bladder cautery; or if necessary, apply two cauterizations on each side above this area; and use small point cauterizations.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture infiltrates the ankle region, and causes instability of its location, a sign is that the foot extends over the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	The location of the dislocation is found in their knee joint.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	So you should cauterize the patient's leg near the water part of his body with a similar-looking cautery. As for your hand, you will hold it in the circuit of that part like when it is being twisted, and so that the part does not fall into the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let the shape of the previously mentioned cautery be used in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this type of cautery is not available to you, then use three different ones: the large olive wood one.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And do the cauteries according to the intensity of the pain throughout the whole chain; and then treat that part once it has been healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLI.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Regarding the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the water part and is caused by friction and humidity, the patient recovers with what we have said earlier, but not simultaneously. If it is old, then you should release the patient from large fluids with pill-shaped items or with artificial pills or similar ones; and then cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of cauterization in this case follows two methods: or with burning medicines, or with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	There are two known methods, of which one is to cauterize that area on the width part of the body with three triangular-shaped cauteries according to this form; and make those have good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the spaces between each cautery are equal to the thickness of that mentioned, and whether it's an olive wood or large cautery.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Make some cuts on the middle part over the tip of the anus, so there will be four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize on the circle which was described in the cauterization of the dislocation of the water, that is, a circle that burns away all pain throughout the chain.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cauterization for a urinary tract where pain is attached to the water and does not spread into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	And if it does spread into the thigh, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the thigh over the place where you will hold the leg that is in pain; and with one cautery on the cavity for about four or so you should heat the calf part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if it's a knife-type cautery, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the intensity of the pain in the body.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the leg bends in such a way that pain is spread out in the vicinity of the ankle, then cauterize it here where you bend with a cautery for three or four points or more if needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the leg bends such that pain is left with a hole in the thigh, then cauterize it here with a knife-type cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And when doing any cauterization, make sure you don't finish with the cautery to the point of burning nerves or large blood vessels, so that through this there is no injury or constriction on the leg.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen several others who cauterize on the cavity and finish in the cauterization, and the fire-filled bed that allows the lump to gain possession of the foot, and the fire pierces and destroys completely the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And it leads to intense stomach acid production, and thus death occurs.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And some wise ones say about the cauterization of water: make it resemble a circular iron object, in which the circumference is as wide as a hand; and place its opening according to the thickness of an almond or just slightly more.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle there should be another piece of iron; and let the spaces between them be equal to the size of a small toe; and those circles should be cut into two parts; and make the length of those nails one nail or two nails, and create grooves for iron appropriately around the circles; and this is how it should look:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	And it should be ignited in the fire until it heats up and sparks, and then placed on the water part of the leg, with the patient lying down.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize that with three round-shaped cauteries in one operation.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then let that heal for three days; and cover that with bandages and let the open wound heal too, for too many days; and treat that with ointments until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: or children, of this type of cauterization we have used it for the sake of protecting him/her, and because we have found those who care about him/her.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	For those suffering from large cautery burns on them, find that place for yourself.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	And when cauterizing with burning medicines, you should make two circles hollowed out containing the iron dust; and let their circumference in the shape of nails be as wide as two or more of them.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the spaces between each are equal to the thickness of that mentioned; let them be cut both above and below, and so that they contain themselves among each other according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And place the patient on the water part of the leg and hold your hand over the water part; take hot water and place it between two circles, let its quality be in a small fire little by little, keep that for one hour, and let the patient taste the burning - like when it is from fire - until the burning stops.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand to the tool and wipe off all the water, including the heated water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And let it rest for three days and place it on the edge inside where the redness of the swollen adjustment is, then let him rest for some more days, and he will recover from his soreness. This lasts until old age.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And treat it with ointment inside where it has healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is widespread within the thigh or leg, have him sit in water according to how it's done for equal water.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of heated water, and I have already written about that in the treatise on correcting medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and non-extinguished oil, each in half parts, mix these and allow them to rest in a new wave. Let the half that is left be pierced by a small probe according to the quantity that enters his eye.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And let the bottom of the wave rest in another heated wave, and pour over this live alkali and oil with gentle water which takes these by a finger, and once you understand these with your hand for proper compression, then observe the scorching that emerges from the hot water in the remaining half to the heated wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And adjust all that water, pour it over another live oil and another fresh alkali. Then it will produce intense heat, which is administered in various medical operations and in the cauterization of other limbs. This operation is done with fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And there are some remedies in which the area to be cauterized is wide, such as acne, melanosis and oil rash on the skin that should be mixed together.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recounts an operation and its treatment from the ancients, which heals water pain and sciatica vein pain, and it is very admirable to be like that. And he says that there is no need for other treatments, and it becomes cured in one go as recommended, and it strengthens his internal organs already from that point.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be close to the gallbladder area, and if there is no gallstone, take a recent fig; then it should be mixed with a little oil and placed in water where there is pain or in the thigh, or on the leg, and it should be done.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it rest for a duration of three hours or according to the patient's tolerance until the swelling subsides.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And after that, immerse him in hot water until his body turns red, then expose him to the sun, when the pain stops and he is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that one should not apply cauterization to these remedies but rather facilitate the body's evacuation.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Mays Escorides explained that when there is a wound on the neck where the vein becomes narrow, it needs to be cauterized; this will make him more thin. And apply the cauterization as follows: take wool and heat it in ancient oil, then place it between his shoulders and under his armpit.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And after that, take a dry wound and apply it with fire inside where charcoal is made; then place him on the wool and let her rest until it expands.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And repeat this process, and do not stop until the sensation of biting goes into the water and rests on the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cauterization is called cattle cauterization.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On Cauterization of Two Pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some pains in both parts are due to various causes, such as by impact or by percussion or overactive evacuation, and for reasons similar to those, by infusion of wet material substance.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And only the cauterization is not done in this single type which is made through the effusion of abrasive material.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Then know that for evacuation of the patient using pills similar to them, which are made on both sides where there is pain three lines according to the width of his body, because signs appear in every line or more, depending on the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and its virtue.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And perform cauterization using point cauterization.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three or four cauterizations along the median clavih (arm bone) in this manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On Cauterization Concerning Gallbladder Disorders.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Various symptoms occur concerning this ailment in young children; and a sign of its onset in children is that it affects their structure causing elevation and increase in activity.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you find it at the end of the spine of the back and on his buttocks where it begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And once you identify this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that using point cauterization according to this manner:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	Let the cauterization cover all parts of the spine equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize along the spinal circuit with point cauterization for two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be evenly spaced between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then treat the area where it has healed with what we have said about water.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Mays advises that cauterization should not be administered in gallbladder issues caused by muscle spasms of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol .xliv.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Regarding the treatment of gout and joint pain through cautery.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus how gout caused by cold humors is cured through the method of treatment and not by relieving the pain, then applying a cautery remedy.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you apply cautery to that nearby evacuation in the foot's circulation around the joint with pointed cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of an olive oil cautery, such as:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains rise within the joints or to other joints, and if these points are felt, then apply this olive oil cautery over each joint up to three or four times around with this olive oil cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you apply these cauteries that are necessary for the treatment, then apply this olive oil cautery and do not press too hard with your hand before it, simply around the size of the vein.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains rise within the joint and even up to twice its size, then administer the cautery which we have described in our section.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the muscles, and it's called small heat, then puncture along the veins as they move, puncture at those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture along the veins over each bone and on the back of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains rise close to several days in the armpits or muscles, then apply this around all parts of the aids.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient of good order and reception of medicines, for if this is done with a good regimen and fever, the illness will be removed by this cautery and you'll achieve healing, God help.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Regarding the treatment of ruptures with cautery.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When feeling a rupture in the arteries and noticing bulges facing towards the front of the hernia, and if these start near that area, then it's advisable to guide the patient to leave his meals for the day and use mild remedies so that the opening in his abdomen might decrease.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then guide the patient between your hands on his back and instruct him to have his elbows inside so that either the hole gets smaller or the hernia appears, along with its bulges.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then guide that back to your fingers and try to locate the rupture over the bones of the heel, marking the end which is similar to half the circumference at the lower parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply the olive oil cautery as follows:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	So that it burns and produces sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then return the hernia or lump to its original size, and place your hand on that area to prevent the hernia from protruding again.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, had another servant on their legs, and had another one on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery on that mark with your hand and the point of the cautery straight, enter it so you reach the bones of the heel midway through the middle; try again at another location if in the first attempt you have not reached the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe the sensitivity of the lump during your cautery treatment, don't burn that lump to avoid any harm or severe ill coming upon the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when using the cautery, do not touch the bones, for this will not ensure your operation's success.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And consider that the size and measure of the children should determine the subtlety of the cautery used for them.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then treat the site of the cautery for three days with bandages until the scab of the burn is removed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that area with other ointments until healing occurs.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should remain on their back for 40 days until the site and wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And consider that you should adjust the patient's diet according to the duration of their healing process, which stretches their abdomen, and ensure the lump does not protrude due to the efforts of recovery.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when it's decided that around 40 days have passed, then administer the treatment correctly and keep that area under observation for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And if it is reduced from labor and fullness of food and drink, and from vigorous uses, then when using this complete regimen for healing, it will result in recovery.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I shall speak about the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and it's at the beginning, and if they are not contained, then apply this to the rupture of that using round points of the cautery according to the size of its body; so that the vein is drained like its right part. And then treat that with what we said earlier, and it should not be adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And they would say that for the first treatment, the rupture should be treated with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is done with trial and error:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and a line is laid out across the width in the middle above the rupture, and another line above it; then place your hand on a triangular cautery, but for the first cautery, it should be gentler and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the treatment of twisting (cautery).
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When the pain persists in certain limbs due to compression or impact and does not respond to healing with medicines for a long time, then it is advisable to treat with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And for the cauteries of all limbs according to their size and thinness, their effectiveness and development, and the location of the twist and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore if the first cautery helps, it is good; and otherwise, proceed with further cauteries; for customarily with those pains they are poked on the surface of the part that is closest to the patient, so that you might achieve those points within which the patient will be healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Capitol 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the treatment of leprosy (cautery).
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some lesions on the skin are treated with a cautery for quite a long time, and somewhat if it's due to the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And when you want to treat that lesion with cautery, consider whether the leprosy is widespread or has been treated elsewhere using what we have said in the division and not with this treatment, nor without it. And be careful about the patient's health that the corruption might comprehend his entire body and all its complexity. Then treat that area on the head with these cauteries: one at the middle of the head, and another a little further down from there; lift the forehead to the end of the hair; and both on two horns; and one behind, over the back or neck or nape.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And with your hand on the cautery for a little while enter into the mouth and make a small pressure, and if the patient has moved in previous treatments, so that the expulsion of thick vapors might be alleviated; then treat on the gums according to what is necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread on the body and manifests clearly, then it is advisable to treat that area with those cauteries we have mentioned for the head; also with a cautery on the end of the nose, and two cauteries on each of his cheeks, and two cauteries on the two shoulder blades of the neck, and five cauteries on the ribs, and one large one near the heel, and another on the waistband, and two on the buttocks, and one on each buttock, and two on the hips and one on each hip bone, and two on the elbows and two on the muscles; also treat that area over all joints of those mentioned in his arms and legs, and over each of his heels, and over the creases of his body.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And guard yourself from the nerves which are on the heel, do not treat those areas.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And some lesions are treated with a cautery on the bone of the knee and another in the mouth of the stomach, and another on the throat.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more precisely you adjust the cauteries, the more beneficial and effective they are; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as with the ears, because his body is already numbed.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And know that the cauteries should be large or small according to the limbs and joints as per instructions for the tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And after that, treat the cautery with a mixture of crushed wheat flour and honey and other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the treatment of stupefaction (cautery).
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any limb is paralyzed or asleep and treated with medicines, bandages, if it's not healed then you treat that paralyzed limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its thinness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery penetrate the skin slightly.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And after that, treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And some lesions are treated with a cautery for the stupefaction which affects his arms and legs, as well as his back ribs, you can see the nerves that have that limb, and the stupefaction is increased.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not presume about this unless it's someone who is knowledgeable in the anatomy of limbs and the emergence of nerves throughout the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Capitol 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the treatment of white marks that are moles.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When white marks are old and do not respond to any of the medicines' ointments, then you should treat that area with a preon cautery according to the amount of skin inside which the whiteness and color might be increased, and the color of the skin changes.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And after that, treat it with wheat flour and lentils mixed with roasting oil and with leaves of arnagrosa, and from each take half parts and all should be mixed together. Then cover with a linen cloth and place on the affected area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Capitol 50.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Regarding the treatment of burns.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When ulcers start and you want them to stop, then cauterize that with a circular point on the patient's body following its natural course, like it's being rolled.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise doctors say that when cauterized, do it with a point on the buttocks in the middle place; however, I don't see this way, fearing it might be an ulcer, and I have seen this several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And the liquid pus should be cauterized in the patient's body following a circular path as we have said, or with points of cauterization.
Capitol .li.	Head wound.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Regarding the treatment of ulcers.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some ulcer takes longer to heal, and this happens due to the excess causing it, or because of the patient's old age leading to decay, with few symptoms, or due to time, and you wish to expedite the healing process; then cauterize on the ulcer's surface with points of small puncture cauterization; and apply something that will hasten its healing afterwards.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you want the puncturing of the ulcer with cauterization, then light the cauterizing fire, which is the shape of the ulcer: and place that in the middle of the ulcer so that the needle penetrates.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cauterization is done in that spot where you placed it, because it will alleviate the arm's pain; and then treat that area until it heals.
Capitol .lii.	Arm wound number 52.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Regarding the treatment of corroding (or eating away).
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a spreading decay in the body, which destroys that as if fire eats dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	So if you see that corrosion in the affected area requiring cauterization with fire, then light up small and large point-like cauterizations as it suits that location where the corrosion is present.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And proceed with cauterization from all sides until you eliminate all the corrosion without causing any harm to it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And let that heal for three days, and place on the cauterized areas a mixture of oil beforehand until all scabs are eliminated and all decay is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then treat it with meat-producing ointments.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	If within three days the healthy flesh grows in the area where there was decay, that's good; but if not, then repeat the cauterization over what is rotten in those affected areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Corrosion can be treated with some doses of acute medicine, which acts at the site of cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, cauterizing with fire is quick and somewhat rejuvenating.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already mentioned the treatment of this with acute medicine in the section; therefore, take that when you have need for it from him.
Capitol .liii.	Arm wound number 53.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Regarding the treatment of constrictions and other similar conditions.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Visible symptoms in the areas removed of the arm patient that are called clavus, and this is a major, intrusive cause, which afflicts the arm; and cauterization on those follows two methods, namely cauterization with fire and cauterization with heated water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Cauterizing with fire is done by lighting the cauterization like a small cone, which is made of iron according to the quantity that contains the clavus from all sides, and it should have thin edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place that ignition on the clavus, and move your hand around the cauterization in the circuit of the clavus so that the cauterization reaches its depth.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let that heal for three days until you start to see recovery in the arm.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then cover that with bandages soaked in vinegar squeezed through salt, and let the bandage stay on that for a night, until it is removed of its scabs.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with meat-producing ointment until it heals.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it is not converted, and visible symptoms occur on the surface of the body, mainly in the breasts and feet, then consider applying cauterization with heated water in those areas. And you should take a small incision tool or a piece of iron or vinegar cone, place that over the clavus; then fill a small container with heated water for a little bit, wet your hand, and move that around with pressure from your hand across, pressing on the edge of the needle in the scab of the clavus, allowing the hot water to flow through the hole in the cauterization; and let the patient endure this hot water soaking for an hour, then remove it, until the clavus and its scabs are eliminated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And do this with those ones and proceed with the other until you have attended to all of them in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then treat those pus that are eliminated by these ointments which cause the flesh to regenerate.
Capitol .liiii.	Arm wound number 53.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Regarding the treatment of shaking or trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you experience some shaking due to rubbing in the nerves or due to fever caused by friction, or due to another similar cause, then consider cauterizing that with four cauterizations or on each vertebra of both sides, between every two vertebrae having one cauterization; and on the feet of the patient, apply a cauterization on olive.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	The trembling of the patient subsides and quickly restores their health.
Capitol .lv.	Error 403: Forbidden The request was denied by the server.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Regarding the cautery treatment of heart attacks.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When there are abscesses in the body, and pus-filled wounds are formed from corrupted materials; then at the point of appearance, it should be cauterized over the entire opening of the fistula using a fine-tipped cautery with a rod as its handle; or with a long piece of esterology; or using a conical cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And some boilings are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; they are not allowed to grow, and they burst out removing that excess, thus healing them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But it is important that this be done near the evacuation through phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Error 403: Forbidden The request was denied by the server.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Regarding the cautery treatment of an inflamed disease caused by a chest wound.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Too many boils that cause inflammation of the chest should be treated by opening the infection, or through incision of pus or cautery on the body part, and then proceed similarly, making it difficult to leave that condition.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	And when this happens with one such thing, touch the tip of your finger to the opening of the chest, and place your hand on that area, hold there until you remove some of the boils inside where the inflammation remains, so as not to let the disease continue.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place in the fire several small and large olive oil cautery tools, by the number of points, and blow over those where there are burning points.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one small or large depending on the location and the wound where the artery has burst, over that vein blow continuously as soon as you have removed your finger, and apply the cautery so that it is cut off and contained that disease.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the disease is expelled from the opening of the artery while you keep your finger there and remove the cautery, then take another fine-coated cautery which are prepared in the fire, and therefore do not stop doing this one after another so that the disease may be contained.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And guard yourself that you do not burn the nerves here, and bring about another mischief on the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when the artery flows with disease, it is not possible to restrict the disease in those cases, especially when the artery is large, unless through four ways: or by using a cautery like we have mentioned, or by extraction if it cannot be removed, whereupon upon removal its extremities are burned and the disease is contained; or they may be tied with thread or with ligature due to strong constriction, or placed under the patient with medicines whose virtue is to restrict the disease; and they should be constricted with powder in decent restraint.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	And one who administers decent restriction of the patient with ligature and constriction with cloths or due to causes of burning effects and resemblance, do not use only tar.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	And if this happens with one such thing and the doctor is not present nor medicine available, then open according to our instruction over the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand within the patient's large constriction where the disease remains from the predominant part of the wound, and above the chest do not remove; and on the chest apply with water rubbed with a large coldness until the disease is cooled and thickened; and consider carefully what needs to be cauterized or which medicine must be used.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Start the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Regarding incisions, punctures, wounds, phlebotomy and their appearances.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Albuqai.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already explained in the first chapter all disease where fire cautery is suitable and with burning medicine, and the occasions and causes of that, and the tools necessary in those cases for the forms of cautery; and I have arranged the chapters concerning the elevation above waist level among the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I proceed in this chapter in that manner, so that the one who wants it may be relieved, then about what someone has requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I start this, know that in this chapter it pertains to the fear of what is in the first chapter about cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because I am aware of the great caution, that in this operation which is in this chapter boils evacuation which is with disease where there is life needs to be applied to the venous sprinkling or incision on the boil or opening for discharge or purification of the wound or extraction of arrow or incision of pus and their appearances.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all of those are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in most of their cases death occurs.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this should not happen to you in which there is an accident, for some boils cause you ways of men and methods of diseases.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And there is one that will die from their disease and it's easy for them to death, and also due to the violence of what they find with their disease, and due to the longevity of their illness, and fear which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And those are the ones who give you their advice and say, you hope for that health, and their disease is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And so it goes that you must consent to whoever comes to see you of this manner; and your caution should be greater than trepidation and your appetite; and do not presume any cause upon this but rather a certain science which verifies what you should, and for which there is a plausible succession of success.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the treatment of all your patients with prediction and indication for which health is converted, that in that there is your aid regarding acquisition of reputation and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O children, God listens to your understanding and does not withhold direction and protection from you, for that is in his hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have arranged this chapter separately by chapters according to the chapter on cautery, on the treatment of the head in relation to the feet, so that you may be comforted with what you are asking for and which is necessary for you.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water which is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this sickness, which appears in children, is due to the onset of puberty and when childhood strength leaves a child's head.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some bumps due to a hidden cause that is unknown.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	May I have not seen this illness except in children; and to all those whom I saw died, for which reason it seems to me that the disease is passed on in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child whose head was filled with water, the size of his head remained always in such a magnificent state that it could not subdue itself due to the size of its head; and more than moisture increased within it causing death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture either accumulates between the bone and the skull, or accumulates from outside on the scalp.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	And in that operation if the moisture is between the bone and the skull and there's little pus, then you should make an incision at the midpoint of the head with a fissure in the latitude, and let the length of the fissure be twice the thickness so that the moisture flows out. And this is the form of the spathum:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And thus if the moisture is much increased and the pus is larger, then these are two fissures according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is outside of the skull, its sign is that you open all the connections of the head from every side and when you squeeze that inside your hand at those internal parts, water is squeezed out which is not hidden to you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And let there be an incision in the middle of the head with three fissures according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And during the operation extract all the moisture; and strengthen the fissures with bandages and cushions; and on the fifth day apply wine and oil over it, and cleanse the wound with threads and ointment, strengthening the head with equalities; and feed the patient with dry meat of little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another manner of incision that considers the size of the pus and the accumulation of water, for some bumps are more in the back of the head, or at the front, or on the right, or on the left; so attend to where the pus and the water accumulation appear, and do this as best suits you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that do not cut the artery and let the veins of blood and cause the patient to perish from the flow of blood with evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On incision of the arteries which are near the ears, called by the name of veins.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Second.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When it happens to some cold or coughs in the nose or feet and you abandon the treatment with medicines, then the last treatment here is an incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And let there be an incision when you want to cut the part of the patient that rises from his head, and rub the place with a coarse cloth so that the arteries appear, and let the neck of the patient be strengthened with a few cloths; and consider where the pulse beats; and the places below those which are near the ears depress, and they do not always hide in such people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And press on the artery with a thread, and make an incision in each at the edge of the sharp part near the incision entering into the skull, and let this be according to the size of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, place the spatula under the artery and twist that which meets them at the parts above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be twice the thickness adjusted, for when any vein is incised blood stops at its exit pulsating which frequently jumps over.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	May if the artery does not appear in the center, then let there be measured from the ear the quantity of space three inches, and press with a thread, and make an incision into the skull.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And whatever comes out of the blood is a quantity of wine one ounce. And strengthen the patient with more or less, and all this is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the patient and the filling of the artery of him.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And let there be an examination of the wound, and thus if there remains over the skull any cause of the scalp, then cut that to avoid pus formation.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with plasters and with lint from linen, and then treat that with ointment inside so that it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of the nerves which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When it happens that old migraines or intense headaches occur due to humidity and quality in the nerves of the temples, or ancient headache becomes strong resembling those, and is treated according to the methods of healing medicine, if this does not relieve, then we have developed these illnesses: extraction of the nerves in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The method of the operation and extraction is like this: the patient raises their skin which is in the temples; and recognize the nerve that seems to be in the temple area according to its position, it's hidden in few people due to the intensity of rubbing.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then you have the patient hold onto their head with some fabric; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or heat up water and pour it on that spot until the nerve becomes clearly visible.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the needle of which this is the shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you ignite the thread while making it easy to pass through until you reach the nerve; and then heat oil and extract that in the upper parts; after extracting that from the thread, uncover those of the tunics which are under that, in all parts.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is subtle, then you wrap it at the tip of a needle, and then cut off a portion according to the amount by which its ends are extended and are contracted, without creating a flow of blood; for if they are not cut, the blood pressure will not rise.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then drain the blood from the vein once. Inside three times.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the nerve is large, then you divide it into two areas at each of its ends with double strength thread or with strings long, and do not let it decompose in front of the healing of the wound, expecting a flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut off the excess that is between two pieces; do this to it immediately or later.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want, cauterize that with a cautery inside the hole made by the cautery knife until its ends are incised; it will stay in the place of that half-done job.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient has fever or shows signs of coldness; because cautery comes from those causes that help in finishing off moisture, and thus it is better for young people.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And cut off the extraction of nerves that you place at the ancient site, and have them lie on your clean dust decently, then treat with dry medicines let the flesh come out and heat in order to heal.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you work another wound appears with blood flowing from the nerve, then you must restrict that blood flow, or with a cautery, or fill the site of the old injury, and press your hand until the bleeding is restricted.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes are present, then hold your hand on the spot until the bleeding is congealed, and cover the area with cold water to cool down until it calms, strengthening according as you can.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And that which is easier in the extraction of nerves is to cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives, because you have touched both spots on the test, and then blow fire until they reach the hole and divide the vein into two spots, so that it becomes extended where its ends are, but do not let them become solid with all this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the heat of the two knives be equal.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if the heat of the two knives is greater than that of two knives, then it is better, for if they are sharp like two knives close to each other and do not cut the flesh at speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, whenever there is a thickness in those, the heat of the fire in those and the flesh is cut slightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better in all works and much lighter.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space which is between the two knives be the size of the thickness of that instrument.
Capitol quart.	Chapter IV.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of noses with sharp and sour tears.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are sour tears, and it is the body of those veins that are on the forehead in front, and no cause is found for the treatment according to medicine, then you have the patient's face already reddened, moving around as if it were a dance of mosquitoes, their noses exhausted, wet like they're already known by their skin texture, and their eyelids are scratched from the sharpness of the tears, the old ones are in favor of this kind of treatment, and they prefer this treatment to passiveness.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you order the patient to rub their forehead's skin and then cut into the forehead three equal gaps according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the gap is two fingers: one gap shall be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little bit of movement of the tear glands which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And protect yourself from the beginning of the arteries which are in two sides, and extend your hand along both the continuation of the jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if it's about any initial space make sure to adjust its quantity to three fingers.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge or damp cloth, place them under where the pain is drying out.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And place two sharp points at each extremity, which is the shape of the incision for them:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that begins from dividing the warmth into the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Scour that entire series which is between the two incisions near the joint which is above the bone, and do this for the incision to move into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And remove this incision and insert another instrument in the first incision, it is called a knife, sharp on one side and not so sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place the sharp part of this you should cut off the attached flesh and that series, and the other end in his bone inside the bone, and put this one into it so that it reaches the middle opening, and cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the organs.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	May the incision continue until it reaches that part of the series, and do this in the middle opening between the other opening.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And once a quantity of sweat from the pain has flowed out, squeeze the places of the accumulated sweat on the wound.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And place near each opening of the old cut, and apply over those powders mixed in vinegar and oil and wine, and make sure not to allow pus to appear.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day loosen the ligament and administer large doses of hot water or sweat baths, and apply this with basil oil among other things so that the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Capital .v.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Regarding the treatment of gout and descending organs from the parts inside the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When in some vein there is gout and continuing it, and sometimes the organs descending from the thigh are exhausted, and their examination has deteriorated, and the eyelids are ulcerated along with their skin, and at the back of the head is intense pain and subsequent exhaustion, then you should be aware of these incidents where the substances and gout do not come from veins of the parts that proceed internally.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for this is this: order the thigh to scratch its forehead, and then make an incision in that at the middle of the forehead area, a small one according to width (and start from the opening behind the left temple towards the right temple; and the incision goes inside the bone; and extend your hand along the bumps of the temples which are swollen due to chewing), into where the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the sweat with a cloth or on linen and then fill between the two edges of the incision with old cloth or on linens.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And strengthen it from above with powders mixed in vinegar and oil so that no pus appears.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you relieve this and several times as the pus has diminished, then cover the bone starting from your belly flesh, and treat this with regenerative drying that makes flesh boil like if you took two parts of wheat flour and four parts of honeycomb and mixed them together, and make a plaster from it and apply it in these wounds to resemble original flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol .vi.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Regarding the treatment of gout that affects the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All the causes of gout in the ears are one of four types, or it is like gravel due to a mineral cause, such as iron and lead, or plant-based like clove or broad beans, or it is a fluid-like cause like water and wine together and similar to them, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when gravel is in the ear or other similar causes from those that do not settle or swell in the ear, place the ear to the sun's heat, and if you see the gravel, then distill with some oily substance or saffron, and administer the removal of this, and make it sneeze in the condition, and keep your nose away from the occurrence of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear, and stretch the ear upwards to the parts above it, which swollen spots are exposed from these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not affected, then administer removal of this with the instrument called a small ear syringe, which has this form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is blocked by the syringe, then yes, that's fine; otherwise, then administer the removal of this with a slender tube made of copper.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not blocked by this, then make a tube of reed and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal and coat the surroundings of the tube with wax and softened oil so that there is only opening to the tube.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract forcefully from your nostril with strong suction, which produces swollen areas like what we have described.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	And if it is not blocked in this manner, then take some powdered chalk or ground almonds with which you make small balls, and place this at the end of the tube and cover this sufficiently with a cushion.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then intervene in the ear canal for ease, and remove the moisture from the ear.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And so if none of the causes we have recounted is responsible, then you should prepare to treat that which might lead to a boil or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of treating that is to start by touching the patient's vein of the phlegmatic blood and remove it according to the manner of its nature, then make that incision between your hands and convert the ear towards the parts above, making a small crack in the base of the ear you should press the pus from him into the place pressed by him.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the crack has the form of the lunar figure reaching to the skin, and once the skin is torn off, you must keep that if possible with appropriate instruments; and, using speed when working on this while it's happening, treat it so that it becomes healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause in the ear is one of those growing lumps that inflate, then administer treatment and remove it; but if you cannot withstand the pain, then take a thin needle according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And perform that extraction of the lump in the ear which is contained.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And don't do that when you think it's already saturated with the steam of the ear, pause in heavy spots, and then carefully remove them or through gentle pressure on the sides, or with an incision as we have said, so that the removal becomes easier.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	And in the water which has entered into the ear canal, so that the patient sneezes at the beginning and fills their ear with a bit of old cotton, then place this over the ear where there is water, and if through this it becomes open, it's good; otherwise, take thin wooden and iron tools according to its length, and heat these slightly in the flame, and have the patient insert one of these into the entrance of their ear, press against a part of that with another cotton ball and hit it with another cotton ball over the ball which is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Then don't stop this with a cotton ball until all the water has become drained out.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And once the water has fully drained away, take paper or a glove instead,. and place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end into the flame so that its tip is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And place another glove and do this as many times until all the water has drained away, and remove it with a cannula like the one used to extract cotton.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	And in the removal of what enters into that ear, if it is a small one, as big as possible and similar to it, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is of a large size causing pain deep inside, then administer its removal through gentle pressure and using cotton balls, and this cause is the least among all other causes that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	And in the removal of worms produced in the ear, when you treat it as we have said in the division and within the treatment of distillations, do not let your treatment fail, then consider observing the ear under sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if any cause of worms appears here, then remove it through gentle pressure or through small cotton balls, but if no cause appears, take a cannula that is stretched out and somewhat wide, which is the shape of this:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the small end into the ear according to the quantity that can tolerate it by the patient; and then suck out through strong suction, and do this several times, until all worms have drained away.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	And if you cannot withstand the pain, then fill and seal in the cannula circuit with wax as we have said; then administer distilled waters which have already evaporated the old ones in worm treatment, and consult this for further information on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And make your application using the oil medicines in the ear with this tool which has this shape:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Make it of silver or wood, stretched out, and on its surface there should be a small opening.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And make it so that when used for the canal's cavity as required here, it becomes necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the rod and wrap it around the descending part of this cotton, then pour oil into the cavity of the horn, or juice from any herb, or whatever you want from these medicines in the cannula — and that is inside the ear — then insert the rod with a little cotton on top and squeeze it using your hand as soon as the oil is expelled into the cavity of the horn and the patient feels the oil internally.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And whatever is inside the ear should already be softened by heat from a small flame.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And remember that when you distil in the ear, it should not be too hot, because ear medicines cannot tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of wax blockages in the ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some cases of infants have caused abdominal swelling in their parents that has not been punctured, and this happens sometimes in adults as well, wax blockage in the ear canal by a small rock or a piece of soft flesh in there; and some of these wax blockages occur before the opening of the ear canal which does not reach the inner part, while others are outside the parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in the beginning of his condition, which cannot be comprehended by mere observation, is in the most difficult treatments for recovery.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that situation where you can see it clearly, take the patient's foot to the sun and observe it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you notice swelling that is visible, open it with a thin blade which has the shape of this:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it where its breadth is small, having one part sharp and the other not; and the blade be of two lion's lengths each side so that it does not pinch the foot.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the swelling is in the flesh around the foot or at its ankle, then you have that with very sharp scalpels and penetrate it deeply so that all the flesh is inside.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the swelling is in the front of the foot, then take a sharp lion's claw and make a small incision with fire, and then place that near the middle of the foot.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you have felt swelling that causes discomfort in the foot due to pressure, relieve the compression of it with ease; and make sure not to injure the nerves of the foot.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place a bandage on the foot according to the size of the area that you have enveloped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing process; or take something and immerse it in water, crush it over it, and use it; and if you see the swelling has disappeared, then observe that you discard whatever you used and replace it with another one which you envelop in wet cloth made from cotton dipped in rose oil, while waiting for the pus to drain out; and take care of this until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	And if there is a discharge of pus, then immerse the sponge or cloth in warm water and place it over the foot, and use another treatment that stops the pus discharge, which is mentioned in the distillation treatise.
Capitol .viii.	Title VIII
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Title VIII: On the treatment of atresia which affects the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Atresia affecting the eyelids; some times they are wet, at other times they are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then use those with tweezers or forceps, and separate those from their roots, and place them in crushed water over the affected areas.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	And if there is pain with pus discharge, then you apply a cautery to those with a subtle limber tip.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best application of the cautery is that the incisions and the pus-filled areas return when there remains any cause at their roots; and when they are burned with fire, those roots are destroyed and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Title IX
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for granulomas that occur on the eyelids of individuals.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Swelling occurs on the eyelids of individuals due to some cause which manifests as a large lump in its firmness and hardness, and because of this lump, it is called granuloma.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an addition of large moisture on the eyelid that leaves and above it.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, in this situation, you should consider it when the lump is proceeding within it from under the eyelid and is hard to all parts; and the cause of it is minor.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then make an incision over it for the width, and then carefully probe it from all sides with ease until it drains out, and then lift it with forceps and remove that.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if it is not clear to you whether there is pus or if you do not penetrate the eyelid with small incisions one by one, then this does not signify any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the shape is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and take care of that until it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, there will not be any harm in that as the warmth of it restores that and causes it to heal.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the lump declines towards the inner parts of the eyelid, you should remove it from within the surface; then cut open the eyelid and lift out the lump with forceps, or another one that you use for incisions, press it from all sides, and if the eyelid is stretched by incision, this does not signify any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And near the incision, wash the eye with salty water; and take care of that area until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Title X
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Title X: On the treatment of excoriation on the eyelid above the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Excoriation is a greyish condition that arises in the tissues of the eyelid above, and more so for children, it intensifies their tears leading to blurred vision; thus they cannot see the brightness of sunlight due to the tearing up of their eyes.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And you often use those to rub on their faces continuously, and sleep with them on their faces; and on the eyelids of them, they have wet eyebrows which are already covered by swelling and the apparent tendency for excoriation is in the eyes; and when you press that area with your fingers, you hear scratching sounds coming from those.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And one way of treatment is that the foot rests its head on your finger, then place a cloth under it and apply butter oil, make a circle according to the quantity which contains pus from all parts, then place this over that area and press with your fingers from all sides so that scratching sound accumulates in the middle of the circle. Then at the center of that moisture, make an incision for width, and the incision should not be larger than the one made in a lymph node excision.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	When you are in the preparatory phase for cutting open the abdomen, you must completely cut it throughout where you reach the navel. Afterward, in the later positions during surgery, proceed to make a cut through the wound following the shape of white fatty tissue.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	So extract those in the sheets which you have enveloped between your fingers towards the parts outside, and rotate with your right and left hand until they are dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And remember not to tighten in the wound so that blood does not accumulate and cause discomfort there.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	When it is not at your will in the beginning of cutting through the wound, then adjust in the wound a little aid so that you can proceed with cutting; and further extract that which we have said; and further submerge cloths for him in water and wine and spread them over the area, pause those on the spot and strengthen those with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And thus that they sprinkle salt and pause that in the cavity of the wound so that what is soaked with that moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And further, treat it until it heals.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	So if an abscess occurs in the spot, then treat it with plaster bandages until it heals.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter xi.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On methods of bleeding.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the eyes there are natural warts and they have become old, then these cause harm to the eyes leading to conditions like frequent tears and inflammation of the eyelids and inner eye area which is known as bleeding of the eye (tactinir del huel). Treatment for this can be done in four ways: through cautery with fire; or by using acute medicine as mentioned earlier in the section on cautery; or it can be treated with bleeding without cautery through incision and suture; or through needles according to what I am saying.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And when you make the cut to place your finger at the eye level; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, then yes; and if not, insert a needle into that part where pus is present under the eyelid, and let the needle penetrate through this point above. And thus, near the margin of the eyelid in which warts appear, near the warts, pull out the thread from the parts above on the eyelid, and turn it back to its original position.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And afterwards, you make the cut in the inner part of the eyelid with the warts aligned towards the major lacrimal ducts at the level of the lacrimal sac; then remove the thread and spread a petal or sheet powder on the eyelid. Apply this to the eyelid tentatively until it looks like a mirethron leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But when you make the cut, according to the amount of deflation of the eyelid, which has already diversified in humans, those who are such that they bleed excessively from the eyelid according to the amount for which the eyelid becomes softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And afterwards you apply it over the two lines where you have marked, starting from the major lacrimal to the minor lacrimal.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your cut is close to the natural skin, as in the thickness of a king's throne.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the needle in one of the two corners of the abdomen, and thoroughly scrape that area. Then adjust it according to the stitches, both lips towards the stomach or on a thin thread under the needle, clean away any pus, and let stick whatever excess is from the threads over two eyebrows with some causes of irritation if you want to do this; otherwise, do not treat it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And after that, examine the stitches of the threads three days or four, and then treat accordingly.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, let the wound and its stitches heal naturally, treat it with things that dry and constrict, so that the eyelid is elevated, you should seal the wound and add to him; yet stitches are better. Thus always do as the ancients taught.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But regarding this matter in him about the eye, it is a good operation, and not out of fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method for confirmation, and it involves marking on the eyelid in such a way that it resembles a mirethron leaf, and then raising the eyelid by three fingers laid out consecutively according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to do this way, hold the nails, and if this is unequal, then take an awl in which there is a thread and insert that into the middle of the figure, and place the other needle near the major lacrimal duct, and the second needle near the minor lacrimal duct. Adjust between your fingers the needles equally, and next to those raise your hand as high as possible equal to them, lift up the entire string over which the pain is felt just like we have recounted.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And adjust the two edges of the wound for suture, and treat that which is being healed so it becomes healthy.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If an abscess occurs, you should start with your incision or your cut; but treat that abscess with bandages and make it resemble yours, and apply the ointment.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And some cuts under the eyelid where their hairs have to be removed, then take care that you use in that the one we said for incision; but sew with what is more artificial on those that are more so.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Remove the canals like this:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And this is how you convert the eyelid and divide the figure inside as I recounted; next perform with skill two canals or two subtle stars of which length will be according to the length of the eyelid, and their width slightly less than the width of the nose.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already incised at the extremities of each part, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	And add with subtlety under what is superfluous of the eyelid of the dog, and tighten the threads of each part firmly, and let that area rest for a few days; so that through the tightening the thread will die and be rejected, and it will fall into place when it does so naturally.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is delayed, then break the threads at the sutures, and treat that wound so it becomes healthy.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	So when it has become solid, the eyelid is lifted and the hairs do not poke.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is how you perform two canals which you will do according to this method:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and let the quantity of length and width neither exceed nor fall short.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	For the removal of painful hairs in the dog with an awl when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are unnatural, hard and prickly on the dog's body, then in this operation you should take a subtle awl and place it at that point of this subtle needle and lion. And next, when adjusting the ends of it, press them with dexterity in a delicate manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the needles be as long as your palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you prepare another subtle needle under it quickly, and if you want, press the ends of that too.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the dog's head in your lap and near the sun so that your work is shown clearly, for it is a subtle and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the hair that needs a tool, and let it pierce the eyelid smoothly while you remove that above the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair inwards and insert it until it's tight, and let the hairs be one or two or three but not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand into that until the hair is pulled out tightly inside the eyelid through the opening made by the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If it has been pulled out tightly and the hair is not gone, pull tightly on those parts with the needle you made for that until beyond the tight pull from the tool.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And then remove that with the dog's view, so hereafter you will pull it tightly and the needle, and shave all and clean its body, and let the skin rest for two or three days, so that the hair adheres to its place and grows back good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is shorter than the natural hairs, then adjust a long hair from the natural ones, and lift it up to that, or leave it so that it grows about some space further on, and then lift it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	For the treatment of excretion which occurs above the eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When excretion occurs in the dog, it is the contraction of the eyelid when it tightens at its edges or on the right or left side, due to improper healing or scarring or from a cautery burn. It's called porcupine-like, and this excretion can be natural or accidental; it happens due to proper healing or scarring or from burns resembling them.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation in this case is that you should cut through that contraction and separate those parts from it, then place a piece of lint fabric between them, and bind those so they heal.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not cover where you use the healing treatment from the causes that dry out, it must be tight; so if you do this, excretion will be worse than nothing for any amount of time.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use from those causes that moisten in such a way as fennel, and soak it in the water with finely chopped it or oil of castor, which should be mixed with some of the oil, then soak the lint fabric in this, and treat it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And your treasure in your treatment is to pierce through all that is not yet hardened according to the shape I will describe at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation which we have described is merely a correction of the hernia that does not return to its original form according to how it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitol Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the treatment of hernias which are performed in the eyelid, let us proceed.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This hernia which occurs in the eyelid, called vertically herniated hernia; it is of two kinds, one natural, the other accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	The accidental one is caused by injury, cut, cautery or other similar occurrences.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of performing this operation is: take a needle with a double thread, insert it into the flesh and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right one, so that the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And extend the flesh to the parts above on the side of the needle and where the needle is, make an incision wide open.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then if it returns to its original shape as usual, that is good; and otherwise take hold of the fold and place the needle in the split figure, and with that turn the eyelid, making both cuts on the back of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of the two cuts be at two corners of the incision you've made between them, and make an angle from there so that when they meet, a figure is formed by them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: the lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And remove that piece of flesh as much as the length of your needle from there, so that it keeps the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And adjust the separated parts, sew those with the thread of wool; and cure those with what we have said about restorative medicines and baths so that they heal.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the hernia has occurred due to a cut, stitch or cautery, then proceed to make a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid as previously mentioned.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And afterwards, separate with a bath between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the speech on treating hernias above or below, let the operation flow according to its form in your hands, and that is in the shape of different masses.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And all skilled artisans always prepare tools in every way that is possible for them to return the shape to its natural form, or close enough to it, and according to what suits you from the operation and the instruments among their best arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this kind of solidification happens in many people, it means that the eyelid has thickened above on the albumin layer, and is prohibited from ease of movement and its natural functions. So proceed to insert the tip of your finger under the eyelid, then raise it up or extend it onto your thumb.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then proceed to make a thin incision for the adhesion, which is not at the sharpness of the cuts, having made it blunt enough so that the patient does not become anxious about the operation, and retain the flap that does not deteriorate the eye on its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision carefully remove that adhesion with ease so that the eyelid returns to its natural shape and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then put into the eye salty water that you wash with, or distil from junia dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And afterwards separate between the eyelid and the eye with an ointment bath, place on the eye infused wool in the protein of sweat, and over several days use baths that consolidate until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On cutting the tear duct and elevation of flesh of the lacrimal areas.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the nose can be done in two ways, one is nervous and resembles a hard delicate cypress; or it's non-nervous, resembling white sticky moisture. When you touch it, if it causes the patient to grasp onto your finger, it is removed, and the finger does not stick in them.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both types only start from the major tear duct, gradually spreading over the vision and prohibiting light and eye movement.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The method of performing the cut is that the patient holds their head in the place they are, opens their eyes, raises the eyelid with your hand, and then gathers the nose onto a small duplicate finger and extends it upwards.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert a piece of horse, ox, cow or similar skin, or gradually double the end of the needle and place it in the middle of the nose, penetrate that with the needle, tie the nose to the finger; extend that upwards, cut from the skin at the back of the nose which keeps the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And then follow that into the hair where it enters him.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then proceed to cut the remaining in the root of the tear duct with a thin incision or small V-shaped cuts, removing the natural flesh of the lacrimal area so that by cutting it, no continuous flow of tears occurs.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nose is extended under the sun's finger or under the hand as we've said, and then it is removed with a V-shaped incision, which has this form:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And make sure not to touch the peritoneum with the spatula, avoid rupture in him, and prevent the pupil from being pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Near the incision remains in the mouth for a little salted or raw meat cooked from savory spices, and let that stay inside until another day; and take care to see that what is eaten during this period heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not sensitive and you cannot put the needle in there, or it's not pierced at that particular location on the foot, then using this type of nail with medicines heals it, and it is healed just like I have described and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to divide that [meaning a tissue or organ], then open the cleft of the leg and take out a fine, sharp spoon according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you notice that it has become thin and mixed with dirt or sand, then distill from your mouth into the savory meat cooking pot or into the raw meat broth or into salted water, and leave the cleft open until another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And during this operation iterate over it until everything that is yours has been removed, otherwise pus will accumulate in the cleft, and then you leave it, and take care of the pus until it heals.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And continue with your operation on that according to reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The discharging of the lacrimal flesh, if it causes great harm in the cleft, should be suspended until morning; and cut out a part from that, and do not finish your incision so as not to cut off any discharge of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And continue by distilling over the lacrimal savory broth and cooking it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Regarding the incision of a hernia and what is born from flesh pressed into the cleft.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some cautery marks on the eyelids have been born from pressed flesh and are over-pressured until they cover the pupil, or come close to it or strengthen near the eyelashes. They compress the eyelashes against the parts forwards and are assembled like the edge of a baluster.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation is such that the leg pauses its head in your field of vision; and then open the eyelids of that area and gather all that flesh with needles or scissors; and cut the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished by the scalpel, and make sure not to let that part descend. You should complete your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And if your incision is like the one where you cut those [meaning muscles] or with a spatula which we have recommended in the cutting of the nail, or with small forceps by which you gather scissors according to how it will come to this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	And when your incision is completed and all that flesh has been removed, then fill the cleft with salted water, or distill it with powdered savory spice resembling those of corrosive medicines, and place on the cleft from the corner a piece of duck's albumin until there is assurance of pus formation.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there is any reason for hernia and it has been surgically corrected with cautery, and you fear pus formation in the cautery area, then leave the cleft open and take care of that pus formation with water that dissolves that pus. And continue to operate on that according to your operation until it heals, similarly do this for the flesh pressed into this type's cleft.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you should know that the cure of the cleft is removed through natural or accidental means via iron, and do not put your hand into any of these operations while you notice that this member is suffering this operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Regarding the collection in the cleft.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Sabel refers to those tough veins that are found in the cleft and prevent you from performing surgery on them; they allow the cleft to heal over a period of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	So it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the cleft where there is Sabel is strong and in it there is no other illness but Sabel, then you gather that Sabel.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you command the leg to pause its head in your field of vision, and suspend those veins on one needle or two according to your judgment; let that needle be made with double subtlety as follows:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two needles gradually in one body as follows:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And gather those veins with subtle forceps, with subtlety, and remove the cautery as soon as possible, until you see that these veins are being discharged from the cleft and are being expelled.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And make sure not to let the cleft touch the ends of the spatula. And if your operation is in the middle of the day facing the sun, and you are firmly focused on your operation, do not cut any veins other than these ones.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed, then distill over the cleft with green or savory broth so that its sharpness corrodes what has been discharged from the Sabel.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If it is not possible for you to gather all in that hour, then cover everything with what soothes the pain of this, and leave it for a few days until the pain of this subsides and there is assurance of pus formation.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And continue to operate on it according to your mother's method until it heals.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the way of the saws:
Capitol .xix.	Head Chapter Nineteen.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On returning hernias to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat hernias with a cautery or with acute burning medicine according to the described process of the patient and if it is not cured, then there is no need in them but you should make incisions over the abscess. And you must extract all the moisture which is inside the patient and place the cauterizing agent when the wound has been exposed, so that the bone may be uncovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone is exposed and there appears corruption or blackness in your body, then you need to treat it with a powder of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called hard powder, and it is made of iron indigo, and its head is red also like the asir which is made punctured by saw-cut or finely ground through fine grinding (like in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the corrupted area of the bone, and then gently rotate it with your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is flattened.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And make it into some powders, and then restore the area from causes of desiccation and vasoconstriction.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So if the area has consolidated and is in your patient's good flesh and the source of the malady has been completely excised for forty days, and it does not recur or any accident happens to you, then you will know that it is cured.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	But if not, then it is not in your patient's body but to reduce the wound to the form of the nose, and according to this method: you must uncover from bone with iron or with acute medicine, when the bone is uncovered, then take hold according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the end of your iron be triangular, and the main part of it be initially expanded inside the extremity as seen here.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And place that over the bone, let it be close to the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little beyond your nose, and then rotate your hand towards the tool so that it penetrates all the bone, and you feel the patient's head when his hand comes in contact with yours.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	So then restore the area with vasoconstrictive medicines that dry out like these.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	So when the flesh and the area have hardened, then the material that flowed out to the parts goes back to the nose, therefore it is little pus on the head.
Capitol .xx.	Head Chapter Twenty.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On reducing the prominence of the nose.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the nose is entirely prominent and there is no occurrence of swelling or diminution, then you should cover it with the head, and then proceed as follows: make incisions in the neck's scarification area and bleed well through good bleeding; then place liniment over the nose made from garlic and aloe and ointment and sarsaparilla, and finally strengthen the plaster on the nose with powder.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the way of powders is that you take cloths made of linen moss, and each cloth should be divided into four squares; then make from those mosses.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place those one on top of the other according to the quantity required by the nose.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then strengthen them with a thick bandage over the powders; and repeat the suction with bleeding in the neck's incisions; and leave the suction and smooth the nose strengthened all day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	May this way if while the ligament is softened, then cover it so that it is strongly tightened.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And continue to hold the ligament all day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the nose is already reduced, then it's good, but if not, continue to apply the plaster with powders and bandage with suction until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Head Chapter Twenty-one.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the operation for reducing the prominence of the conjunctive tissue.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the conjunctive tissue, and it protrudes outward like a bit of fat, and takes on the shape of oneself through this method, and you want to operate on this, then the operation on them will be as we have prescribed, that you insert the needle into the fold of the uvea at the point left in the part above, and then insert another needle with twice the width of the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate and smooth out the first needle according to its position; and then cut the double filament area and lift the part of the uvea around the needle in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen that with powder.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then remove the needle and place wool soaked in egg white over the nose, smoothing it so that the filament falls into the eye.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And continue to treat the nose with this method until the wound heals completely.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And add some powders around the entire part in a circle over the nose to adjust the prominence greatly, and then make it pierced with a fine needle that goes to the tip of the nose, allowing the moisture to flow towards the eye white, and lower the nose slightly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And continue strengthening until it heals completely.
Capitol .xxii.	Head Chapter Twenty-two.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of conjunctivitis.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness called conjunctivitis is simply an eye disease that resembles water dripping from the nose and it's not this one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The way to act in this situation is that you make the patient lie on the padded bed and straighten their body, then place your hands on both sides of them and push inwards where you saw the disease entering the parts you were treating, ensuring it doesn't descend and stays upright. The patient would see the causes of illness as they perceived them.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend to the knees, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If it is not prepared for the descent of the disease to water, then make the patient lie between your hands and take a subtle spatula which you place under them on the eyelid, looking for a little in front of the continuity of the conjunctiva towards the corneal coat in the crown (into the location you want). Inside where it is expelled by the disease.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once it is expelled, then you distil in the smell of hot water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And treat the other causes until he is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of water descending through the channel.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already discussed the species of water in division and which one is suitable to be used when declaring the illness, then use that according to their health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then take care when making the patient lie on them between their hands on a mattress and hold their head straight.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And place your right hand close to the eyelid of their eye, if the eye is where the water is, it's the left eye; or with your right hand, if the eye is on the right.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And place your left hand with your left hand take the almond, if the eye is on the left side; or with your right hand, if the eye is on the right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And place the tip of the almond close to the crown by the swelling of the eye in the area of the eyelid's album next to the tear duct, and scrape off the almond from its base and rotate your hand towards it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And penetrate into the area of the eye's album and feel that the almond has already been expelled due to blindness.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And take care that the size of the almond's path to the pupil is comparable to the distance from the edge of the darkness to the end of the blackness, which is the eye area; you will see in that area where the eye perceives light through the clarity of the corneal coat.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And place the almond in the spot where there is water, then gently pull it down once or twice, and if the water descends immediately, then make the patient lie on their side so they can see through their eye as soon as possible, with the almond under their eyelid.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And take a small rest; if the water has descended, then remove that almond before you can remove the almond again.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is settled and does not descend, then remove the almond gently, rotate your hand little by little towards it, and in that water dissolve a small piece of clear gemstone salt and with that wash inside the eye; and take care to wipe out the eye using a cloth or cotton dipped in oil-rubbed fat and albumen, washing your eye with it.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	We may take those of our time who, like a thistle in the eyelid's album.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if your almond does not fit into the eye due to its hardness - which is characteristic of some individuals whose eyes are stiff - then take care that you use the spatula named 'albirid' as described:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And pierce that conjunctiva with it, and do not finish your hand on the tear duct, and do not do so unless you make a path to the almond's subtle location.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And gently insert the almond as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should complete your work by having the patient lie down to allow for a natural descent of the body while they sleep on their back in a dark room, and forbid any movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And take care of the nature of this water for it to be purified in its nature, and do not let their head rest on either side of their body.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And place them according to their position within the morning ritual.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And gently open that in this dark room and expose the clouded vision, let them see some causes, then return them to their usual routine on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And take care not to do this during the time of treatments or immediately after bathing.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Have it that you remove this water for oneself, so the water can pass gently through great and intense observation.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If it happens that a boil forms, then have it that you open the eye before the seventh day, and correct that with water that allows for pus to drain.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then take care to remove their sight and place your hand on the mouth area of their face, through which regulate the discharge from their tears for a few days, existing in the dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And gently move this darkness and discuss them about their causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that even if a student cannot see for some days, then you should be diligent about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have come to understand some of those who are in the Artax, and someone said that they should make fire with a perforated almond where water is expelled.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I have not seen anything quite like this in our land, nor is it fully detailed in any of the ancient books; and it's possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the methods for using different types of herbs, so that one can apply them to those situations where one is ignorant about those matters:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And whether it's from an herb or iron specifically, and let the ends of these be this triangular subtlety, the sharp end thus as that is the shape.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Regarding the treatment of flesh wounds, nothing happens in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When there are diverse cuts in the nose from which one can cause a disease that gathers at the pus of the nose or at a nose polyp; this illness is called a polyp that resembles that part of the nose.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And when his flesh is cancerous, mottled, of dark color; and when it is that the flesh is lion's, not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	So in that which is in these lion's flesh and not deceitful or cancerous, understand that when you make the patient sweat between your hands and place them under the sun, and open their nostrils, pinch yourself with an onion in those areas.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then remove that from the parts forward, and then proceed to dissect what you have understood from those in a sharp, fine substance between one part where you know that all the flesh has been exposed; if there is any cause of concern for which excision is possible, then do this with this tool among the subtle instruments so that it can remove the cause that remains.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If you are masterful in discharging or drawing pus from an abscess, then pause for the patient; or if it's of malign abscesses, then you cauterize that within which the discharge occurs and all cavities have been opened.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And proceed to insert water or blood in the nose near the incision site.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If you have opened the nose and there is moisture inside the palate from it, then you know that it has been healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the moisture doesn't penetrate as you sweat, then understand that inside him is flesh nothing but in the pus you will not find bones of the nostrils where excision has not been performed.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	So when you sweat, introduce a faithful substance from him where there is any lump, and use his own pus as the liquid, pausing between each nut with the quantity of the said or monthly period, and encourage the patient to move one end of the faith in the nostrils at the ray or for some other cause which is possible for him.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And when this has been done, draw his smell so that it penetrates into the canals of the nostrils, and let him rest on his pillow, what makes children vomit from the ears often accompanies this action, and it's a light reason for those who want to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then pause the two ends of the faith, one end that sticks out over the nose and the other that comes into the nose, and proceed to apply flesh bandage on the pus that is inside the faith, and do this so that you understand that the flesh is already around the pus in the faith.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the faith, pause in the nose near the discharge of pus with a spoon, and do this for three days or more until all that has hardened from the flesh is removed.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the treatment, pause in the nose with a lead catheter for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you are dealing with a curative discharge that dries up, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the device for nose purger that distills oils and medicines in the nostrils:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or an herb, which resembles a small opened lamp, like a small cup, and the metal similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed catheter like a cane, and the catheter of this device for nose purger is flat, open; on which there should be a handle at the rear of it, with which you hold that when you immerse in oil or whatever you want from the essences and susceptible causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this nose purger is priced: mix castor oil, white balm, ginger, turpentine from madder root, long pepper, camphor, and an ounce of spice powder. Take a mixture of milk and garlic juice, make them into pills, and boil one pill in water mixed with the essence, and let it sit in the nostrils of the patient upwards.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Regarding nosebleeds from the ends of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Causes that are associated with nosebleeds in the ends of the nose, it is magnified and smeared over several days until a cure is found for him.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And because of this understand that you have inserted it in the beginning of his appearance, and extract all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then pause on the spot or with a cautery or burning medicine where there is pain.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If the discharge takes longer than usual until it is magnified, then consider whether it is hard, dark in color and of little feeling; in that case, do not touch it with iron which causes pus from a bad abscess; for the reasons associated with you discharging this abscess under his great mischief on him.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is yellow in color and not of dark shade, and when it's possible to start cutting throughout that area, then discharge the patient and cut out that suspicious lump, and treat the site where it discharges until it's healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter or section title: XXVI
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the suturing of the nose, and of the lips, and of the earlobe when continuity is dissolved by disease or by injury.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when a solution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, you should not perform the operation on it rather than some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then, when you need to attend on someone due to one of those reasons, consider if there is a fresh disease affecting him, and then adjust the two lips of the disease with suturing, and afterwards treat that site until it's healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of solution of continuity are already separated and some is made healthy, then cut that you scrape off every part of his inner flesh until there's no disease.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips with suturing and strengthen them, and spread dragon's disease powder on those areas after mixing it well, and place a small amount of tallow on top of the powder. Then cover that area with a plaster (of dayfinicon or another consolidating plaster), wrap it for 2 days or 3 days, then remove it and replace the plaster. Treat it with an ointment until it's healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The method for suturing is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as we have recommended in the suturing of the abdomen, or add the solution of continuity with a piece of flesh and let it know.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the extraction of those causes that occur within the two lips in their internal parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Marks observed in internal parts of men's lips certain hard abscesses resembling fat lumps, and some are softer while others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Then cut the lips and cavities of each of those hard lumps from every part, and fill the area with fine sawdust until the disease is strengthened, then wash it with warm water and treat the site until it becomes dry.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On cutting the adjusted flesh in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Notice that white marks may appear on the adjusted gum which the ancients called "albula", so cut it off with a string or what you have ready, then cut its root and let it bleed until it stops or until the disease ceases.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And place on that with fine sawdust or other收敛ing or astringent powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then cut it again, and apply the cautery to it, so that the application of the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the reason for teeth with iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When in the surface of the teeth both inside and on the front side, as well as between the gums, there are sharp, rough edges, some marks are blackish and occur yellow or green within which they cause corruption to the gum, leading to the formation of iron-like teeth.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And then cut between your servants and place their heads in that spot, and grind the teeth where those rough edges appear along with these other causes within which none of them should cause any damage. Do this for both blackness and yellowishness as well as others until they are changed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	And if that is sufficient as in those of the consumption of the reason, good; otherwise, then continue this process on those another day and the second and the third until it reaches your final conclusion where you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	Know that teeth have required various forms of resin and different figures according to how your operation is prepared.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And by so, for the razor that makes the tooth as the inside part of the tooth is to be shaved, it's another one than the razor that shaves between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors must be prepared by you which you will see shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the eradication of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	And cut that you treat the tooth with all remedies and delays in the total extraction of it, for there's no cause to remove its disease when it is extracted, as it's a substance which evaporates during its extraction.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	And when the servant's disease is forced on that tooth to be extracted, you must firmly certify which tooth causes pain, as visible marks of pain separate the disease from healthy teeth and fall within diseased but painful tooth. You extract it and then the pain doesn't cease until the diseased and painful tooth is removed, which we have seen in operation of warts.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	And how you should certify which tooth causes pain, and as you know it well, then cut off in the circuit of the tooth at the gap where there's any lump, until it dissolves from the gum tooth on every part, and take that out with your knives or thin forks gradually until that is scraped clean.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then cut through it forcefully with large prongs for good speaking or breaking force, place the servant's head between your thumbs so you can hold them without hurting us, and adjust the tooth according to right manner so that you don't scratch it, nor give more pain to the servant who doesn't feel major pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not yet relieved, then take one of those instruments, and place that cushion under him from all sides with ease, striving for the removal of him in such a way that it starts as soon as possible.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If the tooth is broken or corroded, then fill that space with a cloth and press it at the tip of the delicate area in such a way that it does not get stuck during your compression on that side; hold them.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And make the incisions exquisitely on scarification across the entire part of the gum tissue and preserve your strength so that you do not pierce it and break off a portion of him, then return to the patient due to malice greater than his first pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And remember not to do what the ignorant barbers do in their rashness and boldness regarding the eradication of this; they don't apply what we have recommended. Their misguided efforts cause serious illnesses in men, which are more difficult than they can be made to break out again, and all or some of their roots become harder, or some that you remove from certain bones in the jaw as we have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And after the eradication of it, rinse your mouth with vinegar or add salt to it.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there are discharges from the gums for this reason, like pus sores might do, then apply a certain quantity of vinegar and sprinkle it over the wound. If that vinegar doesn't work, apply heat treatment with a cautery.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and delicate tongs with which tooth extraction begins is long at the extremity, short at the handle and thick, in such a way that they do not bend when using those tools.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And may they be such that in the midst of thick handles, when you press them with those ones, they are not bent, and their extremities are short.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of iron from India, with straight handles. The extremities of those ones have teeth on which one slides into the other and press by gradual force during use, some of them being like the bill of a pelican, they are called storks, and they are made of strong construction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Title: Thirty-one
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Regarding tooth extraction and the removal of broken bones from the jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract the broken tooth, then place yourself above the spot with your hand or for two days while that place is softened; and then intervene with your strength or use the tongs which are assembled like the bill of a stork or crane, in the shape of forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extremities of these should be made inside like a file or an almond.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not follow your judgment with these forceps or tongs, then place yourself on the root and remove all the flesh, then insert the tool which is called an awl; this tool has such a form:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And may have a short extremity that is thick and small, and should not be bent because it should not break.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if the root is already extracted by this method, well done; and otherwise, help yourself with these other tools whose forms are as follows: the first tool has a triangular extremity in which there is some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second tool is that it should be triangular and have a more delicate extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And already you can help yourself with this tool having two ramps, of which this is the form approximately like the following:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other tools which are used in tooth scraping; when youth is performed with this tool that resembles an old man, and here is the form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of a triangular twisted or short extremity, which should have some thickness, and should not be bent because it should not break.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you must know that the tools for removing teeth are similar to other tools.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	And the craftsmen are wise and subtle in their art, they find out for themselves according to what this operation means and the various illnesses; which are of the illnesses that the ancients would not describe or use a proper tool for, due to the different forms of species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth is broken, then place your weight on it at its location with that which suits him according to the tools and forceps we have said about in tooth extraction, and help yourself with this gesture where this is the form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And have some small thickness gradually, and hold it or keep it in your mouth so that it doesn't escape or go inside until the bone is fully extracted; then restore the place with suitable medicines for this.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if there is a small pus in the bone, then remove that from that pus and its darkness, and cure it within until it heals.
Capitol .xxxii.	Title: Thirty-two
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Regarding the treatment of prominent teeth over others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent not according to their natural form and that shape is laga, especially when they protrude in women and more so in older noblewomen; then place yourself to consider: if the tooth is very close to another tooth, and it's impossible for extraction or medication of him, then leave it alone; but if it isn't attached to another tooth, then you should incise that with this tool whose form resembles a piglet, and is made of Indian iron at its extremity with a sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And if your initial effort is to cut that repeatedly over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and not to be an excised part of the teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is a tooth that has been extensively ground down on the drill, then grind that with an Indian steel file of which this is the shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	It is all of Indian iron and the handle is made of wood; it has metal points such as those used on a file with needles, through which the tooth is gradually ground down in pieces of soft days for ease, so that no other tooth becomes excised and falls out.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then draw it there at the tip, and cut it with some razor blades.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth where part has been extracted and the tongue touches it, then hollow out that inside where the roughness of that fraction is covered and smoothed, and ensure it's filled in such a way that the tongue doesn't irritate nor the word gets corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On restoring excised teeth with a golden or silver plug.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When it happens that the teeth occur before concussion and removal by impact or impact, and the patient cannot stand on what they chew due to this, and you have treated that with styptic medicines, but your treatment has not worked, then for them not to fall out again, you should try metal plugs in their place instead of silver, which turns black. Leave it for some days near silver, however never change it for gold as long as there is no need to.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the plug have such subtlety and coarseness according to the amount that can enter between the teeth; as for the shape of the plug, take the plug and hold twice its length between two healthy teeth. Then make it grow in between the curves of the plug on both sides of an excised tooth or several, so that the thread reaches the healthy tooth from the other part.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the threading into the part where you started, and strengthen your hand with ease so that there is no excision.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And if your thread is the one to which you tighten the plug, make sure not to move the teeth that are being treated.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut off the excess ends of the plug with forceps or trim it, and place those in every position, and mix them between healthy teeth and excised teeth to prevent harm to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then straighten that one like it was done with a Roman tool.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it has slipped or broken, strengthen that one or those with another plug in such a manner throughout its process.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of teeth and the figure for the correction of two healthy teeth and two excised ones, like these bound together:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it comes to returning one or two teeth back in their usual places, and they have grown back as we have described, and then grow again.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And do not let that happen; rather, let only skilled artisans and wise people handle it.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And some illnesses are attributed to causes in cattle bones, and it is made from them like the shape of a tooth, placed at the spot where the tooth has failed, strengthened in this manner as we have said, remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the thread that enters the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This thread which leaves the tongue in some illnesses or is natural since birth, or accidentally happens due to an injury where the one already has become consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on you is that you open the mouth of the patient, at its peak existing in your sight; and raise their tongue, then cut that thread nerve according to its width where the tongue's recent position was dissolved.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any hardness or knot in that one, and this has been due to the consolidation of an injury, then you heat it with a small tool and cut it through its width where you have cut the thread nerve, until the knot dissolves.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And make sure not to create a crack in the front of the flesh, cut here and let blood flow.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the remnants of the cut with vinegar or with a salted water, or with a rubbing water; and let the patient rest their tongue for a while; so when they clean themselves at night by the patient's side, it is hoped that another illness does not become consolidated.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If blood flows out, place pressure on the cut; but if the blood stops, then treat that spot with an iridescent cautery which you apply to this one.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And let healing happen through other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the extraction of a ulcer on the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some illnesses happen on the tongue that resemble small ulcers, preventing the tongue from its normal operation; and it becomes larger as it fills up the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on you is to open the mouth of the patient facing south towards the sun and observe the ulcer.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of a dark color or black, hard, which the patient does not feel any emotion about, then do not touch that which is raw.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it has changed to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you insert the small tool into it, cut that with a fine spade, and cut all around; and if blood begins flowing during your operation, then you stop on this part, so where glass is placed, until the bleeding stops.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work where you have previously treated it with respect for him, in a place where he is washed with warm water and salt; and take care of that with another treatment during which he becomes healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter xxxvi.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of pus from both ears and that which is nothing in the groin, and on other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When you encounter in the groin area, those are glands that are gathered like cotton, which tend to be found outside and are named as the two ears. When you treat them as we have said in the division and they do not heal, then you should consider if the abscess is hard, of a dark color, with little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of reddish color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for fear of bleeding; wait until it softens inside as it matures, and then either you will puncture that, or it will burst on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, round, and the root of him is delicate, then that is likely to be infectious.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on him is that you consider, before your operation, whether the abscess has rested from being cauterized or if it has diminished with some diminution; then have the patient lie down facing the sun, his head toward you, open his mouth, and a servant takes between their hands the tongue of him placing it on an instrument made noble by this form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And make it out of silver or gold, and let it be thin like a wire.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you press upon that tongue and it shows you the abscess, and you place your own finger thereupon, then take anointing oil and apply it to this area, and pull that outwards from the parts as much as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing when you remove some cause of the tunics, then carefully use this tool that has this form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	It is similar to forceps, however the extremities of them are curved, so that each one of these has an opening in front of the other, very sharp, which should be made from iron and well hardened.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	May this tool not be available to you, then use this from the spatula that has its shape: And it should be sharp on one side, but not on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And once you have incised one part, then incise the other according to this method of incision, and wash the patient with rubbing water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is bleeding, wash with decoction of elderberry or chestnut leaf water, and do so in the way that restricts the flow of blood for the causes of constriction, until the bleeding stops, then take care of it until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes, in the groin area, there are other abscesses besides those two ears, and you should incise those according to what I have said about incisions of two wounds at the same time.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman for an abscess located in her groin, which was of dark color, with little sensation, the groin had already swollen and enclosed around her groin, and the woman was breathing in difficulty, she had also been prohibited from eating or drinking water, and she had reached the brink of death if she had not been treated for another day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess was already so large that it contained two fathoms between which it passed through two thighs.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	And I surgically removed it and placed him under one of their fingers, then pulled that out, the large portion was released from him. Then I incised where I understood his other thigh, then I made him open his mouth, and held his tongue, then I positioned the finger in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I removed a large part of him, and there was only a little bit of blood coming from him instead.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	And the groin of that woman was completely healed, she began drinking water right away, and soon started eating food again. So I did not stop incising from that abscess for a long time, and instead another abscess formed in place of it, which continued to be incised until that lasted.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	And thus I went this way and cauterized her groin, therefore it was healed of the addition; and then I wandered around without knowing what God had done to that from this.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter xxxvii.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the incision of the heel when it is infected.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the mucus is secreted in the throat, and it is infected and long, then it is named as a perpendicular one. And if it is located on the side of the thick and round part, then it is called a sore throat lump or bubbling.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	And when it has been healed as we have said in the division, and your treatment does not improve, and every time pus is cauterized and then stops for him and is delicate, then you should consider that you need to incise where a lump or cluster has aggregated round; and if it goes along that length, and is bloody, of dark color or black, and there is no sensation from him, then you should take care of the incision on him, where there is fear in the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you do that according to the way I have said about its whiteness and length, make him open his mouth and press his tongue with an instrument whose shape processes this, then place your finger in the new area, pull that outwards and incise it with one of the two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two wounds.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And know that you should not insert it anywhere but where it is adjusted above the natural limit of its addition, for if you insert it further from him, you will harm his speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And when inserting, use the one we have recommended in the insertion of two bellows, and cure that inside so that it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If it was the patient frightened by the insertion, know that you should use the engine in the cautery of him and his fear, and the manner of the cautery on him is nothing but to water, and it is that you place the head of the patient at your side, and then press the tongue of him against the tool we said, and take water from the one we said in the section for cautery, and apply it to this cause live, and pause this not thick nor subtle, and with this fill the cavity of the tool which has this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the part of him that has been returned in which medicine is placed as in the cavity of a reed, and place the tool with the medicine on it, and the patient lies on his back so that he can swallow or gargle in his mouth due to the internal medicine, so that nothing comes out from this use and that troubles him.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And place your hand on the medicine, and squeeze it over the uvula for half an hour while you see that thing being degraded and dulled by the chewing of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take hold of and wrap that around the end of the reed, immerse the cloth in the medicine, insert the reed into the cloth inside a tube where the cloth adheres to that tube, do this as many times as it takes until you get what you want from the cautery of the uvula, and then let that be when it dries up and falls off approximately three or four days later.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, do this again, and after the cautery, clean it in the channel of the uvula with a chewed cloth on the tongue, change that which is in the channel of him in the medicine, wash it with water, cleanse outside with grease, wash inside with gargling substances until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of treatment is saved that insertion and far from fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some uvula ailments are treated with that which is subtle and cauterizing and inserting, which is healed with submersion in this manner: gather chamomile, hyssop, rue, thyme, Arabic gum, camomile, broth and similar items among the herbs, adjust all these causes or some of them in a single bath, and let them be submerged in wine; they boil. And the bath is stirred with a ladle, on which a clay pipe is placed according to this manner; it is made of silver or gold.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And insert the end into the mouth of the patient until the steam rises to the uvula above the quill, until the uvula is somewhat dizzy.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And repeat over these dizzy spots until it dries up, and remember that you should not perform this treatment at the onset of abscesses, which would overly affect in the abscess, and do not think that you should do this, but rather declare the abscess-causing condition of him by cautery.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you do not have this instrument at your disposal, then take a cane and create in the extremity of him a hole for honey, so that the mouth of the patient is covered, because the honeycomb prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capitol .xxxviii
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Chapter XXXVIII:
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Dizzy spots stick to the throat or thorns from animals or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	And you should extract what is evident from those, on which you catch the eye, because when you press the tongue against the tool in front of yourself, it will be declared to you what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is not evident and is hidden in the throat, you should make the patient vomit before the food has degraded in the stomach, because a strong cause attached to the throat will get out through vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of bread or a lettuce leaf or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of desiccated marine sponge, tie it strongly with a thread, and have the patient swallow that thing, as it goes to where the thorns are located and is extracted, then it will get out.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And if you take a snake, drink it with bound thread, and let it be inside the mouth gently pull it out; or take a spoon and gently put it in and gently take it out.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if they do not get out those causes which we have mentioned, then use an iron tool according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be slightly thicker than a small one, and in the extremity of him there is a cavity which you insert into his throat for ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And have his head raised up high, and remember to touch his bone of the throat, so that it does not affect him badly or that which surrounds it with the bone or thorn, or what the doctor puts on his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But let the patient use honey, through his knowledge of the place of the cause and pierce it gently, and pull his hand with the tool in his hands, all according to the quantity that has been prepared inside so that there is an incision.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter xxxix.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of gallstones attached to the gallbladder.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the gallbladder is treated with what we have discussed in the section of recovery with medicines and it does not respond, consider this for the gallbladder of the patient under the sun. As you understand the tongue of the patient with that tool which we recommended to you.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	So if you remove the gallstone, extract it from the bile or from delicate parts gently.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it's not possible for you to extract it from there, then take a concave catheter and insert that into the gallbladder of the patient, and place in the concavity of the catheter a heated iron, and do this as many times (as long as the gallstone is dead and comes out of the gallbladder) and keep the patient from drinking water for the whole day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a basin full of water, and make an incision in that for the patient, and wash the mouth with that; and don't drink any cause from that again, let the water sit next to his hand for an hour each other, as soon as the gallstone feels the water it will come out.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If it is not an incision with what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with garlic or with asafetida through the tool that we recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so that it may cure.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	Another method of operation in fumigation is this: take a plate with the firewood burning on it and cover half of the plate with a cloth containing a hole, place the end of the tool in that hole. Place above the fumigation; have the patient hold their mouth at the end of the catheter, close their mouth so that the fumigation does not create an incision until you know that the fumigation has reached the gallstone, as soon as it comes out.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it doesn't come out, then you should repeat the fumigation several times, keep the patient from drinking and eating salty foods and such, and don't drink water, and it is necessary that this regimen be carried out without an incision.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the tool by which gallstones in the gallbladder are treated when they are visible; it resembles tongs like these, except that it has some curvature in his.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Which is laid out on the gallbladder, and the end of it resembles a stork's beak that is curved, which is filed with a file, for when you grasp any cause, that does not come loose.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter xl.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	Which includes the entire discourse on the treatment of abscesses and in the section about them.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are specific types, of various methods, according to their memory recall, from each in this treatise.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in the process of piercing and sectioning them by two methods, of which one is for the specific nature of abscesses themselves; and because we acquire moisture from it.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is for the locations in which they occur in the body, so that when an abscess happens in the head it is different from an abscess happening in the anus; and the abscess in meaty locations is different from an abscess occurring at a joint; and each one has its own method for operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And some abscesses are such that they only need to be covered, not pierced until the healing is mature in those or completion of them.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other abscesses that need to be cut when they are crossed and have not yet matured according to their completion, such as abscesses near joints, so that when an abscess is near a joint, its being extends until you place this which is in the circuit of it, and strengthens your corrosion of the muscles or nerves of that joint, causing a contraction of that limb; or if it's near the main body member, and if you delay piercing it before it matures, it affects the main member; or if it's near the anus, then pierce the non-matured one; and do not cover where you cut through without completion of digestion, but rather where it is near the anus, so that you don't allow its pus to extend into the divided parts inside the anus and form a fistula, or one made at the end which is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	And you should cover when you know the time for the abscess to be pierced, and this is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you should know that it has matured when there is the cessation of pain and the disappearance of fever, as well as the decrease in redness and pulse, and the sharpness of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And when you know that it has matured, pierce in the location of pus left by the abscess and from pus coming from the healing of the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the piercing should be proportionate to the length of the flesh or body parts, if abscesses are in the locations of breasts or feet, and on spots, in the strings of nerves, arteries; and later, in all equal locations where it doesn't reflect. For those that do reflect, use piercing according to that limb.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in a soft location, then it is customary to confirm the digestion of him after the opening within that has been done until the passage of food and the disappearance of the foul smell is observed; as we have said. If you puncture there ahead of that, it extends the illness of poverty and sordidness through the body, and hardens his muscles and increases the depth of the wound.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	When it comes to such abscesses, you should puncture according to the size of the flesh or the body's need, or according to which is necessary for the member in question.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And when you administer small punctures, for large abscesses make a large and wide or clean incision according to the variety of the sizes of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And for other abscesses where the channel needs to be constricted and cauterized, do so when it's done in such a way that the process already continues, as happens with many of the lymph glands and lymph nodes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And for those that are incised at an intersection with three corners; and for those where it's incised in such a way like a snail shell shape, as in the abscesses of the lymph nodes.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And for these, round sections and crescent-shaped sections are administered, resembling them.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	When it comes to the one that cannot be done in such a way, like superficial abscesses, you should puncture that through the superficial opening or just flat.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is thick and has already accumulated solid pus, you should puncture it but don't worry about removing all the poverty at once; remove some part from it, then let the abscess settle until the next day, then remove a larger portion, and proceed to make cauterized cuts gradually until there's no pus left.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Especially if the patient is prone to vertigo, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an old person in decay, where the animal spirit's foulness is resolved with the release of pus, and hardens the body, then you should operate them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	When you look at this chapter with great caution and your puncture in which you are making these abscesses, do so by cleaning the wounds and consider whether the pus of the abscess is little or it's a flat section; then administer either the ones that open to the inside or the traditional remedies. And if the abscess is large, and the openings from the punctures are foul, then you should pause meca in every thread until they reach the time period.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess an opening has been removed from the channel or it's concaved within the circuit, then you should complete it with old cloth or a needle thread as when you pull out pieces of skin or lymph nodes; strengthen that by the third day; and proceed to process that and cure what remains under those ointments until it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If during your operation there is pus discharge in the hours following, then you should administer water baths and vinegar for them, using a piece of cloth under it, and place that over the area where there are foul discharges.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If pus continues to discharge, then you should administer medicine and treatment as well as the powders I have recommended in specific locations of our book and its divisions.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is in the winter time, and the location of the abscess is a spot with nerves, then you should mix powders with vinegar and oil, and place those on the spots.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it's in summer, and the spots are fatty, then you should apply powdered substances with water and oil, or vinegar and oil on those areas, for as long as three days, just like we said. And afterwards, you should remove the abscess and clean that area, administering whatever remedies suit them until they heal.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses in general, but according to the path of distinction that I have already mentioned about all abscesses and how their cure should be handled separately by chapters.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter .xl.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Regarding the channel of abscesses that occur in the body's vein.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the vein of the head small abscesses, and they are specifically lymph nodes containing tunics that harden their texture; and the specific types of their pus.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from them you can see, and those that contain moisture resembling lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of these are the ones that contain moisture like dust and resemble them; and those that are slippery, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the channel of all, and during the extraction of these you should not fear, just as you should not cause any disturbance with the extraction of these.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the channel of these is that you expose them with an instrument whose form is somewhat like this, which is called prong, so you know it contains what's inside.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	And if what it contains is pus, then you should divide that with the channel according to its length through a superficial channel according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And start from the line of .B. until you reach the line of .G. When the pus is evacuated, then you should excise that skin that contains that pus, and do not leave any cause there; if after this some new causes return, if there are any leftover causes from it.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse it in Egyptian ointment if it's present, or otherwise in water and salt; fill that with the pus and leave it immersed for another day, whereupon you'll dissolve everything that is resistant to that skin layer.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply Egyptian balm repeatedly and thoroughly if it seems necessary for you, assuming that there is no cause of that scaly skin; then treat the wound with balm until it heals.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains fat nodes, then you should incise as follows:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	Make a section in the form of a cross, and cut open between the two edges of the section, then force your strength into extracting the membrane which contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If your surgery encounters opposition, then do what I instructed you to do initially.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Similarly, proceed with the treatment of the hardened abscess section and its healing according to what we have instructed you; if the abscess is hardened but has few symptoms and a little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some of these abscesses are like those found on the head in certain men where there is little moisture; this condition arises when I incise into an abscess on a woman's head and close the abscess as if it were a deaf, hard, white lump that could not be drained, and if anyone hit that area too hard, they would get an ulcer.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	And in other abscesses that occur on the head, this is not the head cap, such as those that come from the bumps of children and the ear lobes, but the section of all these are superficial sections.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause in the perforation of those from the lower part up to where it provides relief for the body in the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then treat those with what suits you according to that which is suitable for the process of healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol Forty-Two
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Section on scrophula, which occurs in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Causes for these abscesses are found in the neck, the axillae, and the groin; some causes occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck are caused by internal causes, and all scrophula of these is within its own membrane; just like in fat nodes and abscesses on the head as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrophula are causes, some of which are moistened and some contain moisture; and among them are malignant ones that do not yield to healing.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	And in that which you must use with good technique in the palpation, whose color is indicated by what it manifests and is uniform throughout, not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and not swollen when palpated; then incise it on a slightly superficial section of the part above up to the last line of the body along the .G. line within the line of .B., and burn that throughout. Extend the edges of the skin around its circumference, or with moistened points if you need those, as we have said about abscesses in the head; then extract it gradually bit by bit.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And more caution is needed to avoid incising the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And if the scalpel is not sharp enough to fit your hand in incision or it troubles the patient, then do not incise what is not necessary. If you were to incise a vein or artery and interfere with your operation, then pause on the inflamed wound until the pus flow stops, strengthen the wound, leave that so that the heat of the abscess subsides and the wound becomes softened, and it begins to heal.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the pus is drained.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	And then resume your operation as soon as you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then inquire about the causes of other small scrophula according to what you have been told; hence incise those and cleanse them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the large vein, then do not incise that scrophula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before this, when you have drawn that with a strong curved forceps and leave it until it falls out by itself.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cloth that you have already soaked in Egyptian balm, and proceed to treat it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you have incised the whole scrophula, then proceed to adjust the two edges of the wound and cut such that there is nothing left but a small amount of excess.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	And if you find that there is excess pus due to the size of the scrophula, proceed as to understand how to incise its root and remove it. Then sew it up with what was said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those scrophula that contain moisture, pierce it with a superficial incision at the point where it appears to you in the place of its maturation, and pause at the incision of that which is located below the body's pus area, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And after this, perform the incision and apply balm as you would with those, in order that it may soften what has hardened due to congestion.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you have already cleaned the wound, then treat it with balm of new flesh until it heals.
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol Forty-Three
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Section on the management of abscesses that occur inside the glandular tissue.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients divided this section in the duct, and no one has been seen using that method in our land.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	This is the recording of the speech of those ones.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	In men's cases, there are corners, where the removal of the prepuce should be avoided, because it is not done lightly as in others; for all veins and major arteries are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have cysts in the mouth or ear canal or two ears, when the disease is not in the hair, you should use the section of prepuce to avoid the loss which is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	So when we want this, you should inscribe the prepuce with three circles of the prepuce's circles, or four at small size by latitude in that which is between two circles for quantity, so that the section be on the side, not on the cartilage. This location is suitable for sections that are without flesh and whose veins are close to his.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is inexperienced, do so when you extend the ear canal up to the notch, and then make an incision in the canal that reaches the canal, but avoid any veins or arteries near those if you see them for any cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then inscribe the line according to what we have prescribed; it signifies on the section of the canal by the fleshy part which is from that eruption at this which is of his rupture and by the excision of the pustule.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the opened wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	So when the hour is ripe for that feared perforation, add two flaps of the canal of the wound, and if that alone is cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that cause flesh to be born so that it becomes healthy.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And of Albucasis that the summa of the speech which we have prescribed, the exposition is merely that some of those cysts already opened the ear canal in the ear, and the ear went into death, and his hand was between cut, and some were to inscribe the epiglottis so that the patient breathes the ear over the wound site for one breath, and he is saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this we command to leave the wound open until it consumes the malignancy of the ear; and this malignancy is in him for three days; and then we command like this on the wound, and treat it until it heals.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen based on my method is that a servant inserted a candle into her ear and inscribed part of the lung canal in it, and I was summoned to treat him, and the woman also sounded like the groan of the dying, and discovered the wound and found the pus that was inside the wound small.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	So I confessed that she had not incised a vein or artery, and the wind came from the wound, and treated her until she was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And don't harm the servant unless even in pustules, and after some days return to treating their arrangements.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And I also say that there is no fear in the section of the prepuce.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Regarding the section on cyst that occurs outside the ear canal, it is called the ear canal hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This cyst named ear canal hernia is a large cyst according to the color of blood, and it moves in females.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it occurs in two ways, whether it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, there is no need for treatment.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental occurs in two ways, of which one is like fatty lumps, and the other way is like a cyst which is caused by blockage of an artery, and in that case there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And don't assume to apply iron to him except when it's small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should test that and investigate it according to the description, and if you find it resembling fatty lumps, and is not suspended by any of the veins, then you should incise it like those, and extract it with what contains him from the skin and remove; and otherwise, then it is thoroughly examined throughout his being, and treat the site with whatever provides treatment until it heals.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Regarding the section on types of lumps.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the lumps there are various species, and I have already described all the species in their division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And you should note this distinction between lump and fissure when it causes doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	And I say that with fissure there is a heat quality and fever and violent pains during which the boiling of excess subsides; and it is fulfilled as decay when at this point the fever, pain and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	In a lump there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it has this side which is in the internal sac proper.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it depends on the color of blood, and its beginning is like a boil and happens like feces, whether larger or smaller, and they are according to two species, whether they are fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of moisture are patches, as I described in my division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And when you reach the treatment of lump, that you expel it and inquire about it at its origin according to the instrument which is called introducer, as its form comes in the chapter which is similar to this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method of investigation for cysts and all lumps, which is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the pus filled area which you find in the lump, and you will test your words little by little inside until you know that the instrument has penetrated the canal.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then, according to the size of the abscess, finish positioning your hand, and then extract the pus, considering what is left in the footprint of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if there is excess wetness circulating, of any color, then you incise on the superficial section according to what I have said in other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no wetness at the footprint of the pus, then you will know that it's fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	Dry on them as I instructed to form into a cross shape like this:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Just as you were taught, suspend that with twine, and scrape the wound from all sides easily, and preserve the skin or sac, if possible, over it. Then extract that healthy tissue along the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that healthy tissue, and it's advisable to remove this instead. Then you extract it into scales so that nothing comes out from him due to any cause.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If he experiences a reason for some or too much time, the node returns according to his desire.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you notice that he suffers from a part small of him, then fill the wound with some corrosive and sharp powders, strengthen the wound, place your hand over what is the pus cavity cautery, and cure it according to another treatment until it's healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it's a large node, then you cut both of his lips and cure that which is inflamed.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	Just as you were taught, if it's pulsating in opposition to him or not, then cauterize and apply over the spot that is inflamed which is vitiated and smooths that stretched area for two days or three until it heals; and then return to cut off what is ruptured from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Regarding the necessary forms for excision and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those there are the forms of the abscesses, and they have three species, from which there is a large one, and it has somewhat less size, and it has a small one.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large abscess is like this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the moderate-sized abscess is like this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small abscess is like this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, alum, descending extremities correctly, so that they stimulate the inside in the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experienced ones, and they are called small bushes, and one of them is called blood.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	They have three species, from which there is a large one, somewhat less size, and even smaller.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large experienced one, its form:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the moderate-sized experienced one, its form:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small experienced one, its form:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	Make sure they are for those abscesses and ulcers and fistulas and swellings, both of the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	They are round, large, and sharp like big needles with which the ulcers are sewn, made of copper, or of bronze, or of iron, or of silver. The best ones are those made of copper.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are the experienced ones made of black lead, which one should remember that for those, the fistulas are opened in the cavity where the reflections are, and their reflections are reflected on its lightness towards those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	They have three species: some of them are long, others are moderate-sized, and the rest are short. This is according to the size of the opening of the fistula and its constriction.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The form of the large experienced one made of lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The form of the moderate-sized experienced one made of lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The form of the small experienced one made of lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the needles are of special kinds; some of them are simple ones, which have only one curvature, and they come in three types: large, small, and moderate-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And they have iron hooks, and they also come in three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those needle-hooks have two curves, and they are also of three types.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And they have needles with three curves, and these come in three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all of this is necessary for their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The form of a large simple needle, its form:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of a moderate-sized simple needle:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a small simple needle, its form:
Forma de unci orp gran:	The form of an iron hook with one curve that is large:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The form of an iron hook with one curve that is moderate-sized: its form:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The form of an iron hook with one curve that is small: its form:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a large needle with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The form of a moderate-sized needle with two curves: its form:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a small needle with two curves: its form:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a large needle with three curves: its form:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a moderate-sized needle with three curves: its form:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a small needle with three curves: its form:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels with which they cut and abrade the nodes and abscesses, and they come in three species: from them, there is a large one, moderate-sized, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	The form of the large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Procedure for using a surgical knife:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Procedure for using a small surgical knife:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The endings of those on which a section is made are sharp and the others are not, they are not handled in such a manner, but rather that they are done gently during the lancing of nodes, fearing the introduction of a vein or nerve. And for these the patient finds relief and gets calmness due to this adjustment; you need to find this kind of excoriating on the pustule.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of amalgams, and they come in three species: large, medium, and small, just like pearls.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of a large ball:
Forma de magda migier:	Medium-sized sphere form:
Forma de magda pauc:	Small sphere form:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made from iron and resemble a rod on which alcohol is applied.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And in the pointed end of this rod, there is an inner tube concealed; and in that spot, there are conduits both inside and outside. You can adjust it as you wish, just like what you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of syringes, which are concealed between the fingers, you perform the puncturing of pustules without feeling the pain, and they come in three species: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms for suction cups that relieve the flow of illness, they come in three species: large, medium, and small. These are their forms:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made from iron like a citrus fruit, round with some length, and they are delicate.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And you should have these species of suction cups in large, mediums, and small sizes, for when you need to quickly relieve the flow of illness, and then when your first remedies do not work.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use those to relieve illness everywhere in the body, and only use them on fatty areas. Just like this, use them on the sweat glands and thighs, and on the underarms, elbows, breasts, abdomen, and buttocks, and similarly for any other fatty areas.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some treatments are done using those other small tools that resemble tiny needles according to this form; when performed through phlebotomy or the incision of veins or arteries, illness is relieved.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Some treatments are done in a round manner as per this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII:
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of male breasts which are formed like women's.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some treatments cause the breasts of some men to swell when they begin to become fatty like women's skin during sleep. The breasts are then swollen and assembled like women's breasts, with fatty lumps scattered apart.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for those who experience this issue, remember that you should lance in the area where the lunar section is formed according to this form, between line B and line G. Thoroughly cleanse the skin by scraping it off, apply the medicine as a paste filling up any wound gaps, adjust both ends of the wound with stitches, and cure it wherever it's healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the breast sags towards your sides and becomes softer due to its size like in women's breasts, then it should be cut into two parts filled with pus on either side, forming two sections resembling a lunar shape. Each should contain part of the other; where the larger line contains the smaller according to this form between lines B and G. Then scrape off the crust that is between the two sides of the wound, remove the swelling, administer as we have said about suture and powders necessary for the treatment until it heals.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision for fear of harming the patient and due to illness, then it is advisable to soak the wound with corrosive ointment and leave it as such until this destroys the fat, and then treat it properly when it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII:
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the puncturing of pustules that are located under the skin.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These pustules that are found under the skin are of the species of scrophula, thorns, which have a layer that is excised.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And some of them contain moisture; for those that contain moisture, it is to be punctured according to this form: from line G to line B. Once everything inside the pustule has been removed during healing, then you leave it until the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And afterwards, let the area heal with suitable ointment, until it heals.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the pustule is of the species of nodes or scrophula, then you divide it over that area just as we have said in the section about scrophulas similarly.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the wound is extended to such an extent that it causes pus discharge, then apply a cautery as we have explained previously.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX:
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the lancing of pustules that occur through arteries or veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured, and the clot is consolidated over that area, then punctures will occur causing pustules. And there are signs by which you can identify whether inflammation and a pustule are caused by an artery or a vein: when a pustule is due to an artery, it's longly extended in the chest region; and when you press on the pustule with your fingers, you feel a rattling sound inside.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to a vein manifests itself in the patient's body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And if an abscess is formed on this point, especially in the region where the lymph nodes are, and in joints, and around the neck, or in local areas of the body; it's a large one, so avoid iron treatments for its cure, and if it's at the extremities or head, that too should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	For the one affected by their condition due to swelling of the artery's opening, divide in the main section along its length; and then ligate the section with cords, and close near the artery, and release from the tissues where it is exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then apply pressure to that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and strengthen the artery with two folds of silk - which causes you to become skilled in extracting arteries those which are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then stab that spot which is between two ligaments inside the place where it causes all damage until the abscess dissolves.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then apply treatment in which wax is created that falls between the ligaments; and treat that with suitable ointments so that it may heal.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it's an abscess due to vein congestion, then you should hold that which is in your hand like the abscess near the main section of the vein and apply pressure. Then insert the needle at the spot where you held your hand earlier with the needle, and make it penetrate; and there should be a double thread inside where you extract from one side, and then ligate the abscess with a ligament according to what I have told you on the ligament of grapefruit for both parts near the two ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that we will extract the thread, then insert the needle at that spot with all of the abscess; when you make the first incision in the needle, strengthen your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	And then dry the abscess in the middle part of it until what is inside becomes settled; then cut off the excess of the thread, and leave that which remains from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place over that powder which you have submerged in oil and vinegar; and then administer the treatment made with candles and ointments until it heals.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Remove the top of the abscess which occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	So when an abscess occurs in an artery and a vein, similarly, an abscess also occurs in nerves when they are injured during percussion or overworked; and in that way.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And the method to follow for this is at the spots on the limbs or ankle, or in any place where there are painful joints.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it's a large abscess, and has the same color as the other body, and is in the major parts of its structure with veins beneath; when stretched under tension, felt below feels like the thigh seems to be numb.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it's not an abscess that has spread throughout the body, and here is the vein, which swells all over but doesn't go forward or backward parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	So for those that are in the joints, don't treat it with iron, which would provoke a contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	And for the one that is on the head or forehead, apply the thread internally at the surface.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it's a small abscess, then you should do that on the edges and cut off that spot afterwards.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it's large, then suspend it with a string, scrape that area, and hold that place; adjust the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	End of chapter.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Regarding the section on abscess which occurs due to colic affecting the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Deal with the discomforts that are felt in the bellies of those and in the other parts of their bodies from these things, which are called fungal due to similarities with fungi; for the roots of these are subtle and the head of them is large; already those mouths of them are open, it's from those that are small, and it's from those that become very large.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one already, and in their belly there were two parts that resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, of subtle roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already those mouths of them were inverted and would crack, humidity flowed continuously from that area.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	So I inserted and explored each one in the foot measuring eighteen uncia's. And the other measured six uncia's.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And during the operation at the incision site, consider if the thigh is wet and if the color of that part is white and wet from subtle roots. Then you should insert it in a lateral position, and place it near your presence with a cautery in fire; when those observed discomforts are expelled, do so without any harm to health; and if you find illness there, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you find the thigh pale and fearful, avoid inserting with iron; instead take lead that has recently been melted, strengthen that part in this manner as we have said; leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust at the constriction of the lead thread; so don't cease to strengthen that large lead, until it is cut and falls off by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If the disease is of great complexity, then in the examination of him there are some causes of fear and dread, especially in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It might be possible that you remove his illness, and then properly cauterize it so that it doesn't return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And properly treat what's inside where the disease has been healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And remember not to proudly claim to remove diseases that are of a dark color, with little sensation, under careful examination, for such are indeed cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will return with memories quite nearby.
Capitol .lii.	Capitol. Fifty-two.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Regarding the cure of the prominence of the umbilicus.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Umbilical prominence is caused by various reasons; or through fissures of the diaphragm which is above the belly, and due to leaks in the cloth or hernia according to what happens in other ruptures; or because of sickness that flows from veins or arteries as previously mentioned, or due to constricted wind within him.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it's due to a tear in the diaphragm and the leakage of the cloth or hernia, then the color of the pus is similar to the color of the body; and there is a lion-like pain, and it appears from various locations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it's due to the protrusion of the hernia, then that place on him resembles what we have recounted from its severity, with a much more intense variety; and as you press that against your fingers it becomes hidden, and then returns. The tension in him is so great, and the vigorous movement of introducing water and strong labor is magnified.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If due to dampness, then it's lion-like and doesn't become hidden when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor does it swell.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if due to sickness, then these signs appear in the pus turning black and declining.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it's due to no meat (which could refer to a lack of substance or muscle), then the pus is heavy, large, and hard, and its formation follows in quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it's due to wind (which could be a medical term referring to air or gas within the body), then the palpation of him is lion-like.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation here is that you consider whether the prominence of the umbilicus is due to sickness in an artery or vein, or wind; then choose not to treat him, for there's fear and dread in this as we've taught you in the chapter about the pus related to arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the umbilicus is due to hernia or cloth, you should order the sick person to keep their seat extended; and try this out in the system around the umbilicus; and then tell him to stand against your hands on his feet; and surround with a wide space in the umbilical system over the area where you've tried it; and extend the mass of pus up above at least one large span; and hold firmly or gently along the way of holding, decently.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And try to cut open the middle of the pus extended over the flesh and insert your finger into that point to push out the hernia; and if you have found it or guarded it through the flesh, then you will extract it quickly and force the hernia towards the inner parts of the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the cloth, then take that with one finger; and cut away any excess of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	And if it's contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that movement, and proceed with your operation again. Take two needles and place them in those strong points, and insert the needles into the system around the pus where you've done cutting, in a way of crossing, which you will make penetrate; and strengthen the pus on four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, keep the needles and flatten the area where the extended flesh will fall on its own; or cut that when it becomes thinner and is placed, then do so, and properly treat what is covered by the ointment inside which has been healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to no flesh in him or dampness, then you should drain the pus as we have said and eliminate the sickness or dampness that you find in him, and properly treat what has been drained and consolidate the area.
Capitol .liii.	Capitol. Fifty-three.
De curacio de cranc.	Regarding the treatment of children.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already discussed in the division about specific illnesses of children and how they are treated, and that the treatment must be gentle to prevent scarring. We also mentioned illnesses caused during pregnancy and care should be taken in their treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And it was said by the ancients that some childhood diseases can be eradicated from certain locations, such as on the head which is present in the breasts or thighs and resembles parts of the body that are susceptible to removal, especially when they start small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When it's old and large, don't try to cure him yourself, for I haven't been able to heal anyone of this kind nor have I seen another, nor has this reached here.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation here is that when it's allocated as we have said, you should prepare and leave the sick person and purge them of black bile some diseases, then proceed to drain it, if found, there is a clear manifestation.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And try to prepare the sick person for the preparation in which the operation is located, and ensure there are tools that reach it; and make a concave from all sides on the skin so good incision can be made inside without damaging any cause of your patient's disease.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the sweat flow, do not abruptly stop it, press the areas, and wipe away the sweat completely with your hand or with an instrument that is at your disposal among the tools.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you encounter thick sweat on veins or arteries, then cauterize that within where the flow of sweat has ceased, and then treat it alongside another treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Head. Chapter.
De curacio de ydropici.	Concerning the cure of dropsies.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed in the division, regarding the types of dropsy from water, and the signs for each type, with their cures we have medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is merely the type of edema caused by salt alone, and it does not resemble treatment with iron for the types of tympanic nor for the type of dysentery, which are fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have treated this type of tympanic dropsy with medicines and your treatment doesn't show improvement, consider that if the patient has already achieved debility or if there's another ailment alongside dropsy, like in their cough or abdomen discomfort and similar, then don't treat them with iron, for caution should be exercised about this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If your patient is experiencing excessive vigor and it's not another ailment but dropsy alone, not related to age or youth, then the way of performing surgery on them is that you lift the patient between your hands, guide them until they expel their belly with their own hand, push out the water from the left side of the stomach, and take a thorned spade according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	Make it of two sharp parts, with a pointed end like a spade; however, for the patient, make it somewhat shorter and gradually, in order that during surgery you do not enter the intestine, and ensure that it is done.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider if the generation of dropsy is from parts of the intestines, then you must consider that when performing surgery you need to be three finger-widths away from the umbilicus for the sections on both sides, in the line of the patient above their stomach.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the generation of dropsy is due to illness in the stomach, then your surgical incision should be on the left side of the belly button for three finger-widths.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the cause of your patient is due to milk, then your surgical incision should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not make your incision above the rib where you want the patient to vomit, so that excess fluids do not accumulate in that area.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And with the instrument, puncture completely along the entire line, then intervene in that section and raise your hand above the thorn between the line and the syringe, and scrape there; and if the amount is of one nail or roughly.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And puncture the syringe so that it reaches the place where the water is located, this is the location of the fluid.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And after that extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a slender silver catheter; it is made of silver or bronze or brass, at the lowest part of which there is a small hook, and on its sides are three hooks: two from one side and one from the other side; and shaped is the end cut like a feather, as follows:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the tip of it is an armature, which when the instrument reaches the fluid, immediately presses against it, thus removes half a moderate amount of water in the middle, if you remove more than that within the hour, weaken the patient through dissolution of their spiritual animal essence, or it might cause them to have a stroke leading to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Extract from that according to the vigor of your patient and according to how you interpret the movements of the patient's hand as indicating their spiritual essence's vitality and their goodness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And after that remove the instrument, collect the water which causes this; it's because immediately the intestines retain the hook above the syringe, which you've been told to puncture in accordance with that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And after that repeat the instrument on another day if you find your patient tolerating this; extract a small amount of water and do this for several days with caution, ensure not to excessively reduce the water.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	And if you are concerned about your patient and release a large amount of water, then cure them by burying in sand, using sweat baths in the shade, and waiting under the sun for a long time. And cure them with drying medicines until they recover.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach and the intestine near the water extraction site, as I recounted in what was previously described.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter. 56.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Concerning the treatment of children born with unperforated urinary locations.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some of the children are born with their head inside their mother's womb and their opening not perforated (or it is stretched straight or not in its proper location).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Then perform surgery on the child immediately after birth using a small silver catheter following this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And place on the hook a small lead hook and connect it, leave it for three days or up to four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when they want to urinate, they should do so and then return back.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you don't hold the lead, it's possible that the urine which goes over the area won't close this (wound or cut).
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	Let him take what we brought straight for medicine with lead's scales, as we have said, within too many days that it gets expanded.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	Let them take those from whom we took the thing not in their place, this is said, which causes it of those, that one who takes it should reach the tip of the penis so that he cannot urinate internally; within lifting the penis with his hand at the parts above; and it's not to his generation, because its sperm can't arrive at the mother according to straightness, and it is a male infertility disorder.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The method of the operation for him is that the patient lies on his back and you extend the tip of his penis with your left hand with a strong pull, then you cut into the tip of the head of the penis at the junction with the shaft, as if it were done with a knife or any part doesn't bleed, so that the middle part of his blood looks like the tip of the penis and that the thing falls in the middle of the area according to how it covers.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And remember that in your operation of blood flow from the wound, what damages occur to this; and pause for you while you cut the wound, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 56.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Regarding the white matter that occurs on the foreskin at the tip of the penis and pus, discoloration and adhesion of the foreskin at the tip of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Damages seen in this white matter on the testicles is an indication of chronic inflammation.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of them is malignant and the other is not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malignant, you should hang it with a delicate thread and cut the area until that disappears completely; then pause for that part to be submerged in Egyptian oil; then that, treat it with clear oil until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the white matter is malignant, then you should check its color. Then you should apply a cautery near the cut and the tip of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	Let's say that if the white matter is on the foreskin at the tip of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the white matter is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should take off the white matter which is inside until it hardens; and later you treat the external part, when you treat that period, it's not guaranteed that it won't be torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And just as damage occurs in the testicles and on the foreskin discoloration and deterioration, then you should remove everything that has already deteriorated and that is about to spoil or that has already spoiled; and later draw a line over this area with honey, which gets damaged by flour sifted from old saffron and white pepper grains.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	Let's say that if there is blood flow from the wound, then you should apply a lunar cautery according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	The application of a lunar cautery is in two consecutive stages, which are during blood flow from the wound and when the wound becomes infected.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the tip of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed in that moment, then you should insert a lead catheter into the base of the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin at the tip of the penis (this type of adhesion only occurs in those who have their foreskin intact, and on them circumcision is not prescribed; and when adhesion happens due to wound or abscess) you should scratch with a blunt blade until it is dissolved and the tip of the penis is released from all sides.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it's hard to remove those completely, then you should scratch with a blunt blade on some area of the tip of the penis and foreskin, and this is because when the foreskin is fine, its thinness easily pierces through its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And afterwards separate the foreskin from the tip of the penis with a thread of its thinness, which has already been rubbed in water to prevent further bleeding.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And afterwards treat it with astringent until it is hardened.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 58.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Regarding the circumcision of children and the treatment for what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not the solution like other wounds: however, it is of our operation and our will, and more importantly in those cases that belong to children, it is necessary for us to assign better operations and procedures that cause less loss of health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	So it was said by the ancients that they did not practice circumcision on some of the free ones, who do not use them in their laws, but this is only what we have acquired through experience, which is that I have found that most artists and barbers use circumcision and sterilization with needles and at the tip; and they use tendons for the female and cutting at the thumb.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have tried all these methods and found that the best sterilization is with blades, tendons for the female, in sterilization like at the thumb, which damages parts above, where the foreskin has two tunics and allows you to avoid further cutting and pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And concerning circumcision, which is performed by surgeons, and is digital, from which the woodworkers use, it does not ensure the removal of the end of the male member, where it forcefully enters his groin.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation involving a scalpel, forcefully using iron and corroding your operation is advised against.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the umbilical cord of a child is naturally short, and cuts are made in such a way that they do not require circumcision, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	The method of circumcision that uses knives and scissors on the male organ, where I found good results from my own experience; the knives have a proportional incision size, so their sharpness is like the sharpness you apply with your hand; and similarly, when you press your hand down, there are two types of sharpness provided in comparison over time; and it's done by applying pressure to the organ forming a shape containing the foreskin from all sides, at which no mistake will be made.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first method of the operation is that you should make the child lie down more if they are among those I understand as smaller children; do not do anything else but hold the organ in its foreskin only, and let that be inside by another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make the child happy in every way possible to him from what receives his understanding.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then place the child between your servants properly prepared, and it should not exceed ten minutes; hide the knives in your hand or leave them under your elbow, so that the child doesn't see those or any other of the tools.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then place your hand on the organ of the child and blow into the umbilical cord, pulling that inward so that it separates the head of the organ, and then proceed to correct whatever is added in its skin.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then bend the marked place on the organ twice, and fasten pus below that with another small thread, and place your finger at that location to guide where you want the second thread to be in good retention, and cut between two threads.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then raise the cord slightly and flatten the head of the organ; and slowly soften the wound little by little, as it is better; then place a powder on top and over that place a piece of cloth saturated with a broth made from hog oil that has been cooked recently. Leave that on for another day; and treat that with care until it heals.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the knives for circumcision, this is how it should be:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let the first half be uncut and the other halves be cut, so that it doesn't remove the tip of the penis, and make the length of the sharp edges as long as twice a penknife handle.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in circumcision is when forcefully it removes the entire intrinsic cord or part of it; you should ensure the incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	So take care to extend that from your hand towards your knife before the cauterization of the area, and cut it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you can't hold it at your knife, then take that in a pin and cut it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	And if it has been more than three days, and the foreskin has been cauterized, then let that be inside so that the pus opens, and cleanse that with ease, and cut it according to what you are prepared for.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And watch over the head of the organ, which will not be on him.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then treat that with what heals the wound from the powders we have recommended in the chapter on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it has cut into the cord beyond measure, and adheres to parts there, that won't be noticed by him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And treat that with what we have said until it heals.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 58.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Chapter 58. On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by blockage due to stone or inflammation, or by obstruction with a foreign body or meat packing, similar to what we have discussed in our treatment methods section.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and there's retention due to a stone which has already reached the bladder's neck, then take care that the patient remains lying on his back.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then place his legs of the patient on his back and spread out his stomach from the part above his hips, and make him tense his abdomen as much as he can.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	And then the neck of the bladder is forced to expel the stone behindwards, so that the urine becomes absolute.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved with what we have discussed and the treatment must be vigorous towards the patient, then take care that you administer extraction to him with an instrument called a syringe, which has this shape: It's made of silver and is slender as a lion's claw, just like a needle from a medical kit of a doctor's, of about twice the length of a palm plus half, where it has a thin tip at its head.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of expulsion of urine through that is that you take the organ folded and tie it with wool or cloth for good adhesion; and insert the ends of the organ into the part left by the syringe, and if there's any cause from the wool, remove it, but introduce it into the needle forcefully. Then press on the syringe to the end and towards his urine bag.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And cut open the patient's flesh, scrape the bladder and the scrotum with an instrument, apply oil, myrrh, and olive oil, then wash them.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the bistort into the prepared place that reaches the root of the scrotum; and then fold the scrotum above at the point of the pubis; and then push the bistort inside that; and then push that inside until it reaches the bladder, and that makes the scrotum reach the cause of emptiness, and do not follow this order, but in the meat where it is twisted.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then slowly stretch the string through the wool little by little, because urine wetts the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And then remove that and do treatment with urine, use a bistort, don't stop doing this and use the bistort until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 59.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Regarding the quality of bladder enema and the use of pincers and tools that are suitable for this task.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or congestion within it, or obstruction by pus, if one wants to distill water and medicines through that area, then this should be done with an instrument called pincers, which has this form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	If it is at the extremity of the object where there is a lack, then it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that place are three holes: two on one side, like this times.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning is a concave place where this is inserted, and according to the amount that pushes that one, the addition is made, within which when any cause is thrown out by that from moisture, it is drawn in, and when it is expelled by that, this is also drawn in, and when it is expelled for a long time, as it does with pincers, on which naphtha is heated in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So if you want to prevent moisture in the bladder, insert the end of the pincers into the moisture, and draw what is pushed towards the higher parts, as the moisture is drawn into the cavity of the pincers.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the end of the pincers into the scrotum as we have described in the bistort; and then push the moisture towards that which you push, as soon as that moisture reaches the bladder, and hold the scrotum with it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The subtle form of the cauterizer for the bladder, which is what the bladder is treated with, and that is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or tin, with the head of the cauterizer resembling a small feather, and leave its tube inside firmly.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take the bladder of motion and place in it the moisture that you want to cauterize in the bladder, and then join that between two with a strong bandage on the string, and heat that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the end of the cauterizer into the scrotum.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then place your hand on the bladder with moisture, stretching it down inside so that the scrotum holds that moisture has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not have a bladder present, then take a piece of parchment and make it into that circle; and punch it all over its roundness; and then insert a strong string in those holes, as they are turned; and then add the circle just like it is alsofatur added, so when you place in that what you want from moisture, and oil and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you hold that in the tool and do that as you did with the bladder, and place your hand inside where moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	Regarding the extraction of gravel.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed in the division the species of gravel and treatment with medicines, and the difference between gravel produced in the kidneys and gravel produced in the bladder, and those signs.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said about gravel for which manual operation and section are necessary.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the gravel produced in the bladder is precisely that which is formed inside the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I will narrate that with obvious exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	And it is said that gravel produced in the bladder mostly goes to children; and the signs of this are that urine discharged from the bladder is like water in its subtlety, and appears with sand-like particles; and the scrotum rubs its scrotum, and red spots appear on the penis, and then it rises; and there is a hole made at the anus in pieces of those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is difficult to heal children from that within which they have achieved fourteen years; and the healing of the elderly for this is difficult.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	In young people, it is easier for this because it is among those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of the one from which gravel is greater and healing is easier; if it's small, it goes against that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	And how do we proceed with the treatment of this, go to the beginning of this by reforming the scrotum with a cauterizer which removes all the opening that is within their intestines; for this opening prohibits some red spots from allowing the formation of gravel during its investigation.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then hold the scrotum against their feet and make it swell up to prevent gravel from descending into the bladder's base or escape at any other place or some spots.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And place that cauterizer between your hands ready, and let his hands hold everything in their places, so that the bladder is made to slope downwards towards all the parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And apply it directly to that area and its entire outer part.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So if you feel the pain in the space, then you need to cauterize that section immediately above it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you don't cauterize everything immediately above your touch point, then take an olive oil with your left hand's index finger. If the patient is a child or young adult, insert this into their anus; otherwise, use it to stimulate their belly button.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And cauterize directly where the pain is located with your hand.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually convert that small part into the bladder's neck.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And place pressure on that with your finger, and expel it towards all the parts outside; locate where you left the section.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to press on the bladder with his/her hand; and command another minister with her/his right hand to extend the thighs above all the parts in front, and with the other hand apply pressure on the region where the section is made, as it lies at the place of the operation.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert some foam that has this shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And divide what is between the anus and the thighs, not in the middle, but towards the left side of the patient's buttock; place the section over that pain and your finger on his/her anus, making a transverse cut so that the outer part is wide and inwardly narrowed according to the amount I removed from the pain, without exceeding it, and if your finger is in the anus, the pain should be pushed out of the section, forming an opening that meets patient's capabilities.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there is some pain that has an angle and borders, making his/her excretion difficult through this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And that thing, which resembles a small cone and is round, causes slight obstruction due to it.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	So if it's the one with an angle and borders, adjust in the opening.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it's not an opening, then take care to place it on that spot or firmly press with that, the tip of which is like a file on which you press on the pain without forcing it out; or insert this delicate instrument with curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you can't place it there, then widen that a little more, and if you see the release of pus, cut firmly in that area with vinegar.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the pain is more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand into the bladder's mouth and gradually cut towards it; and then push a little close to that area. And similarly do if they are multiple pains.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the pain is very large, then you should cut with a large incision; it can happen to the patient in one of two ways: either it remains as it is or changes during urine distillation, because if the place is not completely solid.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	If you administer an expulsion from within that is completely open, or uses the saw in the fracture to extract that in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with essences of aloe and dragon's pus, strengthen that.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place it over that bandage soaked in oil and vinegar or in rubbed oil and water wash, so that the abscess opens up.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then roll the patient back onto their chest, do not untie the bandage for at least the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have untied that, wash the area with water and add oil, and then care for it with antiseptic ointment and within that until it heals.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If an abscess pus forms and is corrosive in that wound, adjust it with an antiseptic ointment; and if it resembles this when the urine is frozen inside the bladder (and this is known from the release of pus through urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that pus, for otherwise it causes the bladder to inflame and decay.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with vinegar mixed in water and salt, against all species, using that which you consider appropriate for healing until it heals.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And during all the hours of your entire treatment, take care to adjust the medicines that are applied on the body.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the pain is small and is located at the root of the penis, it's implanted in him, and urine excretion is prohibited, then treat that with what I recommended before you reach the section; and these symptoms are attributed to this treatment; and I have mentioned this already, which is this tool you should take, which has this shape:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	Of triangular end, sharp, implanted in shaft.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take the needle, and tie it at that place just below the penis to prevent the pain from returning to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the penis, piercing with ease until the tool reaches that pain.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And with the drill in your hand, you carefully move it into that small opening little by little, and you make a hole inside which allows the other part to penetrate; as soon as the urine is released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And press your hand on what is hardened in the stone of the entry point away from the foreskin, when that is squeezed, and the hole gets filled with urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	May it be that this cure is not due to your apparatus for any cause which prevents that, then leave a piece of it on the stone, and another piece above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And apply over the stone in that foreskin between two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then remove that.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then untie the ligament and change the affected area, which is done in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to have a piece of leather on the stone of the foreskin, but in order that it does not return to the bladder, and another ligament above this one only when, once untied, the leather is near the exit of the foreskin, the disease returns to its place and heals.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this it is necessary when you have the leather above, that you raise the disease to the parts above, or return you must give your consent and heal just as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Capítulo 61.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Chapter 61: Removal of foreskin in women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Foreskin in women is seldom produced.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If there is foreskin on any of those, then it makes the treatment difficult for her and is prohibited by too many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The one among them is that in women childbirth stretches the vagina.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you don't find a woman who tells you whether she had intercourse with a man when she was a virgin, or if she has married women having been with men before.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you don't find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation by hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the section on foreskin in women is far from the location of foreskin, so you need to focus on this area, and there's fear in it.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If necessity causes you to do this, then find one woman who knows how to perform it, and few are found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are lacking that, then approach the almost subtle male doctor, or present a woman matron skilled in women's affairs, or a woman who has part of this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then make that presentation, and command her to do everything you tell her, from the inquiry about foreskin to commencement; which causes is to check if the woman is a virgin, then make him touch her behind and wants foreskin.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if she finds that, secure the leather of hers, and then command her to cut over that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If it's not virgin, then command the woman to insert her thumb in the patient's mouth and inquire about foreskin, but place her left hand on the bladder, and press that firmly.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then if she finds that, then command you to gradually expand that from the opening of the bladder to your fingers within the strength of her virtue until it reaches up to the crease of her thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then cut over that location opposite the mouth of your mouth should reach up to the crease of her thigh from any part towards it, and place foreskin in that area, and his description should not be distorted by foreskin command him accordingly.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be small at commencement; and then insert your finger in that area, and if you feel foreskin, then adjust the section according to the amount by which he knows foreskin can be removed from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the types of foreskin are lumps: those being small and large, rough and hard, long and round, and having ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	And then know how many types there are of her for this that you signify about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see discharge of the wound, adjust in that wet place and take it for an hour until the blood is removed, and then return to your operation until foreskin is removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make ready with your tools for the removal of foreskin in men as you said during the removal of foreskin, so that you are helped by those during your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want to see the discharge of wound, and know that the expulsion of blood is from the incised area, then you sprinkle powder on the place and strengthen it with dust and constriction descent, and do not continue this; leave foreskin and don't remove that one, as childbirth will result in death for her.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then heal the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And once the intensity of the bleeding has subsided after some days, and the place is healed, then you return to your operation until foreskin is removed.
Capitol lxii.	Capítulo 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Chapter 62: On section regarding inguinal hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Inguinal hernia is simply the addition of moisture in white sperm, which is left in the semen-containing canal, and it is called spermatic cord.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it occurs in the proper scrotum which his nature prepares for him within that part of urine, when another urine has already been produced; and it is the semen canal between the white sperm which we have said, and it's not this but testicle.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The formation of this hernia is due to weakness that affects the genital organs, so it fills with this substance to those parts, and sometimes occurs due to hits made on the genital organs.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	This dampness takes on various colors, where the color of it or it fades to yellowish or blood-red, or rusty, or is black and creamy, or is watery white, and this is what it is.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which one knows where this water accumulation is in these: if it is on the white scab as we said, then the pus turns yellowish, elongating somewhat like an hourglass figure, and appears the genital organ, where the dampness contains from all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the dampness is in the proper scrotum, then the pus turns yellowish at the tip of the hourglass and through this one estimates that it's another hourglass.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the dampness is between the chain of the genitals and the white scab, then it causes loss of sensation.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And how you want the knowledge of the color of the dampness, then you expand the color of the dampness in the pus within the middle interweaving where its shape is followed; and according to how it exists in the trace of the interweaving, judge from what is inside them.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Then when we come to the treatment of them, then command that if this is possible for you, the patient should have bloodletting, and make him lie down.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And return them to their back on some cause for a little or another, and place your moist cloths under them.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And place yourself on the left part of them, and command that the attendant follows on the right side of them, who extends their arm to one of the two sides towards the chain of the genitals and the midpoint of the abdominal flanks.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And take a broad blade, and divide the chain of the genitals from the middle spot longitudinally through to the pubis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the section according to a straight line equal in distance from the line that you should cut through the skin of the genitals, so that it reaches the white scab including it.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And scrape that, observe, and guard yourself for not piercing that; and your scraping is such that it hangs down somewhat towards the hourglass and more subtly examine your scraping according to the quantity you can manage.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then make an extensive puncture through the white filled with water, and remove all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two folds of the section with scissors, and extend the white towards the upper parts; do not touch the chain of the genitals including it, and cut the white in that manner which is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And cut that entirely or in pieces, especially the finer side; if you do not examine the incision carefully from him, there is no certainty that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	And if the hourglass proceeds from that outside of its chain during your operation, then when you have completed the section of the white, return inside him, and adjust the two folds of the genital chain with stitches, and care for it as other wounds until it heals.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the hourglass corrupted by another illness, then command that you remove the blood vessels which are under the retractor, and extract the hourglass, and care for it as we said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	And if the water is aggregated in two parts always, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore cut that part as you did in the other equally; and if it appears to be an operation to your sight, then do so.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you cleanse the wound, and interweave between both sections wool soaked in oil or in rubbed oil; place another wool that you have soaked in vinegar and oil on top, spread that over two genitals and the flanks of the abdomen; place wet cloths on top and powders, cover those underneath with a substance as this:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then have two cloths placed and be filled with wet wool according to this resemblance; have the ends placed where they are pressed by hand or damp wool, have them attached to the belt of the trousers, and one of the ends take in the buttocks between the two, and the other end take near the knee bend, and two ends over two thighs, and two other ends on two hips, and all tightening be done inside the trouser belt.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is artificially treated with a cautery instead of cutting in the section; so you take a fine surgical knife and cut through the chain of the genitals, and ignite according to what we have instructed, once the white part containing the water is exposed, then you take the cautery as follows:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it resembles Greek lettering.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then make an incision in that white part, and ignite as long as all the dampness is released outside.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the white with scissors, scrape with scissors, and scrape with the fine ignited cautery; cut that as much as is possible for you so that you remove everything; be careful not to let the water touch the fire.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is placed safe and far from blood flow, and better than sectioning surgery.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If it causes you discomfort due to an abscess or when using a cautery during sectioning or cauterization, or blood flow, then consider what discomfort it causes you in this way, and apply the cure according to how it is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the patient is scared and doesn't anticipate the second operation due to its horror, then perform a perforation according to what I recommend; and this is when you must confirm, according to what we have discussed about their meanings, that this is an aqueous hernia.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then consider how you might place the patient on an elevated surface, then puncture the abscess at the lowest part of their body through a slit laterally, and pause the puncturing according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the incision be wide so that all the water flows out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And place your hand gently and smooth it there, to ensure that all remaining water flows away.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And treat the area until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	If the discomfort is due to the removal of water at that time, you should puncture there: this procedure is done only when white pus in the wound's opening causes discomfort and prevents water from escaping. Then consider how you might place inside the wound a tool with which water from dropsy is extracted, whose shape follows; or adjust pressure on the wound area with something small.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that water returns and is somewhat healed approximately over three months or around those periods; and once it's added, then puncture according to that meticulous method, so the patient can spend their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On sectioning about a carnal hernia and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that during sectioning about this hernia, there is danger of infection in the major preparations; therefore, I consider it best to release you and save you with that.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I remember the operation in that case and the specifics of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, state that abscesses are found in the parts where the glands combine and this occurs due to such causes: or by excessive acute inflammation which infiltrates the glands, or by impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it doesn't appear during pain, and it's a heavy abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And soft fluid is pusified, whose color is dark, and there is no pulse in the patient.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And some instances are performed due to blockage of the arteries, and because of swelling in that way where the memory of the patient is already noticeable, or due to swelling of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	That which is due to arterial swelling is recognized by the spreading of pus when you press that with your fingers; and don't consider it if you touch that.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	That which is due to vein swelling does not spread for any cause; the compression with your fingers shows it.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it's possible that sectioning can be performed on this type and on other meats; for you would incise the nerve of the glands, then extend the hand to the upper parts, extract the white pus, release the suspensory of the vessels, tie them up, and incise the suspensory pus that you release from all parts of the hand.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	And if the hand is already on those hard masses, then consider how you might remove the hand and incise there.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion due to some cause of the pus, or between that which is within the veins, then consider how you might release all that adhesion and incise it through a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If it's a native mass in the location of the adhesion which is behind, then consider how you might incise all that belongs to you, and remove the hand like we've said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And once your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool soaked in olive oil and vinegar; and treat that using another method until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernias that are venous.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Ampullae are abscesses enveloped by some wrapping resembling a bud under the softening of the testicles, and this causes difficulty in exercise and walking for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in treating this condition, there's concern due to what follows it in memory.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However consider that when speaking of surgery, I follow the first method as described.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And say that when you place the patient on an elevated surface; then move the suspensory of the testicles to those parts; and touch the nerve of the glands with your fingers in those veins which are palpable near the belly button; and have another servant ready, and extend them with vigorous extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then make an incision through the skin in a diagonal section across the vessels where you can see the vessels.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then excise from all parts in this manner as we've said for removal of arteries which are located under the arms.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then insert in those an needle with a double thread, and tie that at the first location where veins occur, and tie another vein at the last of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then enter those into the middle area by straight section according to the length of the body, and extract that which is added by the moist putrid and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then treat the wound with the cure of other wounds where you wish for health to be generated through which the vessels fall under two genetic types, which do not cause harm in this way.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If it happens to affect all the veins, then remove or extract the testicles or cause them to be removed through this method for their vessels, in order that they lack nourishment due to the obstruction of the vessels, and become hardened, or cause it so that there is no youth among those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that extends over the belly from the sides of the abdominal muscles, causing the parts of that rupture to join some of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either from the muscle or protrusion of it, and this condition affects these two species due to various causes: impact, or by jumping, or due to shouting, or due to lifting any heavy cause, or due to exertion.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it's due to extension of the muscle, is that it occurs gradually over a long period, and does not occur suddenly, and there is an abscess evenly inside the belly where the muscle compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of this is when it's due to a section of the muscle, at the beginning it causes sudden intense pain; and there is an abscess visibly different from what you can see below the apparent cause, and this is due to the movement of the intestine, and his body towards the parts forward of the muscle.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And some ulcers are removed from within the intestine, and this is called intestinal hernia with scarring.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And some ulcers are caused by windiness, and some ulcers run into the intestine opening, and they get stuck there, and this is a great suffering for patients, and some ulcers cause painful conditions that worsen when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of these species of this illness we must be cautious, because it should be avoided to engage in that activity there.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method for performing this operation is to order the patient to reduce the intestine with his hand at the inner parts of its cavity if he resists during his return, and then place your hands under his chest between his legs, and lift his limbs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then stretch the cord which secures the testicles at the upper parts, and cut the part of the testicle's cord; and then make two cuts in the incision area according to your need to open this section among them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the opening according to the amount that is possible from that, let it be made through the section.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then cleanse that muscle which is left of the testicles' cord, while revealing the white firm muscle from every part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And then you intervene in the place where the testicle is cut off, which is between the white muscle, which is left of the cord of the animal's tail, and the other side according to it, and relieve that adhesion behind the tail part.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then take the testicles' cord towards the forward parts, and as such extend the white muscle on your left hand, lift the animal's tail towards the muscle at this part; and command the assistant to stretch it under you, you then dissolve that adhesion behind with a full solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And check with your fingers so there's no cause for the intestine wrapped in the firm white muscle.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find any cause from him/her/it, then you remove that off to the belly side.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle with a thick thread of seven threads, and insert that under the muscle at the lower part of the cord of the testicles, which is cut. And then you pierce the ends emerging from these so that four threads are inside, and then arrange some of them over a certain shape like a cross; and tie it to that muscle where we said that leaves the cord of the testicles strongly on both sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of these threads and tie them firmly so that none of the vessels under those can pass any cause through which an abscess would not occur from here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And place another tight band according to the first band, three digits away from the belly; and between these two bands smooth that part of the muscle which is left of the cord of the testicles, in proportion to its size, and cut everything else roundly, and remove the animal's tail.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then cut in the part left of the cord of the testicles through the section which flows with health and healing as we have recommended in what we have discussed.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply oil-soaked wool, and place it on the wound; and administer the bandage as we have recommended (and some ulcers of the white muscle are cauterized, which we have mentioned in relation to preventing blood flow, for which ulcers occur), and smooth the bandage so that it falls by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the operation takes too long, then heat the water, and place it over the area where we instructed to apply heat.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And treat the wound with the other cure for the wounds until they are healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter sixty-six.
De hernia ventosa.	On venous hernias.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, nothing has been seen that should be burned during the treatment of the patient.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first said that it is done in this way as we have described for the hernia that is inflamed; which is to say that you tie up the vessels close to the section above that facilitates its movement; and then dry it around the middle point in the vicinity of the abscess where I open, into which the vessels would fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the wound according to what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter sixty-seven.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the disorder that occurs in the gullets.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes tears occur in the gullets as we have described, and you should identify the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not attribute any cause of the intestines to the veins; and if they do, there are only a few; and return them all at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the time is prolonged with this, there is a tear in the chest where the intestine descends into the chest; and this happens due to the extension of the chest which is present in the gullets as we have described, the cause being that the chest is extended, and it makes the area soft and it becomes inflamed, then you will notice.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of the patient is with a cautery as described before in its treatment.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some cases are healed with iron according to this manner: which is that the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then dry the area of the abscess rupture, place it under pressure in the middle according to the width as large as three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And strengthen the white chest that is below the collarbone where it is exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And take hold of the rib and place it on the prominent part of the chest, and press it onto the navel of the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And place both prominent areas on the end of the rib of the chest, and adjust one of those to the other for sewing.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And take out the end of the rib, do not cut into the chest completely, nor pull on the heart, or any other cause like those I have learned about in treating intestinal hernias.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And treat that in the treatment of wounds, and if you incise the roots, cleanse it and restore the wound until it is consolidated; which means that the chest has contracted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this area, which is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter sixty-eight.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the neck of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Some cases the neck of the testicles in some men is softened due to this as the muscles that are within it are softened, and you should examine the patient.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	It is necessary for the one who treats the patient to make the patient lie according to their two hands, and incise all of the neck that has been softened over the natural neck; and place two lips on the sewing.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, take hold of at the beginning the excess of the softened neck with three or four stitches and make a firm sewing.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And place the stitches between them; and treat according to the treatment of the other wounds until it is healed, and they fall out.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter sixty-nine.
De castracio.	On castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is condemned, but due to some reason, it has been mentioned to me that I should remember this in this free text; and it is not necessary to remember this unless for two ways, of which one is when you are questioned about this in the art of medicine, that they should know how to treat this patient who might have castration, and the other way is that we sometimes need castration of other animals for our children's needs, as well as for tools, and bowls, and pigs, and similar to these animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And so I say that castration is done in two ways: either by cauterization or through a cut to section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	When this is done by cauterization, the operation process involves cutting off the animal in hot water so that its testicles soften and hang.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And take those with your hand until they are resolved without showing signs of the incision.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	And in castration done by cut and sectioning, you should have the animal lying down with your left hand pressing on the neck of the testicles.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And tie the suspensory, and cut over each heart in one section where two hearts will proceed.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And cut those pus that you have found from anywhere.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not allow any cause about the ones in the chest, but only the subtle chest which is above the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better which is done by cautery, as cautery gently leaves no cause for the testicles so that the animal desires intercourse.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one is when it appears in the middle of the space in the scrotum, which is between the two testicles; there is a part that resembles the female partner where hair grows.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some of those secretions cause urine to flow in the duct of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In the females, there is a special case: that of the female genitalia being like two testicles in men somewhat smaller than half each; they are placed so as to be almost like the penis of men and similar to their testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is for three types: two from men and one type from women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it means that you should insert those tightened muscles where the secretion of that thing escapes, and then proceed with treating those injuries along with other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And for the second type in men from which urine flows, which is in the duct of the testicles, there is neither treatment nor operation on it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On lumps and flesh protrusions due to female causes.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	A firm lump is adjusted due to natural causes and gets a regular examination; some swellings become exaggerated in certain women, spreading like in men, and enter during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then you should remove the excess of lumps with your hand or a tool and insert it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And don't stop at insertion; particularly in the middle of the process, make sure that there is no flow of pus.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And afterwards treat that with the treatment until it heals.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Birth flesh is tissue that grows within the mother's womb filling it up, and firm lumps are formed in those parts forward according to resemblance of cow (and thus they called this "tail disease" initially); so you should insert it like inserting a lump, and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72.
De curacio de alratica.	On the treatment of hernia.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Hernia occurs when the woman's uterus is not perforated, or when it descends slightly.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it can be either due to nature or by accident.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to tail disease which preceded it, and that is caused either by loose or poorly adjusted flesh, or by a thin or thick cord.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it occurs either in the middle of pregnancy, or on her back, or in excess pus within her, or below her, and forbid intercourse, conception, and childbirth, and prohibit excessive menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The knowledge of that is made by examining the womb; if the protrusion is noticeable, proceed immediately; but if it's not noticeable, then you need to search for that with your fingers or by touch.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If the protrusion is due to a thin cord, and it's close to the two lips, then you should pinch and relieve that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you place your fingers on the two lips until they touch the inner folds of both breasts.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, with her legs spread apart, and you then extend both lips until that thin cord is broken and the protrusion is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and dip it in oil and place that over the area, and keep doing this for a day until the inserted location is not consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	And if the cord is thick and dense, then you should insert that in a fatty area or in laurel leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	And if the protrusion is due to weakness of flesh, then suspend that with a tool, and insert that.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use medicines that stop pus discharge and throbbing, such as atkins, dragon's blood, and ashes, adjusted with almond oil.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide lead pipe for the wound not to be consolidated lightly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep that there for some days and apply lime juice.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then treat it with the other consolidation treatment until it heals.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes occurrences happen during pregnancy related to other tissues, and you should insert them according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	And if it's due to a pus-filled boil, then for the boil filled with pus inside the womb should not be made against iron in any manner.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids, tail diseases, and red bubbles that occur in the womb of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are an accumulation in the openings of veins where pus flows continuously; and old hemorrhoids occur like this.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already mentioned the types of those and their signs, and to explain which ones receive treatment and which do not.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	So it's said that hemorrhoids and boils during pregnancy that do not appear through the sense of touch, in those cases, there should be no treatment with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	And those ones which are on the openings of the womb where you can feel them, these are the ones that receive treatment.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And when you put the woman in bed, rub her and then extend her on the mattress or on rough cloth, and pierce those with the razors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then apply the powders over those, using the extracts of the tincture's urine from one of the digestive powders for a few bites, similarly to how it is done with those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then soak her feet for an hour, and after that, let that be in hot water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the urine keeps flowing, then have her take a decoction of sumac and dried hawthorn berries and gooseberries and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour from oats, mix that with honey and wine and make a poultice of that to apply on the back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the bleeding stops, drink it; otherwise, stick two bandages on her and on each breast make incisions.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and immerse that in the juice of vinegar or in the juice of hyssop or in the whey of vinegar and wine, and stick it on the spot; and then treat the area with ointment until it heals.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May your hand be which regards things with strict scrutiny, and when you pierce that which to my understanding corresponds as I have said in this equalizing.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And treat that until it heals.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the operation of accidentally piercing an appendix in pregnancy.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Special symptoms of abscesses occurring in pregnancy, such as swelling, abscess from urination stones, ulcers, hemorrhoidal abscesses, menstrual abscesses, fistulae with bleeding, ruptures, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already mentioned these ailments and their specific symptoms, as well as the signs of them, and the treatments for them in this division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And when I say in this treatise about gynecological abscesses caused by pus, if you want to know how the operation is performed for them, then consider it.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider if the pain from the abscess in its beginning is sharp upon percussion, phlegm, and fever, and sometimes there may be redness around it and if there's discomfort over it, then you suspect a perforation of it. Treat that with what helps during maturation until the intensity of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then consider having the woman cut on a table that has two surfaces; lie her back up and adjust her feet to the lower part of the belly, have her thighs spread out, place her arms under her buttocks, and tie them firmly with what is appropriate.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife should follow with the right hand and administer the instrument over which there is an opening in the belly, its shape will come from those causes that we shall explain further.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this tool, fix it on the line of the mother's belly in the woman, and let nothing from the tool enter the belly more than the line of the mother, thus saving the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	And if the tool is larger than the line of the mother's belly, then consider sprinkling powders over the texture of the line to prevent all of the tool from entering within the line of the belly.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And when you want to place the vibration that runs in the tool of the right side above and let the minister have the tool while shaking the vibration until it's able to open the opening of the belly.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when you notice the excitation and it is touched with the hand and it is long and wet, then consider having that dried on the head of the tool with a heating lamp.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the healing is evacuated, consider having on the wound a poultice immersed in camphor oil or turpentine oil with some inflammation; place the foot in the section over the line of the belly.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And release the belly and over the navel, place clean wool cloth immersed in water in which there are boiled oranges.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then after about two days treat it with ointment until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the sores are washed and cleansed in water with honey, which then returns to being treated with water in which the bark of lime or the root of rhubarb has been boiled, and after that resumes treatment with ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is in the belly and swollen, consider prohibiting treatment for it by force, instead treat that with what we have said about its cure in this division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives in what manner to treat breech births when they occur according to an unnatural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is for the midwife to recognize in its beginning the figure of a natural birth by signs. And when you observe the woman push from her lower parts and desires to smell the air, and upon this she is cheered up because of what is happening during childbirth, and accelerates fetal descent, then you know that this part occurs according to a natural figure, it's the fetus descending towards its head, and secondly attached or hanging from the umbilical cord.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Then when you notice those signs, consider that her belly is compressed by itself so the fetus descends lightly as it passes over its head; have her push the second time, and let there be a good reduction of those excesses for good restoration.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	If someone else is this part of it not-natural and un-livable, when the child sits on their feet and the body of the person is in front of the head of the person and the hand of the person or at the foot of the person,. . . Or when the head of the person and the hand of the person is in front of them, or at their belly, and firmly they are turned onto their back, resembling the un-livable figures of the person.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	A necessary cause is for the midwife to be knowledgeable and subtle in all those causes, and to guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I will show you every figure of those [conditions], and which organ is in those [conditions] through which it is signified and where it stands.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the illness is sitting on its head due to natural evacuation, it's strong in women and occurs at their difficult part, and sometimes the virtue has already weakened, then perform this action for those that women have within them, and evaporate the sweat of their body with fennel oil and hot water.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then the midwife inserts her finger between the woman's anus and rectum, or applies this to their navel where what is wetness flows out.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And presses on the belly of the woman so that she gives birth to it.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If they do not give birth, then cause the woman to be irritated by colic of wind and fennel colic in their stomach.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then order her, direct the water, that she compresses and makes her sneeze with a potion; and keep her mouth and nose open for an hour, so that the child comes out very quickly.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both parts of the child are expelled at mealtimes, then cause you to reduce those gradually with small facilitation in portions.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If she does not follow the instruction, then lay the woman on one of her sides and lift her feet off the ground, and soon overturn the side on the earth; and keep the woman so that she does not fall from the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the parts are not turned inside out and the child does not come down, then insert those and remove the membranes of the child or place the body on the hand of the person with cloth and remove that equally, so that it comes very quickly.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Due to the embryo's position on their feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the child is on its feet, then cause you to push those inwards, and gradually turn the small child, and make that equal, and take one of its feet and extend those gradually.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When it is inside between the thighs, then command her to squeeze and make her sneeze with condition, so that it comes very quickly if God wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not expelled with what we have recommended, then return the small child gradually until you place that according to its natural figure, so that it will be expelled very quickly in slight labor.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited to do all that we have recommended, then take fennel and dissolved gum, and crush them together in the mortar with good grinding, and apply that to the sweat of the woman, the lower pus of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then let her pass urine in boiling water so that she can achieve her sides.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And whenever the parts you left with are softened, then let her take inhalation of myrtle and rest it on her.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when she has the inhalation for an hour, then let her lie on one of her sides, and have her sneeze and open her mouth, and lift her from that, and press the lowest part of her belly very gently, so that the child will come out very quickly.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Positioning of the fetus on its buttocks and its parts.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus comes out in this way, then gradually insert her parts; and make the woman lie on her back, and place her feet at her bottom, and those should be stretched over the thighs, and fulfill her parts.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And gradually press on the belly of the person, and gradually remove what is left from under her feet in preparation for the part that is at the bottom.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the child is not expelled, then take her feet and move them vigorously, and gradually press what is on the sides little by little until the child goes to the parts above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert her parts and make the child equal gradually little by little, and command the woman to squeeze so that the child comes out.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Positioning of the fetus in a lateral hanging position on one of its parts.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Make it equal in reduction of her hand, but if you cannot reduce that, then raise the woman and let her go.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot go, then make her lie on her side, and compress her thighs with strong concussion, and apply lime which I recommended of the remedies.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the labor has come, then make her sneeze on a side, and study about reducing her hand, and make the child equal according to its natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command her to squeeze herself so that it comes out.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Position of the fetus over its back, spreading its parts, and the woman's flesh is at two points of her mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	When the midwife holds the baby's head and gently rotates that small one little by little, so that it becomes easier.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And just like this when they are equalized, and then place something on the patient's forehead as we advised previously about oil and poultices.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And instruct the patient to turn little by little, and when you have done this, then make that person sit on one leg and command them to lean over straight ahead, and also command them to press their head down; and ask them to sneeze in a certain way.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The prepared fetal exit is made on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the mother's pain is at its most severe following this method, consider it, and then you should subside the second one inside your elbow where moisture can be expelled.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the baby is hanging over the neck and back of the patient, then you should subside that one from behind, so as not to be retained or stay.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then push the baby towards the internal passages, while you pause that second one covering it, and command the woman to take several breaths, and let him out gently if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The delivery of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You must know that twin births are rare, and some have even seen them three or four times, but this is strange and difficult to understand; most of these are caused by natural reasons, not by living.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And consider those, whether they are multiplied, one second, and are separated by the placenta, distinguish those among them in their umbilical cord. Some births occur naturally like a single baby, and some births are impossible due to circumstances as we have advised.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some of them are difficult, you should guide the birth and proceed to what we have said about the unnatural figures. Then you treat those as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and does what makes it easy and subtlety, as well as delays, and adapts her method according to every figure once she has brought about health through her skill.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembering what forms within the womb from embryos, and those that abort.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some lesions are formed in the first one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more than ten. You should check that out for yourself if a pregnant woman has aborted her fetus, and another x number of them have been formed; this results from measuring the glorious senses.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this is known to the midwifery science which allows her to deal with that small resemblance of what it is and therefore stands by it according to what she knows.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On removing the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead fetus as we have advised in the division of medication and it is not expelled by natural birth, then if you are forced to use surgery with your hands, consider whether the woman is in good health and does not belong to any of the accidents through which her loss is feared.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	And consider that the woman should be laid on her back with her stomach up, and her head inclined upwards and her thighs raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister should have that of both sides or be bound on her back for so that the body of the patient does not extend beyond the removal of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you moisten the mother's mouth with oil and wet cloths, as well as with honey, fennel, and sesame seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then anoint the midwife's hands with those oils and poultices, and then place her hand in a comfortable position under the mother, and then adjust the location where you will find the nails on the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Place yourself conveniently in this: then consider if the fetus is ready to descend with its head, and then place the nails on its heels, or around its neck, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or let your beard fall, or at its sternum, or near its spinal areas, or let your underarms hang.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the descent is from its feet, then at the pubis, or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And consider that the nail should be in your right hand, and place the curvature of it in that place which is between the last two fingers of your left hand, and place your hand comfortably while putting the nail in one of those places that we have said, so as to reach the final cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And adjust and place another nail, or the third if necessary, so that there is an equal pressure and not an extension according to its straightness only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And make the effort at every part, so that the extraction of it is alleviated as if it were done with the removal of a tooth.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And consider that the extension should be softened in what is between them; and if any part of it is retained, then you must know that the midwife moistens some fingers with oil and handles this skillfully while rotating around that which is being retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the part of the fetus is expelled, then the nails should be placed near that which is more suitable; and do this so that the entire fetus is expelled.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the hand is embedded in front of the other one, and it's not possible to reduce that by squeezing him, then cover that with a cloth; and later extract that from all around, and cut into it or near the joint of the hand or along the side.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And apply this on the other hand and on both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the fetus is large, or it occurs to him by squeezing during labor, or if there's water retention in his head, then apply this to enter between the fingers and slice open the head, or extract the water, or find that out with an instrument which is called "the scalpel", its shape will come close to these among the other instruments in the chapter which is approximately this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Similarly do this if the fetus has a large head by nature: and then apply this to cut into it with a saw, or take that with an scalpel as we have said; and later remove the bones with the forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is stuck and squeezed by the sacrum, then make a cut inside where the moisture which is in the feet can be dissolved.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it's not complicated and there's no need for labor, then you cut the head just as it suits you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the belly parts are stuck or in his urine, then apply this to pierce it where runs the moisture that's within him.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the fetus is on its feet, then the pressure on him is light and the direction from him to the mother's mouth is slight.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If it's squeezed by the abdomen and feet, then apply this to extract that with cloth which you will cover your hand with, and cut the abdomen and feet where runs this as in those.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other limbs are still and turn the head, then insert the left hand into this; if the mother's mouth is opened, then insert your hand in her belly button, and encircle that with the head, and pull it towards the fingers to the mother's mouth, and later insert one or two inches, and pull him towards those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mother's mouth is squeezed by pus in the belly which happens to him, then apply this not to be overly lifted over him; before applying this, first administer an emollient for wet causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply bandages; and care for the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the fetus is on its side, then if it's possible, make it straight: and administer what we've said for the living fetus.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if this is not possible, then cut open with scissors, and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And apply that you don't leave any cause for the second one inside.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we've said for the care of the wounds from the pus-causing conditions that come from the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is bleeding, then apply in warm waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman in her belly with a dead fetus, and nearby around that fire another pregnancy was started, and a dead fetus is the result of this other.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	A long time ago it happened to him an abscess in his belly; and inflated inside that big fire, and began to sweat blood.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called upon to treat him, and treated him for a long time, and the wound has not consolidated.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Therefore I placed on him of some causes strong plaster for extraction, and removed one bone from him, and after a few days passed, and removed another bone; and I was too amazed, because in the belly there is no bone.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I realized that they were of the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	And then I gushed the wound, and extracted bones of the dead fetus from him, the woman existing in her own intimate arrangements, and had already seen such a manner for a long time, cured him of a little bit of blood.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I do not attribute this to be strange, but rather that in this is knowledge and assistance for what the doctor artist does with his hand for treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Regarding the forms of the tools that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Shape for turning which is open in the mother:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the shape of the stretcher on which they are equalized, to this equality there are two handles at both ends of two fetuses.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this handle should be more delicate for squeezing and made of wood or bone.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each handle is as large as two fingers, and the edge of each on both sides is one finger, and the length of each is a palm and half; and in the middle place of two handles are two joints for those that fit the handles, which are already tight, from which the length is about a palm and a little less, and the width of each is as large as two fingers, or a little less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two attachments should be inserted into the mother's mouth so that they open to those when you turn the two prescribed handles.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another shape similar to that, but more delicate and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	When it's caused by the presence of heat or fire according to the resemblance of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the extremity of their body there are two appendages like these as sometimes happen, and the length of those appendages is about a handspan, while the width of each is two inches.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And if you want to open the larger ones, then you should make a cut in the flesh while the feet are hanging down, and widen it as much as is between the thighs of them.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then open your hand with the tool like you would use a pair of shears equally according to the amount that you want from the opening of the belly of the larger one, making sure that the measuring tool does as you wish.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The way of giddiness which the ancients said:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The form of propulsion in which it is propelled by force:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The form of entanglement in which the large head is contained.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it resembles forceps with teeth at the extremity, as sometimes happens, and some cases require being longer like forceps according to this form, as sometimes, which has teeth like those of a saw in which it is inserted and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The form of entanglement for few:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The form of a hook having one spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The form of a hook having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The form of forceps where the closing teeth are on which the head of the fetus is contained.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The form of a pair (possibly referring to scissors or another tool) that has two extremities where the head is severed.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	The form of two spatulas laid out:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are practiced, and when more of them have multiple species and they are prepared by the artisans, as much as it is easier to their operation and as much autonomy should be given to humans according to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not use those instruments simply anywhere; what is necessary about those cannot be excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Regarding the extraction of the second one.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second one is retained, you should induce birth. Then instruct the mother to retain her own breath, and make her sneeze with the condition, and hold your hand over her mouth and her nose. If it comes out this way, it's good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a cloth and make a hole in the cover with a straw and place in that herb over the mother's mouth, like a balm and rudely and nettle and chamomile and powdered saffron and cinnamon sticks and absinth.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the cloth, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And place a calabash tube in the mother's mouth, and let that go inside so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And have her sneeze as we have said, and the second one will come out easily.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	May this treatment remain with you and not be forgotten. If it is not used, then instruct the midwife to submerge her left hand in oil of sassafras or in alum powder, and immerse that into her stomach, and pull out the second one easily. And when you have found it, take it little by little. May this attach to the mother's womb. Then insert your hand as we have recommended, and once you find the second one, remove it slowly according to its rectitude so that the mother doesn't fall due to her own effort.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before you start, make sure she is lying on both sides for ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And adjust it in the amount of effort, so that she obeys and avoids adhering again.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended the treatment with sneezing and using herbs in the cloth.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	And if it is not removed by all the causes we have recommended, then make sure you don't tire working on her continuously. However, you should have that which comes out of her to her mother's mouth lying on the thigh of the woman, and apply a grease and tetracycline ointment; for that will cause that process to be clarified over several days, it will dissolve, and be easily removed.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	And when it happens, the bad smell ascends to her head and stomach, and that discomforts the mother; and then you should know how to administer sub-smoke treatments and things suitable for this.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Such as the ancients already used sub-smoke treatments with nettles and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of an instrument by which the woman is sub-smoked for the retention of her menstrual cycle and second fetus:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Made from ash or herbs.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And place the delicate tip in the stomach and the broad end over the fire, and the sub-smoke treatment should be placed over the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And let that go inside so that that smoke is consumed and repeat it again.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Regarding the treatment of an unperforated baby's anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	The child is born and its butts are not punctured, which are already thin and thick.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then instruct the midwife to puncture it with her finger; if not, puncture it with a sharp pair and make sure not to touch the scab.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then press on that overheated wool in the air and smell it; and then treat that part of the ointment inside that is not burned.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear it has become inflamed, then keep a tube in the stomach for several days, and stop when the child wishes to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if there is pus in the buttocks due to consolidation of an abscess or boil; then know that this consolidation has softened, and apply the treatment we have said about healing and lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Regarding the treatment of the fistulas that happen to you.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that occur in the lower part, causing a low discharge of pus and swelling, those that occur near the anus or in the space between one buttock.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it's either a fistula or lumps.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that swelling is old and moistened by the white watery moisture or pus, some of these ulcers are due to these fistulas sometimes penetrating them.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known by the way they are affected due to discharge and ventilation; some of these ulcers cause discomfort in the patient during discharge, and others make the patient suffer from worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of these ulcers occur in the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the male organ; and some penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the anus.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And in which a penetrating fistula goes into the anus and does not penetrate, it is that you put your finger inside the anus, and insert a thin tip of metal or iron into the fistula when there is no resistance.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If there is resistance in that one, then insert that thin tip of lead or horse hair into it where you feel the tip or the hair on your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that throughout or do not find any cause of discharge, vomiting or discomfort as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and then take care in the treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the male organ, then its meaning is the elimination of urine from that and restriction for him until this condition is consolidated with medical treatment.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone causing pain in the vessels, then this is a sign that the tip passes inside here if there is no resistance inside the bone and pain in the vessel circuit of the limb; and that there is persistent pus discharge; and it does not apply to that medicine, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is not a cure of everything, and the treatment of these consists of hard work and patience from the surgeons on which they operate.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	And for those that are not penetrating and are not old, healing with iron is expected as I will recommend you later, and what I have already and recommended.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back and lifts his limbs under him, making his thighs inclined towards his abdomen, then insert a tip of iron or horsehair into the obstructed fistula, where you know the location from which the tip passes.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that is the patient near his stomach, then know that you should insert your finger inside his stomach.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel that the tip is already out of your finger, then insert it carefully so as not to expose yourself to discovery. If you feel something between your finger and a siphon or flesh, then you know for sure that this is penetrating; and thus do not work on this, which does not have a cure, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, some say that it can be cured in certain people quickly.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And about the treatment for which youth is expected in him, that you use subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula as previously described, and insert that burning into the fistula until it reaches near the stomach; then repeatedly do this two or three times until you know that all those flesh parts that resemble feathers are well adhered.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then treat that with bandages wrapped in grease until all those flesh parts that are adhered can heal, and also treat that with medicines for the producing and consolidating flesh, and if it is cured, it's good; otherwise, then this will not be healed within time for any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the tip enters and does not penetrate into your finger which is in the anus, and between that and a tip that is densely covered with flesh or siphon, and sometimes the fistula in this that sears the surface of the anus, then dry out the anus from the beginning of the fistula, and you see if it dries on the tip, and whether inside the fistula until the drying reaches the place where the end of the tip passes, and through the tip it is liberated and escapes.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then normalize those fistulous flesh parts that resemble a feather pen tube and do not break them by any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	And when the discharge of pus comes between you and your operation as you touch those flesh parts, then let there be a moderate amount both of blood and pus with a minor instrument to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, where fire cauterization adjusts two good habits: it is adjustment of those adhered flesh parts, and removal of pus through drying of the moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And if it is an area covered with bandages or in which there are blisters inside the affected area, then carefully treat that place with grease or hard oil ointments for healing and strengthening.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And so medicines in which there is inflammation and discharge; once these are restored, it is already healed and you do not fear repetition.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	May it be that the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and is elongated from your body's surface, then intervene with your tool in the anus and ask about that.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And so if you test it and between you and her is quickly through the flesh or meat, and it is prone to penetration, then not an operation in her but according to the path of faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	That cause must be administered in her one of three ways: either by cauterizing that as we have said; or by searing that where you achieve the cavity of it so that you are able to intervene with those and the healing is likely; and do not proceed with a section through the discharge for fear that you do not enter the containing fluid, and that you carry out over your thigh according to the desire of the patient; and then treat that as we said that strength leads to recovery; or lengthen that quickly and remove that pus that you sear inside near the anus, as we said, or on the testicle or with another sharp tool, and then change those fatty tissues that are fistulated which are in the discharge section; and strive to restore the entire wound from that section, and if the pus holes above are not consolidated, and opens the open fistula at the exit of the anus, and leads less pus over your thigh.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is closed according to this manner: when you introduce the test into the fistula, and near the anus around your body on the surface of the thigh, and near the exit of the anus, then take a test for perforated extremity, which is like a needle preparing the skin in this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And intervene in that field covered with many fields or around those; and then intervene the test on the field inside the fistula where you achieve the cavity of it.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	And if it penetrates near the exit of the anus inside, then you remove that field as far as your tool fits in the anus; and you take out the extremity of the field and adjust both extremities at once, strengthen each one, and leave this for a day or two, and when more enters the field into the flesh, strengthen again inside where those tissues are pierced between the two ends of the field which fit.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then treat the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the hole of the fistula is not penetrable, then make it penetrate in any manner you are prepared for, but only inside the anus, which is not up to you to do so that you do not enter the fluid; and then make it inside until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spade for what is slit in the fistula: its curvature is quite sharp on one side and not so sharp on the other part, so that you do not enter what is unnecessary, as sometimes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Sewing of hemorrhoids where there is pain at the opening of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are according to two ways, either they resemble inside the anus like charcoal, or those are similar when it comes to grease like that of raisins.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And from those they are small and large, and the pain that comes with those is one, it's like a lump, and it's inside the anus, and at its extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But those that are inside the anus are according to the types of less humidity, which have yellowish water or a little pain in the body continuously, and according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for that inside the anus is to command the patient to lie down and squeeze so that the anus discharges and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you prepare yourself and support with strings or what you have those under your nails, and then you cut the veins that are their arteries.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	And if the nails are not there due to their moisture and softness of those, then take them with rough cloth or with cord or with wool blanket, and cut those with your scissors, and then cut those and sprinkle over them some powdered medications near the opening, so that they replace it for cauterizing; or cauterize those according to what is instructed in the section on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then treat those with the other treatment until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not allow an exit, then restrain the patient with restraint in which there is a slight biting, and wash it with that water that is inside the anus that allows easier discharge when the body is squeezed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	And if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is minor, and you take those with your nails, or you take those with strings, cut those, and then treat those as we said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And that which you have cut open, consider to administer sewing for them according to this manner: take a wrapped field and introduce that in the needle and then remove the hemorrhoids from their sides, and make it penetrate through the needle on the other side of the opening; wrap both ends of the field around the part after removing the needle, longitudinally; strengthen the hemorrhoid with strong structure, and then pinch the field and pull out the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all, leave one out, by which the excess of the illness can flow from that.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then place on the buttocks a pad drenched in rosin oil or in wadding; and place that under the buttocks, and instruct the patient to lie there.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then place that within the container; and when it is cured, treat those with grease or apply another remedy until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Regarding the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Wounds that occur due to excessive opening or due to a constriction in nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are old and no longer effective in that medicine, then apply them at the tip of the sword or with your thumb until they become wet, and let the pus scab over there; you must prevent it from consolidating; and when they have consolidated, treat them until they heal.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	And you should apply them with a good amount of pus that the first enters and causes abrasions; and then treat them until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Regarding the treatment of abscesses, this is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Understand that knowing how to drain the pus, this is crucial, and it should not be done unless its redness resembles a spot of a knife, and it occurs throughout the body but especially in the feet and hands, and for those, you should continue until you feel relief from the pain.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then apply so that it penetrates what is in the circuit of pus, and keep it with forceps or with tweezers, and remove it from its base; and then treat that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, apply a cautery after what precedes in its head.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	True warts are small, hard, round fistulas on the surface of the body, and wounds that occur in most children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And for treatment, you should spread or cut that, or apply the mustard or with wax until it heals.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, apply a cautery to this, as we have said, with fire or with acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And once they are eradicated both ways and not in reverse, using the tool I will direct you to.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	Ants are small, furry or fleshy, large fistulas on the surface of the body that occur in the armpits, and when you find this one, it resembles the bite of an ant in them, and they occur around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And for treatment, take a silver or horn pipe, and it should be strong, place that over the ant, so that it contains the circle of the parts around the ant; then rotate your hand around the pipe until you cut what is in the circuit of the ant, and stop that at the base of the skin, and remove the ant from its base.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, do this with a copper or iron pipe as follows:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Take the part above the pipe that is thin, silent (that means not perforated), wrapped around so that its appearance resembles it and is erased, and rotate this.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want, apply the ant according to what was previously mentioned in the cautery treatment of ants in the head of the cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Regarding the form of the instruments that are used for bleeding.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some wounds are treated with bleeding using silver or tin or melted copper or hammered metal instruments; and some wounds are treated with those small and large instruments according to the ones used, where the one that is used in the treatment of small children's sores should be small; and from those whose buttocks are freckled or painful, the bleeds for those should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of a large but few:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The tip of the pipe above where the bag is tied should be wide according to this manner; and at its distance, as many times the bag is tied.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of the pus in it, which penetrates into the anus, should be silent (meaning not open) and bent forward slightly; and on one side of the hole there are two teeth, and on the other side one tooth, and the width of the tooth according to the thickness of the rays and large pus is small.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which you place the medicines of bladder beast or sheep skin, its base should be a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced by the teeth in this manner as they are twisted; and if the space between the teeth is the thickness of the said.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those teeth strong raw lead that is the size of ten pieces or about so many; and adjust this bag to it; and when you place this bag in them, make sure it's straight at the tip of the bleeding device between two distinguishing ones with firm constriction, and bleed under each tooth: The quality of bleeding under each tooth is that you fill the bag with medicine until it's hot according to the tolerance capacity of the patient; be careful not to let too much fluid out or too little.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And the patient should be lying on his back, and raise their knees towards him and place a pillow under them or a rug; then smear the edge of the cautery with oil or with egg white or with fennel or celery paste; then insert that into the anus with ease, and guide this to remove the bag; and when you have it, squeeze out that from two places at the same time in a strong manner until everything inside the bleeding device is evacuated; and then take off the bleeding device and raise the patient's knees to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if medicine forces him to abstain, have it as much as possible; and if he stays awake for the whole night, it's better rather than later in youth.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	Better if you sterilize him in the illnesses of stomach obstruction and the pain in his thighs, then you will apply the cautery inside until he is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are bloody discharges or abscesses in the buttocks, then it is a subtle and dangerous operation of sterilization, among which children are sterilized.
De curacio de las plaguas.	For the treatment of the plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already spoken about the division of the treatment of the plagues as was suitable for the free, and I also describe here the treatment of those with me and according to medicines as per their preference.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	So it says that the plagues are diversified according to how the plagues occur and according to the location upon which they fall.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the reasons why some places swell from plagues are thus due to metal poisoning, or incision of space or of a boil, or striking with a spear, or with a staff, or with an arrow, or similar to those causes of swelling.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Better the plagues that are in parts of the body are thus as a plague that falls on the head, or neck, or foot, or stomach, or groin, and similarly to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I am recommending the treatment of some plagues, for which you should pause that reasoning and rule on the others.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I start with the simple head plagues, for which the recall of the composed ones will come at the beginning of the next chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	So it says that when a simple head plague occurs and is not a fracture, then consider: if it's due to metal poisoning or something similar, and you have drained the fluid only as much as possible and it's a large head boil and you fear the sudden development of an abscess in the patient, then apply a cautery and perform a cephalic leeching at once, don't delay; and extract from that point according to the amount of virtue there is if not any other cause prevents leeching, especially if the fluid that comes out of the boil is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And it's leeching from the opposite side of the affected part; and watch over the patient for fullness, thirst, and heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	Better if you have excluded any cause of the diminution, then it should be reduced in food and not approach meat or drink.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause about the plague, if it happens to him that an abscess develops with a cautery, apply oil that has been rubbed or in wine in which it is anti-inflammatory.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	Better if you are sure of an abscess with a cautery, then pause about the plague, if it is early in their pus and the air has not changed that powder which I recommend to apply slightly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, then pause about applying some ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	Better if the boil is large or due to incision of space and something else, and if the patient's lips are not adjusted by pins, then adjust those according to how I recommend for their suture.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	Better if the boil has already opened through the bone and pen, and it is not retention of the pus but a small suspensorium, then incise that and treat the boil with medicines until the flesh is restored at the site of drainage, and command the patient to eat only foods that cause groaning: caps and meats similar to them, until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find decomposition in the drainage and it doesn't stick to the bone, then you need to incise all this pus and flush it out, and treat that.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	Better if in these plagues there is an artery or vein from which pus flow could occur and it cannot be severed with medicine, then you need to inquire about the artery, and if you find that it's not severed, then you should incise that at a spasm point, or tie it; and if necessity demands that what we have said does not hold, then you cauterize until pus is released.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, then their cause is minor; therefore, you should pulverize this powder over them until it solidifies before the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of the powder is as follows: take one part oil of sesamum, two parts dragon's blood, and three parts of unextinguished charcoal; mix it all thoroughly and sift it, and let this cover the entire boil, and bind it well with good compression so that it sticks to that area and coagulates with pus.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then remove that above with dust and let it cool down, and do not wash it while like this until it becomes swollen, or until the medicine has healed it.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes people do this alone with a cautery, when they don't have access to sesamum oil and dragon's blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this surgical operation is done for large boils when it's necessary to pause on those and stretch them out, and the boils that are recent at their pus, which have not been changed by the air.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has changed them, especially during summer time, then it's not appropriate to use this powder in its usual position, but rather treat those with what we have mentioned, so you should apply some more digestible ointments, or that you apply on those powders made of flour from the dough mixed with water and honey until they solidify; and treat those with another treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If a small fracture occurs in bone, then you extract it through surgery.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I prescribe the treatment for skull fractures in cases where poisoning is involved.
De las plaguas del col.	From lung diseases.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the disease occurs in the lungs, then there is no difference in treatment, but compared to a simple skull illness.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerves in the lungs or artery are cut, then if it's a nerve issue, it is not within their capability to avoid the treatment that causes intense constriction, like zinc and say that it is corrosive and resembles their nose on nerves causing constriction.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not rest on any cause that affects them all, for the substance of nerves is affected and their continuation goes to the brain, which is the source of all parts of the body.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if such is treated with mild medicines, as when it's washed with boiled water, some rest after being immersed in oil that's either refined or unrefined, and the scab heals when it's washed with boiled water, and the other minor wounds heal according to this method, and it's ointed moist.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the disease is large, then you should perform suturing or ligate the veins of the person, and afterwards cure it with powders until it heals.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If the disease is deep or occurs near the base of the lower part, then puncture that area in the deepest part.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If the disease has already cut through an artery and there is bleeding from it, then separate or dry that area, tie it, or cauterize it if necessary.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If it has already cut through the vertebral joints or completely, and the veins in the lungs have been saved, then you adjust the muscles of the neck with suturing above the windpipe, don't touch that; prepare for that and return it to its natural shape, then strengthen that with proper tension, and let that rest for a few days; afterwards, cure that with ointments containing tension and stimulation until it heals.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the disease has already penetrated into bone, then you puncture it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those that you can from them; what cannot be contained by you, let it rest until the disease disappears, and separate it so that its removal is alleviated.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the disease is recent, then apply over that powdered medicine which I have recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If there is a fistula in the disease, then cure it with what will be remembered by its effect in their head.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Regarding lung diseases or similar cases that occur between the shoulders and are made in the space, on the back or in the rib cage or on the chest.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it's a blow to the chest or back, and you gauge its depth, then consider that if there is wind escaping when the patient breathes in pain; then know that the disease is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is not depth in the disease and it's recent on their breath, then you should take care to apply powder immediately, without straining that so that the breath is not retained at the depth of them and returns to the heart causing discomfort; rather, pause with attractive ointment, and wash that twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not available to you, then you should pinch near the wound opening with your finger so that the fluid from moisture exits; and make the patient lie on the disease for the fluid to flow as adjusted in them.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If it has been three days or more since the disease occurred and no spasms, heart failure symptoms, or constriction occur to the patient, then if other good conditions are met in them, then you should know that the disease is saved; and thereafter treat it with remedies and according to other healing methods until it heals.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of your condition is justified, and all this time you have been open, then you should know that a fistula has already formed; therefore, treat it according to its head.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the disease is due to a cut in the back or rib area, and it's simple on the surface of the chest or back, then treat it with what precedes stitching, if it's large, or with powder, if it's small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If it has already penetrated into the bone and you have incised lumps, then you should squeeze the disease and press to extract those lumps if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separate, then let them rest until the disease disappears, making the extraction of them easier.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other diseases that occur in other limbs during treatment, it's similar to what we have discussed.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Regarding belly diseases.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition that occurs in the stomach can be great, little, or intermittent.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	For the great ones, some spots or nerves of the intestine are affected, causing them to perform an insertion into these and for the suturing to be more vigorous and precise.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	Small disruptions are made more difficult by another method, and it's known that returning them to their place is much harder, if you don't quickly insert them back into their position where they expand due to the internal organs making the process difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And thus the best intervention is migration, in which it's not difficult to reduce the hernia, just as it's not difficult in the two species mentioned beforehand.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	Know that there are four ways to stitch the abdomen, but two stitches are common and fit in stitches of other parts of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two others, specific to them, connect with the other illnesses, but they are more specific in the stitching of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I advise you for every exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So say that when the illness is small and a cause of the hernia occurs in that way, making it difficult to reduce it, then this is one of the two methods: either due to the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when there's swelling on the hernia due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when it's like this, then you should cut that area and immerse a sponge in hot water alone, or take it in hot water squeezing, and cyperum, and spic, and bury that around the hernia until the swelling is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And I sometimes do this when there's inflammation in the area, and it's better than just hot water for resolving the swelling.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when the swelling has resolved, then you soak the hernia in water with herbs and lemon juice, for which it soothes the patient with little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	And if you excuse the internal organs near this treatment, then divide the rupture with a small instrument on which there are incisions.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better when it's appropriate that there's no drying, and no need to dry without necessity or deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	From the instrument, let its form be dry:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	On one part of the tool, make it sharp, and on the other part not sharp, and the extremity subtle, and do not make it as subtle as a point, before it becomes blunt for a little.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the illness has been amplified and has come out of the abdomen, then it's to be noted that its reduction should follow its natural form, in its proper place; if this is possible on such grounds, which is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	And when the rupture is wide, and it's in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should make the patient lie on their back, place their knees higher than their head; and if it's in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should place their head and feet higher than the parts left.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pause your understanding and consideration at all times for that reason so that the part with the illness is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And similarly, ensure you provide this treatment in large illnesses and in smaller illnesses.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small illnesses, pause that it's under your preparation, and let the one who ministers be among your most experienced, which has the entire rupture under his hand and adjusts the lips of him, and let it reveal from this to that where there's any cause for another reason.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of stitching: one that you take the needle, or count by the length of the illness; and let it pass from the end of the rupture in the ring finger, and hold the needle down one, or another where you don't put a thimble in both ends of the cord, at two ends of the handle that leaves the cords inside when you make it enter that part; and you have added both ends of the cord and both ends of the handle, and they are made into four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And let the thimble double in the circuit of the needle, and some times from both parts together, and let you add both lips and the illness by proper addition; and let it smooth out the thickness of that one and place another needle in that one, and let it tie that with a thimble like the first needle; and don't stop doing this with needles until you complete all the contraction of the illness.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be in between coarseness and subtlety, as subtle needles hardly cut the flesh; and the coarse ones make it difficult for the thread inside, therefore let them be in between subtlety and size.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And don't let the needle be stuck at both ends of the thread nearby each other, so that the flesh is not cut lightly and that the illness does not burst before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And don't make prolonged stitches for the illness not to be prohibited from consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And let the ends of the needles cut each other so that they don't cause the patient to lose their sleep; place over the stitches the powders expanded from all parts, which have the ends of the needles; leave them until you know that the illness has already been consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these types of stitching with needles in common manner are more convenient in small illnesses, which until in the stitching for them one needle or two or around those.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the second stitch is common: and it's that you administer in stitches all four ends, of the thread and two ends of the handle, at once, with a needle which has a thimble wrapped around it equally in subtlety and size.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, return the needle from that half of the metal part where it began, so that the gallbladder retracts the pus cavity from that other part going up to the wound, so that the suture is according to another suture of fabric, on which the fabrics are tightened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each stitch the amount of thickness of the said thread.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture I know how to do.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this kind of suture, I healed the wound that had happened to a man in his abdomen where he was bitten by a snake, it was the rupture of the major wound up to one palm, and it extended around my intestines for two palms from my mid-section; it was the rupture in the middle of the body member. And then I returned that deposit which had been removed from my intestine when the wound was opened for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and healed him; then he took care of it for several months, and got used to his condition.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that he was not healed; and by miracle alone, since I did not treat him with ointment, which was in the place where the ointment could not be found or any medicine, but only applied to the wound like every day twice and washed diligently with honey water internally until it was cured.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	And I may tell you two kinds of suture that are according to the narrative of Paulus.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And this is how you start with the suture of the thread, and insert the needle from one part to the other part inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And when the needle penetrates through the thread and inserts those points according to the correct direction and length of the entire body, leaving the end of the cord in which you have inserted the needle; and makes the needle penetrate in the other end the part inside to the part outside at the other end of the body.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made that penetration, then you make that penetrate another time in that half of the body part from outside to inside; and leave the end of the cord which is at this side, and make the needle penetrate in the other end of the part from inside to outside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make that penetrate through your penetration which you have made to penetrate in the cord at the end of the body which is in the part under him where all of this penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then start from this side, tie that at the end which is on the cord in the opposite side to where the needle penetrates, and remove the thread needle that penetrated, and then bring that back into the same thread, tying the other end of the cord which is on the opposite side to this end of the body; and remove that from the thread which comes from his part.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once and again, and repeat this between that you cook all what is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the whole of this way of suturing is that you sew with thread on which you sew the skin, so that you sew the cord once from the end part of the thread, and leave that other round until you have completed it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	And the second kind of my own suture which I tell you is Gualia's method, and this is by telling him about it and recommending him, that you sew this according to its similarity in which some doctors sew it, so that they add all parts to their corresponding parts according to nature; and apply the end of another of them and the end of his body to the other end of him, and this is done as I have recommended to you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	And when you hold the needle at your fingertips from the outside part, make it penetrate into the inside part in that sole, and leave two ends of the cord; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside in two ends of the cord.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then turn those each one, and make them penetrate from the inside part into the outside part in two ends of the body other than which are at this side opposite.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this way of suturing is better than the common light sewing, and it is the kind of suture that precedes memory.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is Gualia's method.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And they might say, the stomach suture is corrected with two needles, so you insert into each of these a piece of thread, and start by inserting the needle that should be yours, and make it penetrate inside the other side according to the sewing which sews equal bodies.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when there is a rupture in the middle part of the stomach, then this suture becomes more difficult than from the other parts of the stomach.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	And the method for treating wounds is judgment about the other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	And this is the cause that when you cure the wound recently in his skin before air alters it, and return the intestine and sew it and properly dress it, then pause over that carnal powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if air has already altered the wound, then pause over that several ointments which are in your possession until they make hard wax and coagulate the gallstones; and treat it like the treatment of other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have the remedies at your disposal, then rest on that until, as it begins to warm up and cool down, change that with two baths a day, as you are taught, until you are healed. When there is no need for other medication under ordinary circumstances because the illnesses are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the disease might spread to the main body parts, then it's advisable to immerse the wool in oil of high quality or boiled oil, and place that in a circuit among the armpits and leave the oils there.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in their intestines, which remedies are to be used here, then apply a stoptipic black stick extract, and especially if the pus is inside the intestine and causes an excision penetrating into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that what comes from the large intestine is a lighter healing pus, while that which comes from the finer intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal what is from the intestine which is called "gungun", which does not receive healing for disease that affects them entirely; this is due to the large number of veins that are in them, and the vastness they have within those, and the subtlety of their body, and their closeness to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If what you are dealing with in the disease is the thread, and if you get that fresh, adjust it according to your judgment on which you reduce the intestines evenly.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has already spread to them and there is already a boil or blackness, then strengthen that with clay over the area that is deteriorating in them, so that fluids of infection come out, as in the thread there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then insert what is another piece of string in this, and suspend both ends of the clay so that they hang from the point of the disease's opening on them, so that your relief comes with the attraction to it; you should remove the string and the exhalation of the pus of the disease.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Reminder of diseases when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is disruption in the intestine and it is small, then it might be healed in some people. This was shown to me by him who had been ill in his stomach from the thrust of a lance, and that was the disease of the right part of the abdomen, and the disease was old and caused a fistula, and relieved his flatulence and belching.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I pursued the healing of him even though it was not completed in his healing, but I continued to delicately apply it until he was healed and the place was consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I saw the place already consolidated, thinking about what happened to him when he experienced an illness in his stomach; and avoided any further accident of that kind and maintained his daily routines eating and drinking, and then took baths and exercised regularly as instructed.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced people say that when there is a disease in the intestine and it is small, then it's recommended to proceed like this: you should take large caps; and adjust both sides of the diseased area, and place one of those with an open mouth over both sides of the diseased area. Then, when he takes them on these and tightens his mouth, cut off its head, which sticks and doesn't dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another cap near the first one, and don't stop doing this with caps one after another according to the amount of the entire disease.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce that and make the disease disappear; and break those additional caps inside the intestine until the intestine is healed; and it does not harm the patient with any injury.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine is treated with a fine thread made from the intestinal tissue of beasts attached to them, as they are more robust; and you should take the end of these intestines' threads, and make sure they are neatly trimmed, then place the end of them against this thread, wrapped, and insert this thread into needles and around that intestine, then reduce it in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of sewing with caps is merely according to the route of faith and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the disease is large and broad, especially if it's in one of the finer intestines, then here only a slight improvement occurs, not a full healing of them.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Regarding the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any disease and abscess when they become old, and it forms a ulcer, but is not consolidated and continues to leak pus continuously, then; wherever it may be in the body, it's universally called a fistula, and we call this one an ulcer.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And a true fistula is a hard, white nodulation that doesn't cause pain and which cavity is solid like the cavity of pus; for this reason, it's called some worms, namely pus.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And there are some people who have a dampness that leaks pus; and when the dampness is slightly stronger, it becomes dry within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this dampness turns into pus, and it's small, but thick, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already explained in the division that all ulcers that are not healed and are not on naked flesh are of this nature: among these causes, one is due to insufficient blood circulation within the body; or because it's malicious towards them; or because there's hard flesh between them and their mucous membranes preventing the natural growth of flesh; or because of pus formation; or because that ulcer in itself contains pus mixed with impure materials; or because the treatment is unsuitable for healing; or when corruption occurs in a region, and it's pestilence; or due to properties of regions like in Saragossa where digestive problems are common, making the healing process slower for abscesses by nature; or if there's bone or bones inside them.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And this is how I will teach you the treatment of fistula which is made through surgical operation by me.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	Know that fistula happens in all parts of the body; those are the ones that occur within large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the liver, or intestine, or bladder, or any part of the backbone, or any joint formed by the hand and chest. And those give proximity to the main limb and resemblance.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And those are the ones among these fistulas that occur in this manner which is difficult to heal and does not receive treatment or care, and dealing with it requires labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if there is some fistula whose depth does not reach these locations which were mentioned and you hope for its healing, and want to understand it, then try by means of surgery or instruments. If the fistula follows straightness, and you explore that with it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is tortuous, then investigate that with lead which sinks due to its density in his body and you must bend according to the tortuosity.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula does not have any movement, it is not within your ability to indicate it upon him with surgery.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Therefore cleanse the orifice through its orifices; that is to say, with moisture by which you enemas it flows from the other orifices and comes out of them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And inquire thoroughly according to how you are able to know if here are the nerves, and whether the size of the fistula is remote or nearby. Or it is a fistula with which there are many orifices and this is in accordance with all your strength, through your interrogation of the patient, by placing your hand on the area, and understanding the meanings and causes of accidents to the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have established the truth about all those causes on the true basis, then proceed with treatment according to confidence: at this point, you consider whether it is an apparent local fistula or in a place of health, remote from joints, nerves, artery, vein, or any other location I mentioned.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you dry the fistula according to what was said about its healing process, maintaining that which is in that filtration and corruption of flesh, and that which is born within the flesh cavity or part, and heals from within until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of remote depth and follows straightness, then dig into it as deeply as possible, and thoroughly modify all its corrupted flesh; and prepare bandages wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood through surgery.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this for some repetitions inside where the sharp medicine corrodes everything that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Then restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it has not been healed by this method, then you cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of fistula is bone and you must certify this, then inquire about it and dry it according to what we have recommended. If you do not prohibit any cause related to veins or nerves or main limb as we said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is discovered by you and there is corruption and darkness in him, then cut it open where all the corruption can be removed; and then heal that area from within as long as his flesh heals.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed like this, then know that you have not achieved the total eradication of corruption. And so you uncover him again thoroughly and carefully take out the reason for him and the modification of him through your last strength, and restore that area afterwards.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is healed, then good. If not, then know that this corruption is in the remote depth of the body, which has not been achieved, and therefore you leave it alone in that area.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the bone is corrupted to be small, or it is within your ability to pull it out, then you pull it with fine tongs suitable for this task.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if they are hard bones, then thoroughly perform the extraction of all those, and leave none behind through your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If it encounters any resistance from the moisture, and in their dissection there is neither fear nor error, then cut those ligaments or muscles if they are here, and free the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If it is not your preparation to leave the bones of your time, then pause over the wound so that you should heal that wound there, and leave it within where this surrounds those bones and muscles, and guard against leaving a non-consolidated wound, and ensure the section that you have cut in your operation remains open.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Oil, if you fear, pause over the cut immersed in a heated oil, or immerse the cut in Egyptian ointment, or in any of those ointments that are hot. When those ligaments have been treated, and the bones can be separated from them, then the healing process is facilitated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If there is a large lesion like the one of a leg or thigh or resembling those, and what from him is corrupted is only his face, then that alone becomes that dark spot only behind it where the corruption was, and immediately restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If what from him is corrupted is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that one completely and allow it all to sink into the place where the corruption has penetrated, and then heal that inside until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I advise you to do as an example and assist with this on your operation when dealing with someone in their thigh.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Treat a young man around thirty years old, who suffers pain in his thigh, and the affected parts internally are about the substance inside the body where the substance has penetrated to the thigh, and it is pus of a large abscess, and do not attribute this cause to an external factor.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then extend treatment for that according to the mistake of doctors until the abscess bursts, and evacuate the moving parts, and her cure is almost completed when the change has become fistulated, and make incisions in those pus orifices which were all producing inflammation and the body's moisture.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then treatment by doctors lasted for more than two years, and I didn't know in those cases but rather in the art, when I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the change in him and what flowed from his those orifices through great veins; and already the body of that man was completely yellowed and the color of him was lemon.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the thread into one of those orifices and brought the thread to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I closely examined all those orifices and found that they were connected to every part of the change.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I explored and pierced into one of those orifices where I discovered part of the bone, and removed that corrupted thing, it was already earthy and corrupted and degraded; and it had already corrupted part of the change, in which it had penetrated to the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I tightened that which was discovered by me and prepared from the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I concluded that it was not in the bone but that corruption which expanded and tightened, and I had already removed.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it did not consolidate.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I retraced and re-discovered on the bone for the second time after the first discovery, and found continuous corruption on the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I tightened what appeared to me from that corruption, and then I tried to perform the cure of this and restoration, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered on him the other way and did not cease to carefully and gradually insinuate the bone little by little and restore this and it was not restored until it had been pierced around a hand of him, and he extracted from his marrow, and then restored that with medicines, and it consolidated slightly and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to repeat the operation of this and this section of him, but only due to the arrangement of his pulse and due to the lack of tolerance and breath of him that caused death, which happened to him continuously because of excessive evacuation leading to poor syncope.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus he heals through total recovery, and nothing is in place of hard flesh bone; and it is done well by arranging him inside his body and restoring the vigor of him; and he adapts to his conditions and does not oppose him during movement or injury in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If the bone is prominent in a location of the body already wounded, then follow this method when you wish to perform another on: and you must take hold of that ligament and strengthen it at the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone else to extend that further. And place that piece of woolen thread larger than the first one; and lie that over the flesh that is left by the bone, and extend its extremity in order to pull the flesh towards those remaining parts, and uncover the flesh on the spot you wish to tighten so that the saw does not cut into the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a pole or table under that bone properly, so when you do this the saw is not prohibited from reaching the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And know that the saw should be placed on the corrupted spot little by little, so if it is in the cavity of the corroded bone and does not appear in its manifestation at feeling, force another opening for the closure.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corroded and not prominent, before one part continues to the other, and the corruption is at its best location or in a part of it, then uncover the flesh from all parts entirely; and place a pole under you, and proceed with the saw for the first part where there is corruption so that the closure continues with the second part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And make the saw according to the location of the corruption a little smaller, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, pierce that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it's not at their reason but between them.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the chest of the hand or the chest, it's very difficult; however, you must inquire about the corruption on how it appears to you, and that by cutting it open, exposing it according to each disposition which is possible to you, and adjust every instrument as necessary when doing so, without causing any contrariety to veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	Know what are the knives and the tools to use for incising these bones is very much according to the position of the bones, the preparation of those, and the size of those, as well as their subtlety, size, and smallness, and their hardness and their rarity; so that you should prepare all kinds of surgical instruments suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	Know that this operation means to you about the type of instrument you would need; when you are very well studied and long-experienced in understanding the techniques of this art, and have evidence from practices of diseases, ones you've already handled yourself. So now you understand what is convenient for the use of instruments for every disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I advise you at the end of this chapter about the number of tools which you will use, like the simple ones among them, for your prohibition which you will experience on others.
Forma de serra:	Shape of the saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Shape of a large other saw:
Forma de ray:	Shape of the reed:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The tip of this reed should follow the shape of the head of a star key, and its points should follow the form of the points of a star-shaped object.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is only necessary that at those points friction be applied to the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or that the mouth be large and wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape of the larger knives of the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Shape of the smaller knives:
Forma de razori lat:	Shape of the saw knife:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Shape of another well-made saw: let it have the curvature of excess pus and the sharpness of its iron blade, and let the member be descended from a sword puncture.
Forma de lu:	Shape of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Shape of the knife in which there is a hollowing out:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Shape of another subtle knife:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Shape of another curved-ended knife:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Shape of a small saw resembling a tentacle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Shape of the ones that cut the bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Shape of another smaller cutting instrument:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another cutting tool; this resembles a reed, and its end is like a saw. It exhibits in various locations along the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The shape of the reed corresponds to the one that penetrates the bones, as you have observed.
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its end is triangular with a sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It's made of Indian iron, and it corresponds to all the causes that we've mentioned about knives, cutting instruments, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Regarding its end and the locking mechanism of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The ends either press or due to an intrinsic cause or extrinsic cause, or as you have treated that corruption with the curative of those medicines and the cure did not yield results, or sometimes the corruption escapes from the body of the part you haven't hit for any cause, then it's necessary that you incise that part within this corruption, so that the patient does not suffer death or harm which is a greater misfortune to the part.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that to which it happens, is that the limb becomes black inside where there was a scorching mark, or you let the darkness come close to that area where the burning thing has entered into that limb and spreads throughout its body; and thus, take your incision on that.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly if it's caused by the impact of some toxic causes such as from a sea scorpion or a viper or from a snakebite and similar.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or impact is in the end of the finger, then you cut the finger and do not give space for the corruption to enter into your hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if you reach the hand, then you cut that from the base of the elbow, and do not give space for the corruption to spread within the forearm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if it's deeper than that, then you cut the arm into the armpit at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes beyond that and even around the armpit, then that is death for the patient. And administering another cause to this requires a great amount of skill in treatment.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly do so for the chest when corruption reaches up to the hand of the chest, then you cut it into one of the knuckles.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it goes into the groove of the chest, then you must cut the entire chest.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	May be that if it invades below the waist, then you cut into the groin at the joint of the pelvis.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if corruption has already spread beyond the waist, then there is no method but for discharge and leave the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The method of incising or sawing the limb is that you strengthen the ligament at the part where you want to incise, and place another ligament over the area. Extend your arm with one ligament at the parts left out, and extend your hand with another ligament around it; then you separate the flesh that's between two ligaments so that all the flesh is exposed in a space that's latitudinal between them; and then you cut or saw it.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And cover him/her with a cloth from all sides so that it doesn't touch the area there, and that the wound goes to the patient's lesion correctly and the abscess is treated by cautery.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If it happens that there is an escape of pus when you operate, then you should apply the cautery moderately to the affected area, or place some powders that alleviate the pain on them; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And guide the injured member back to its place as conveniently as possible, and treat that area until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I advise you that when someone experiences pain in their foot, this kind of incident which I and you have advised, which occurs to them in the darkness of their foot under circumstances that were assembled for the combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption first happens inside his/her hand, spreading throughout the foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that person prepares for self-inflicted pus that goes towards the healing to move within the limb with the intensity of its fire and the pain, and it spreads across the foot into the joint, achieving healing.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long ago this corruption incident happened in his/her hand's indication.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it hits me, and so I allow the reflection of this excess on what touches my hand with the application of medicines, towards the transformation of the body; and the excess does not recur but starts to spread into another limb where it started in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he/she commands me to insert my hand into him/her, and I do not want to do this fearing the reflection of that excess, more than I fear the insertion of my hand into his/her corpse, where the virtue was in burning.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And when he/she dies from me, they return to their land and I learn that this person prepared and burned his/her hand completely, and it healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not recounted this story merely for the sake of providing assistance on what happens with this disease, and it is its significance which makes it significant and according to which it has been done.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	For the treatment of colic and the quality of enemas combined with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When there is an abscess occurring in certain fleshly members and the space of the abscess extends until it collects pus, then it bursts and perforates, and the pus is drained from him/her, leaving the area empty as if it was a vessel, and the cord that gets exposed by this event behaves like a fine cloth, and it does not reach deep corruption, nor spreads into bones or nerves or muscles, it's called a sinus, and it is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space extends until corruption occurs in some member, then it is called a fistula and not sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment for this is to insert that cord entirely as it is twisted, especially when it's very fine and behaves like a cloth, making sure not to stick to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	And if you hope that the cord will stick and this corruption has not been reached by subsequent consequences, then in the case of the cord getting hot on its surface, then you treat it with an enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you consider it as a sinus; and if it is large, the arm that you use has an unpleasant odor. Then you treat it with an Egyptian enema made of oil, vinegar and honey, with equal parts being mixed together, they are placed in a vessel, and they are heated over fire until the medicine is boiled down and gets concentrated to a syrup-like consistency.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take what is necessary from him/her and dissolve it with water and honey; and treat that area with the sinus, strengthen his/her passage, and let the medicine stay in him/her for the duration of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then you remove that from its position; and do this for several days until the sinus is transformed and his/her sense of smell returns.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And for some occasions, you treat with ash water, when this medicine is not available to you; and so you take the ash from wood, put it in water; and then boil that water and treat that area with it until you notice that the sinus has been eliminated.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if your body does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor ash water, then treat that area with water and honey mixed with finely grated honey, and also treat it with vinegar and honey mixed together. It is the property of honey that transforms and cleanses, while vinegar causes adhesion to the sinus, especially when there is excess acidity or dryness in the vinegar.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this for several occasions and notice that the sinus has already been eliminated, then treat that area with what causes birth of flesh in him/her.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you take the dyafinicon salve and dissolve that in rubbed oil and vinegar; or you treat that area with some medicines and other salves that have properties as I have written about them in the chapter of salves.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the sinus is tight in such a way that the enema tube cannot be inserted, then you gradually enlarge it with a small metal instrument, and pause while covering his/her back with Egyptian salve or basilico salve until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly if the opening is spacious, then you add his/her lips with stitches and let him/her have the quantity in which the enema fits inside.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the exits from which blood flows in the patient are elevated towards above parts, then dry that area where pus is present within them so that the blood can flow inwards. When the blood is constrained in the depth of the sinus, the flesh will be produced there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not within your ability to dry the sinus inside the area of the base pus as you desire, then you should puncture and prepare the limb for surgery so that blood flows from it slightly according to what you are accustomed to do and ensure there's no obstruction caused by the blood.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	Take consolidative medicines that are placed over the sinus in a way that you want to extend those above the surgical cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And let the cloth be of such size that it facilitates communication with the entire sinus; then, make incisions with your scalpel straight down from the edges of the sinus opening, making an ample but slightly narrow cut to extend beyond the sinus opening. Then, spread another layer of linen soaked in oil according to the amount of fat removed, and place this over the first one far away from the sinus opening so as to allow blood flow without tearing the linen too much; only change it every few days once.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	Allow that which is at the sinus opening to be done, which you increase constantly in order for it not to obstruct the blood flow.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know whether what flows from the patient's blood is much or little, if it is digested or not.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And also always consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it's in an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your treatment is prolonged in such manner, observe the material that is being discharged over the sinus opening, if it begins to adhere or has a tendency to stick. If you find this occurring, carefully remove any stuck material or debris, and when you clean the wound, change the dressing for another one and reapply the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	Allow if near the sinus there is ample space for small organisms to reside, do not be discouraged by the sticking of the material, as this is part of the healing process for the patient. This occurs in some individuals where meat production takes a long time in their wounds, and it also happens with those who are contrary to this.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if for several days near the sinus there is indigestion of blood, then know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence to the sinus takes a long time making it prolonged, then adjust in drying out the medicines. And if the medicines are wet in their substance and their efficacy, they are dried just like fat-drying ointment, when there is excessive addition of zegi (a type of ingredient) in the patient's condition.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the best after this is that you take from fat-drying ointment and dissolve it in roasting oil, apply it on their skin just like its original substance, then place this over them, and use this.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And just pretend in that action, when there is no blood, fat-drying ointment and honey, when they are mixed together to become thickened, use this on them; or if you take myrrh and aloes and mix them, then crush it all with honey when heated on the fire, apply this over linen laid out on a dressing for support under the sinus; and apply this with the thickened honey from which they are mixed together, then crush it again and place it on linen to reinforce that area.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some times these simple remedies are administered to the aristocrat's long-lived life and the secrets of heavenly lilies (which are heavenly lilies), as well as flour from beeswax and centaurine, use these simples or adjusted ones, crush them, sift them through a sieve with the honey I have recommended; and use this on them.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then know that corruption has entered into it, and now an investigation should be made in bones or other hard limbs or joints; then you treat it with tuberculous healing, as described above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	From the treatment of boils and trimmed nails, and cutting of fingers added to the prescription.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	A panaricle is an abscess that leaves nails at the tip of a finger or toe on your hand or foot. It often spreads to other fingers and if it persists and its treatment becomes expensive, it either heals with cautery, gets corrupted, or lets blood flow from within causing the nail root to soften and become fetid; then cutting off the end of that finger is performed, and the color of this turns black.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so, when you have done as we instructed in the division and it does not agree with your treatment, then proceed to incise all the excess that accumulates at the nail root and apply cautery near this area; for hot cautery is beneficial in this respect.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if the bone is intact and the nail is healthy, and all the extensions of the nail reach inside to the parts, they start piercing it and guiding it accordingly. If this occurs, proceed by placing the thin edge close at the corner of the nail that pierces the flesh, pushing it forward and incising that flesh with ease, then place over what remains of the flesh from the burning corrosive medicines so that everything is thoroughly removed; and cure this area with ointments until it heals.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already spread to the nose, then dig into the nose and remove it, because there is no health when that which is corrupted resides in the nose.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you find corrosion and decay reaching into the mouth, then you should dig there according to where their memory is pressed, and soon cure that which is within them so that it becomes healthy.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If there is percussion or abrasion at the nail, and there is severe pain in that area, then dig when you begin to bleed the patient, and quickly remove the nail from its sharp edge to its dry section across longitudinally on its skin. Make sure that the wound does not reach into the flesh left by the removed nail; this causes the patient intense pain and leads to the production of excess body tissue in that location; then cure that area with what relieves pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	This is a normal condition, which naturally occurs in many people's breasts, it is slightly fatty everywhere, or slightly fatty are they in their bones, or slightly fatty are they in their nails.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And such things occur naturally at the base of the joint, or it is the nature of them in certain parts of the bone.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	That which occurs naturally in these bones of the bone is not bad, whereas what occurs naturally at the joints is somewhat detrimental.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And for those who are naturally fatty, the wound is slight, so when you dig that part, do it with a broad blade.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	That which naturally occurs at the base of the joint heals difficultely; therefore, be cautious about its removal.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	This occurs when it naturally happens in the bone; dig so that when you begin to bleed him, the flesh of his is rounded into the hole inside the mouth, and then use one of those suitable saws with this method, and soon cure that which becomes healthy.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	This is consolidation which occurs between the bones or through the natural process of growth in a person that has developed it, or through the consolidation of disease or by fire burning, or due to similarities; then dig so that you release this consolidation when the bones return to their natural shape.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And place between their layers that are fused by oil rubbed in, so they do not consolidate lightly; or separate between them a thin sheet of lead where consolidation occurs according to when you dig.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly if consolidation occurs in some bones on the palm, then you dry that consolidation according to preparation and aligns it with the shape of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From a diseased wound, they are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices are varicose veins, and they are thickened swollen veins full of melancholic excesses which appear in the folds of the body's limbs, and their main occurrence is on the chest, especially for travelers, workers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then dig when you administer blood purge of the black cholera for several days with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment of their iron absorption occurs according to two methods: one is that it be cut and the black blood be expelled, and the other method is that the vein be elevated and all of it be extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The wound occurs according to this method: start by filling the chest with warm water until the large blood is dissolved, which becomes fluid in the chest, and then strengthen the chest of the patient at the lower part of the thigh into a part higher than the knee on one bend, and then bleed the vein in a location, or in two, or three at wide sections, and then raise the black blood to his own hand at the exit point of the chest inside it, and above it in its surroundings, until you have extracted the quantity that you wish and is sufficient, which will remove the properties of the patient.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then rest for that, and command him to refrain from eating any food that produces black cholera.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Continue the treatment by bleeding when the veins are full and you notice improvement in the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of their condition occurs according to this manner: if you remove the chest of the thigh in the patient's folds, then you should submerge it in water and fill the chest with warm water until it reddens and the veins become prominent; or if there is no water available for bathing, have them exercise vigorously so that the limb is scraped.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the arm along the right side of the vein by section from front to back or at the rear of it; or if you are at the lower part of the limb, you should do the elbow.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then open the arm with cuts and scrape the vein from all parts until you see the reaction, and it is that you should observe the appearance of the patient as they decline to blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then when you have freed and opened the arm, you seek that white place which is the artery.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you put both of those lines into it so that it is elevated and placed at the level of your arm's elbow, and suspend that like a small lion.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then dry another section close to that section for three inches, and scrape the arm near the exit point above the vein until you see it.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then raise that and dig that in the final section where it is at the elbow, and then extract that and raise that until you have seen through the second section, and then extract that from the section above that.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this inside to remove that from the section which is pus-covered or pus of all sections, inside where everything is infected; then insert that.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you don't follow to extract and elevate it, then insert a needle made of strong metal twice as thick and tie that one, or pull out the pus. Or make them hold the rod and turn your hand all around inside where it is embedded.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And make sure not to insert it too far; if it breaks, you'll find it hard to lift that out and risk spreading the illness throughout the patient's body.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And once all of that has been extracted, place a cloth soaked in oil and wool over the wound area. Apply oil-soaked wool and dry wool, then cure it from within where healing occurs.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the blood flow is constricted without having any bends and does not follow rectitude as we have said, then cut open all parts of its twists and in the areas where it wraps around him, suspend that with thread inside where you lift everything.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And remember, you should not insert your section to damage the vein or trouble that area. It will be difficult for you to lift that part; exercise caution in this matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Shape of the instrument used when bleeding occurs:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of a thread or string:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not like any other threads or with sharp ends so as not to damage the vein; it is made of a thick, flexible lion's hair. If it were too thin, it would cut into the vein due to its thinness; instead, we have emphasized its excessive thickness, as we said earlier.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Regarding the extraction of the femoral vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is formed in the regions of the thighs, similar to Al-Ategi in the desert areas of Arabia and in the dry regions of India where little vegetation can grow or even bear plants.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it grows stronger elsewhere in other parts of the body, except for certain areas of the thigh region.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the formation of it is from putrefaction that you see from the chain, like poison within the body as if snakes and worms and insects and parasites are breeding between the chain and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of its potential occurrence is when this vein strikes in the thigh with vigorous inflammation; then, the area swells up; and from that swelling point seems to sprout veins from the location like roots.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when you see the manifestation at the extremity, then find that you should place upon that one piece of lead with a weight equivalent to that of an eagle, within two eagles', and move it around while allowing the lead suspended from its harness.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as the symptoms are caused by something outside in certain parts, wrap that with lead and place it there.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the illness is prolonged, then cut a part of it and cover the remaining; do not insert that directly where it is infected because if you insert it, it will contract and enter the flesh causing an abscess and pus formation in the area, resulting in a bad ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	And when it is treated gently and extracted little by little, inside where it is removed from the rear of the thigh and not because of any cause in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And this vein is found in some people who are as tall as five palms and seven, already I have seen one of twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut during its treatment, then insert the rod into his leg and puncture that in long strokes through the body, inside where all of that which is in the material is evacuated, apply putrefaction to the area for a few days with medicines; then cure it for abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein in some instances has increased size, especially when it appears at the junction of the thigh or in the thigh, and it causes swelling openings, and it is from any opening branch.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And thus cure that as we have said in the division and with what was mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Regarding the removal of worms generated under the skin, it is called cattle sickness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is named in some territories as cattle disease because certain symptoms are present among cows and there's a worm affecting many of them, one that is born between the chain (likely referring to clothing or bindings) and flesh, it goes up and down throughout the body, and can be felt by touching as if bursting through its passage and appearing externally.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the generation of it is due to the putrefaction of some fluids thus causing worms, snakes, earthworms, and roundworms within the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is found due to the cunning of it; when it goes through the body and rises to the head, then it becomes strong within him and enters, destroying the tongue, and this causes various symptoms.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you want to cure that and extract it, do not proceed unless you've observed its movement and appearance through touch, then take care that what is over it and what is under it is in harmony and strong constriction, then dry off around it and remove it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it gets stuck in the flesh and does not loosen up, then you should place a cauterizing fire over that area where it resides, and the main cause feared is corruption of it which corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you find that it has traveled to the head close to the temples, then apply pressure on his eyebrow with a strong constriction, and keep applying until it is done, then extract it; and let him use medicine for transforming his body's condition by removing bad pus-forming fluids, and avoid eating anything that can cause fermentation.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Concerning the discussion on illness of the stomach.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called "nafir" in our land, it is pain that appears in some limbs, and later spreads from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen the second one that I will describe to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was summoned to attend a female patient in a village, and I found her arm swollen with a small lump on the vein of the arm. After it had been pressed for an hour, I saw that swelling go away as if it were blood rising up to this point, somewhat more slowly than water, like living silver when it flows from one place to another.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain of that spot stays in the muscle, and continues for about an hour here.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And it moves into the other body towards where it reaches the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And I was told that it would move around in its own body according to what I saw; and I was too amazed by the transformation of him and the speed from member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen something similar in front of this according to that manner, however I have seen movements that find the pain being transformed from limb to limb.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I didn't see it like this in the stomach as with the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not think it is like this simply because the woman was pregnant, since in such cases there are feelings of heat and exposed veins, whereas here appears that sensation of moving wind.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this not appear according to this reverse flow in those who are delicate and have human veins that are somewhat swollen.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And if you want to treat him/her and the patient feels this pain, then it does not appear in his head like we said, so apply pressure on that area and leave him/her a little exposed over that place where there is that sensation of wind being contained, and cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	And if you do not find it in your stomachs, then treat that with bleeding of the body and whatever expels wind, use pills of putrefied flesh and pills of sulfur and resemble them.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Regarding the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diversified according to the species, and according to the locations in the body where they are found, their diversity is that some have large points, small ones, concave ones, and dull ones; some are solid; there are those that have three angles, and those to which ones have tongues; and those to which ones are stings.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the limbs and their locations where they are found follows two ways: whether the limbs or principal limbs curve inward, like the brain, heart, stomach, lungs, intestines, and kidneys; therefore when it hits one of these limbs and shows signs of death, I will describe this cause later, so you should avoid extracting that arrow in those who die in that limb where they are in their most developed state. And when you do not see any of these symptoms appear, and the arrow is not hidden deep within the limb, then you extract that arrow and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the symptoms of the spear, when it hits in the spear and penetrates the bone, and is situated above the skull which occurs through his excessive heat, blindness, dizziness, nausea, swelling and heat on the tongue, spasm and confusion of mind and vomiting from anger, weakness, some words are cut off and her voice is destroyed. And it is situated at the location of the wound with a moist white spot resembling dust, and his eyes resemble moisture in the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if you see these symptoms appearing, then refrain from treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	The symptoms of the arrow when it hits the heart, so that it is close to the left breast and feels as if it has been stuck in a hard cause, not visible; and the movement of the arrow is somewhat like the movement of the pulse, and the disease spreads blackness, and seizes with cold extremities, and sweat chills, and syncope; and you know that death descends from above completely.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	The symptoms when the arrow has pierced the lung are a sensation of thick blood in the wound, and the vessels close to the throat become swollen, and the patient's complexion changes color, and expires large breaths, and asks for the inhalation of air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow hits the bladder which is in the feet, and the pain is near the small ribs, it causes a great strong pain and sighing, and does not affect all the muscles of the limbs.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow hits the stomach, then one feels symptoms like food that is somewhat undigested in the wound.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow hits in the abdomen and is stuck there, one feels some wound opening or the skin, or the intestines which are ruptured; there is no hope for treating this injury by extracting the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the needle hits the bladder and urine is forced out externally due to some cause outside the body, and there is pain over the abdomen upon this happening, then you will know it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Instruct the others as well for each of them, such as the face, neck, shoulder and auxiliary areas, shoulders, spine of both sides, the sternum, ribs, waist area, and corresponding parts of their bodies. They are treated according to major dispositions when the needle does not hit a vein or artery and is not venomous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I advise you to consider this what I have observed about these needles, so that you may understand the treatment for them.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	This is because when someone pricks themselves in the eye socket of their upper eyelid, causing them to remove the needle from the opposite side; they are left with scars on their ear, and yet they recover and do not suffer harm in their nose.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And when a judge pricks themselves with another needle that hits them on their eyelash, leaving them only with the eyelid intact, and the needle was already hidden; it could not be obtained from there but rather had a small end to which they attached to their shaft. This was an extremely sharp needle akin to Turkish needles made of lion bone without any ear.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And when treated correctly by the judge, there is no harm in their nose from a bad incident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And when extracting another needle from a Christian man that was stuck in the shoulder, it was an Arab needle and had ear markings on it. Then I pierced through between two guides, which was already submerged in his shoulder; after that, I made this subtle incision and then extracted the needle, thus the Christian recovered.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And when extracting another needle from a man that was stuck in his abdomen, I thought it would cause death due to it; and consequently, since it did not change despite passing thirty days with no cause affecting its disposition, I pierced through the needle and held it there. The person then recovered and did not suffer harm from any accident.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom a needle was stuck in his back. The wound healed on him, and since it had been around for about seven years, the needle was forced into his thigh area.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom a needle was stuck inside her abdomen; the wound has become hardened within her and does not change with her natural operations. The woman has not experienced any harm during her usual bodily functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man in whom a needle was stuck on his face; the wound has become hardened and the needle is protruding, without causing any noticeable pain or appearance like this.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And when extracting the needle from the king's prince who had it stuck in his middle nostril and which had already receded slightly to the right side; the entire needle was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was summoned for his treatment approximately three days after the insertion of the needle.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I identified the wound of the needle's insertion; and then I probed around with a small instrument without feeling anything. But he felt this puncture on his right earlobe, so I surmised that this puncture was at the tip of the needle.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied ointment to the area with a stimulating and digestive effect, convincing me that this location is where the treatment should be performed so as to reveal to me the site of the needle, thus succeeding on it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And there was no harm at the significant location where you have obtained that spot; I continued applying the ointment on him for several days without any harm. Meanwhile, the wound has become hardened, and I can feel the nose retracting through this space of several days until I felt the needle inside his nose again and informed me accordingly.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I placed a corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it opened up; and with this tool, I probed and identified the tip of the needle, which sticks to its shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I adjusted in the opening of the wound through this medicine until visibly the tip of the needle appeared to me; and with this process, it took me time over a period of four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then when the wound was enlarged, it became possible for me to insert forceps into him and refine them, without causing any harm. Once I no longer had difficulty identifying and engineering around this tool using various techniques, beginning one day on these techniques with forceps that are made to descend under his caput, according to how their shape will appear at the end of the skull; then I extracted it; and subsequently, I restored that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And such doctors judged that the nasal cartilage is not restored; but I restored it and the wound has healed. The nose is fully recovered in health, and there is no damage to him under any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I advise you to consider the quality of extracting some needles in order that you may apply this rule and significance to what I have not said; for neither are the parts of this art nor their definitions comprehended by my narrative, nor can they be understood freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the craftsmen compare with few on matter; and in this, you should consider what is presented compared to what is absent; and find a new operation and a new tool when it comes to descending the causes of foreign things in the art whenever such an occurrence happens.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that taggles are not outside-wounds in the limbs where they are stuck, but according to two methods: either by piercing into the place where they enter; or against the other side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And the one who is wounded by the place goes in it, or the taggle proceeds through meaty place and is thrown outwards.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not follow the advice of the time when you cut, then consider that you should leave it for a few days until the meat around it heals, and alleviate the pain and exit of his and its cut.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if it is stuck in bones and you do not follow your advice, then leave that for a few days and make this cut with the incision and movement every day, and already it is an outside-wound.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not follow your advice for a few days, then consider that you will drill into the path of the taggle in each bone along its subtle travel until the place expands from the taggle, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the taggle is stuck in the bones of the head and has already progressed in one of the parts of the brain, and appears like those accidents which I have mentioned in the thighs, then refrain from extracting the taggle and leave it until his state returns to normal for a few days; so if the taggle reaches the spine, then death is not prolonged for him.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the taggle is not stuck only in the bone of the body and does not pass into the spine, but remains in the thigh for a few days, and no cause of those accidents befalls him, then you should proceed with the extraction of the taggle and his extraction.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And if it is moving and you do not follow the extraction, then you should proceed with travels along the path of the taggle as we have recommended, and then care for the place until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	And if the taggle is already hidden in the body's place and is hidden from feeling, then you should try it with temptation, and if you feel that taggle, then pull it with such means that are suitable for its extraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot do it on him due to the constriction of the wound and its length in the preon, and here is not bone or nerve or vein, then cut over the wound where it can be expanded and taggle extraction becomes possible.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is located at your earlobes where it is stuck from all sides to the entire root; then deliver the meat in which it is stuck from all directions to every means you can do. Proceed with this, if you cannot perform on the removal of the meat in the breakage of the earlobes and within their twist until you follow this.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you manage the extraction of the taggle in any location where it is, then you use twisting of your hand with forceps from all sides until this follows; and delicacy with extreme delicacy so that the taggle does not break and that makes its own difficult extraction for you and for that removal.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do this on that at your time, then consider leaving for a few days until the parts that are in its path can heal, and proceed to repeat this when it is relieved.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	And if it gives you the opposite of our recommended bleeding, then consider administering what we have said about treatment in his chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And keep your virtue from starting on vein or nerve, or heart, and use whatever means possible for you of taggle removal; do this with ease, calmness, speediness and firmness as I have recommended to you.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore you should make the taggle reverse for as long as the thigh behaves according to the figure in which you should place the taggle's setting on it, which is more advantageous.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	And if this is not possible for you, then consider administering what is possible for the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	And if these are taggle outside-wounds on the other side or that already progresses some part to the parts of outside, or makes the tip of the taggle gill-like by feeling the part above its source and sometimes pushes that significantly; then you should consider it on that; and make sure about this section according to the quantity in which they take forceps; and then pull that, when it is made short by following.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it is stuck in the bone, then you twist your hand against the contrary so that the taggle starts to enter into the bone, and expand yourself, and then pull out that taggle.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave that for a few days, and proceed to repeat this until it heals.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the taggle is in there, then you push that towards him.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft is stuck and you want to administer impulse, then you insert this inside, if it's silent (meaning the patient doesn't move), use convex tool so that enters in the cavity of him into the tip of the taggle and then push that towards him.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	And if the taggle is concave, then you push that with a strong convex tool entering in it, which makes the taggle relieved by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the taggle is externalized, then consider that you must hollow out all the meat in which it lies, if this is possible for you, and proceed to care for it with what suits.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the needle penetrates in the feet, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or on the side, and it is close enough for you to touch it with your hand near that point, then you can burn there. Do so by burning there, take care not to damage a vein or nerve, remove it if necessary, then cover the wound as needed, and treat that area until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps on which arrows are mounted:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let their ends resemble a duck's bill, which are made like pliers when they grip the arrow, so that they do not let it go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And from those, special marks are made, large, few and curved, depending on the size of the arrow and its delicacy, as well as the width of the wound and the constriction there.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of the concave pusher on this end, just like that of a duck's bill, to ease the insertion of the arrow in it, and pusher from this silent one:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of the blunt end pusher:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Just like a needle, so that it eases the insertion in him for the concave arrow and it is pushed by that one.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Regarding phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins for phlebotomy which usually require phlebotomy are typically .xxx, or .xxx., meaning it refers to a specific set of veins commonly used for blood withdrawal. of which there are in the head .xvi., meaning there are sixteen (or .xvi.) veins located in the head region. so it are two pulsating veins which are close to the temples, they're called alhasisain; there are two leaves that are visible in both of them; and two veins that are in two lacrimals of each nostril and they're named aspicientz; and a vein prepared in the middle location of the forehead, and the vein that's at the end of the nose; and two guidegi that are on the neck; and two veins that are above the lips; and two veins that are below the lips; and - these are the veins that are called "allegoric"; and there are two veins that leave the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	The veins that are subjected to phlebotomy in the arms are .v., meaning there are five (or .v.) such veins typically involved in arm phlebotomy. Of those, one is cephalic and belongs to the wild lizard's heart; the populace calls it "the head vein", and it is blunt, curved. It consists of a branch from basilica vein and another branch from the cephalic vein. The populace also names that as "vein of all bodies," and the basilica vein which is placed in the domestic lizard, called "citillar". They refer to that other as "the belly vein"; it's part of the arm veins, placed on the elbow; this one is where phlebotomy takes place and is visible above the wrist due to its obvious appearance. Salvatella is the vein located between what they call the big auricular pouches and a small pouch near that area. They are two branches in it.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the chest and ribs are three veins; one of those is that which leaves behind the curve of the small lizard's heart. And the second is sophena, its location being just below the rib on the domestic lizard. And sciatic vein, its location corresponds to the curve of the wild lizard's heart. And in the rib area are other veins resembling these.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The youth of the veins that are close to the temples is akin to catarrhs, emigration, bleeding and old ulcers in the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of feeling those (veins) is according to what I advise you: it's that one finds the head of the lizard on the patient's forehead, and massages the head of the lizard at the back of the neck in the location between both veins with a broad cloth for good friction; return the lizard to its usual position, and if you feel the pulse of those on your forefinger, there is a point here where there are two pulses which are close to the temples near two depression points on the head. And place that one under yours, and if you feel the pulse of those ones under yours, here is the point.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Approach you take the surgeon's lance, it is that which pierces, and approach you introduce your forefinger into the vein in the neck where phlebotomy leads to the opening.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And approach raise your hand to the vein and neck up to the parts above, then cut into the vein with a place where it pierces.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And make the length of the cut equal to that of two fingers or close to it; and bleed out as much blood as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And afterwards strengthen with powders and leave it until it heals.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And this has been provided in the introduction of the book concerning the incision of those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	The youth of the two arteries that are in the temples, concerning phlebotomy, is towards old emigration and malevolent coldness, frequent eye infections, and excessive, acute, eruptive body diseases.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those (arteries) is according to what I advise you: strengthen the lizard's neck motion within which two veins appear by palpation, and demonstrate that your forefinger can feel their pulse; then you will detect it.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And approach raise the neck above the vein up to your forefinger's indication, and introduce phlebotomy there which pierces, then raise the vein upwards; and cut that like you did with other veins; and let blood run according to the amount of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then relax the constriction of the patient's leg, place your finger on the vein for an hour, and then place pressure on that spot and rub it, strengthening it against strong constriction, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And already the recall of their memories, as well as that one, and the beginning of the injury in the commencement of the narrative.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And thus the juvenile phlebotomy of the vein on the forehead is near the phlebotomy of the cephalic at the old facial ulcers and migraines, as well as fever and pus-filled ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the phlebotomy for you is according to what I advise you; it is that one where the patient strengthens their neck with a bend where the vein appears; and then take the tool called fossi, which this is its form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the point of the fossi on top of which is at the head of the tool over that vein and strike it against you with your elbow or with another reason in the manner of you, let the blood flow according to the quantity that you desire; and then relax the puncture in the neck and strengthen it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some veins are opened during a phlebotomy at the neck, but not that the phlebotomy is of acute extremity like other phlebotomies, before being on its side, and this phlebotomy according to the transverse, where the bone is close and strong it would break in you when it is delicate.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	May the youth of both veins that are at the tear ducts of two eyes by pus from the eyes by fever and sepsis in the eyes, and to the facial ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient strengthens their neck with a bend, and then perform phlebotomies on those parts, and you should stand over their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the phlebotomy is done according to the transverse and longitudinally for a few at phlebotomies each, where in the place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is delicate, break its end which is strong.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the blood flow as much as it is necessary to you, place over those spots, strengthen them for a night, and then relax those.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	May the phlebotomy of the vein in the nose be related to acute fever and strong heat, as well as facial ulcers, migraines, and redness that occur on the face, especially if it's an old condition.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the phlebotomy for you is that the neck strengthens and you place your nose on your left hand, take the delicate long phlebotomy and place it at the center location of the nose according to straightness, where the vein does not appear here, and when the blood starts flowing immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	And after you finish your hand with the small phlebotomy gradually and let the blood flow according to your need; then relax that for a night, because it is quickly restored.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	May the youth of the phlebotomy of these two lead to constriction of it and beginning of leprosy, as well as bad facial ulcers, itching and corrosive ulcers, especially with scabies.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of phlebotomy for those is that the neck strengthens each one in its own bend; and it's up to the artisan on the head of the neck, and the neck should be placed on a seat.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then perform phlebotomy for the vein along its length with ample small phlebotomies gradually; and then extract blood according to season quantity or according to how much you need which is in this way; and also pretend to be another vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then relax the bend and strengthen both veins with mid-contraction for fear that the neck might become inflamed, and leave until morning when the disease is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the youth of phlebotomy for veins of the algerich (likely referring to veins in the face or around the mouth) corresponds to small abscesses and pus-filled lesions on the mouth, decay of gum tissue, bad ulcers, and cracks, as well as bad ulcers that occur on the nose and within your body.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of phlebotomy for those is that you shave in front of you, strengthen their neck with a bend, then rotate your lips and observe which two veins among them is one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each is through the darkness of each of both, and more so if there are small black veins in that circuit; and then cut for insertion according to each.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you are uncertain and don't know which one among them is, then you discern through the incision of the largest of those, and from the visible pus in those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And pretend to be the two veins that are on the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is customary for Mays to cut both of the veins located in the labium.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	Mays, the two veins that are left in the tongue, is similar to phlebotomy of the cephalic near pre-inflammatory conditions in the glandular area, for the tonsillitis, and throat ulcers.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of performing phlebotomy on those is that follow the neck between your hands in front of the face, lift the tongue for you, observe your own tongue, from one side of your vein and the other side of the vein, and the color of each declines to darkness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then puncture some veins; and be sure not to end your hand in venipuncture there, because leaving them there are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are venopunctured in the thigh are in those where the common blood flows in all men, and their venopuncture is done according to two methods, or they make a venopuncture with a millet or olive needle by thinness; or they do it with a surgical knife, and call this method of doing it: this is how it is done.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this method of doing it is what you apply to sectioning and those have specific lengths and thinness according to the width of the veins and according to the constriction of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Method of venopuncture with a millet:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	The method of doing it is such that you place the patient in this position as many times, and you are to open the concave veins filled with obvious large blood flow, and towards those which contain large solid stones.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the method of olive venopuncture:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this type of venopuncture is of lesser breadth and with a more subtle extremity, it applies to venopuncture of subtle veins that contain small stones.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	May the youth of venopuncture of the basilic vein which is one of three veins: extract the gallstone from the patient's thighs that are on their left side and in the liver, and this affects their feet and stomach.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And when doing venopuncture there, the surgeon should watch that and be overcautious there, because if there is an artery where he has punctured, if he makes a mistake in the venopuncture, it will pierce that artery and cause bleeding, so you should not do venopuncture with a sharp needle before testing it with olive method, until you have tried it.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein does not appear clearly, then you should stop there and try another place or look for a small branch; or do venopuncture at the end of the arm where that is clear; test that with olive venopuncture just like we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you want to do venopuncture of the patient's side, then look in front of the arm where you feel the area between your elbow and wrist that you know is near the artery, press on this area with your hand; lift up the arm and place the hand over it to test; test that with olive venopuncture just like we have said; make sure not to apply pressure for too long in the area of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you press, with strength on the muscle, swelling appears in the area that you pressed with your hand; then this swelling is the swelling of the artery, so avoid that.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you feel the blood flow in venopuncture like that of an infant, and the blood is thin red, then know it's from arterial blood; and thereafter hold your hand on that for a long time; and place your hand again softly here, and if the blood stops flowing, where the reddening marks stop, then lift your arm and leave that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the patient's wound, be overcautious about it and don't allow any infection for a few days until they heal.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	And if the blood does not stop flowing, and you should not apply medicine at this point; then you will have pierced the artery, if it appears to you; where its extremity is contracted, and the blood has stopped; or take a small suture thread, make it that way, and hold one end firmly with your hand on the area of the vein in contraction under the muscle and powdery substances the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And then if the blood has stopped flowing, it's good; otherwise, take care of that with medicine from which it was preceded to recall the location of the powdery substances causing bleeding.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the cessation of blood from him is difficult in many situations due to the small location of the wound and the possibility of muscle contraction in the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	The method of the dark vein venopuncture is done in youth to extract the gallstone from the upper part of the head and towards the left side of the body; for this reason it consists of branches of the basilic vein and of cephalic veins, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And when doing venopuncture there, be careful that the area is over-touched in venopuncture of this patient, because leaving this area is a nerve; then if you make a mistake in venopuncture and find the nerve, it will cause him to lose consciousness, making healing difficult for him, and he may not recover fully. And this nerve is visible when felt; but if it's hidden in some people and is subtle and not shown, then be careful that you pause your venopuncture at the point where you are doing venopuncture with olive method, and avoid hitting nerves with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you cut the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The youth of venopuncture of the cephalic vein is to extract blood from the head and apply it to patients' thighs.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And be careful in this manner, if you want that the puncture is done with olive venopuncture or millet venopuncture; which is the safest for all veins, not leaving you an artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, when you're doing venopuncture, remember that in the point of venopuncture you should only puncture the edge of the wound area, look for the most superficial spot and do not touch it, unless there is a reddening mark upon your first pressing on the venopuncture area.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, in some individuals, it may happen that there is no blood discharge during the first percussion, but rather a pus accumulation at that site.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	That is the quality of blood from which and the incidents with it are mud, in those cases where you must consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first thing to know is that if you understand the nature of blood from which and the circumstances it should be handled for the benefit of health, hope for recovery, and caution against potential future illnesses. You must perform a bloodletting on one of these veins located in your thigh: the cephalic vein, the deep blue vein, or the basilic vein; you must do so during springtime after fasting, at the beginning of spring and autumn, and just before meals in winter when signs of overfilling appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And a bloodletting should be performed, or after the first three hours that have passed during the day.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Bloodletting should be administered when it's convenient and necessary, whether at night or during the day, at any time and under all circumstances.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	You must know that an infant should not undergo bloodletting until after fourteen years of age, a pregnant woman should not be bled until the fourth month by the seventh month, and elderly individuals should not bleed as long as they have already surpassed sixty years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wants to be bled for any reason, you should know that it's necessary to alter their intestines before bloodletting with a pessary of lion's bile; if they have a retained hernia, so that the veins don't pull out excess in the bloodletting from the intestines which are purified and do not affect the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And do not bleed patients during fasting or drunkenness, nor from illness or intoxication until it's healed of their conditions, nor in those with dropsy, and more than bloodletting should be feared upon colic pain, upon vomiting, upon abdominal discomfort, upon multiple pregnancies or labors, upon exercise after meals or night vigil or any cause that dissolves their virtue, whether physical or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And when considering the subtle manipulation of humors before this if it's gross, in foods and beverages, and with medicines if it's feasible for you.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And within this limit, between eating and abstaining from any cause that prohibits it or exercises through some activity in order to refine the illness.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause the bloodletting for your patient during the day, so around three o'clock in the afternoon, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And be aware that the state of this person's day regarding all animal illnesses, such as distress, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, such as labor, unnecessary worry, sexual activity, and similar occurrences.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And to his will, make the reasons be presented in the use of those things that men commonly like regarding fragrance and odors, and for balsams and similar things according to their capacity.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And let the bloodletting take place on a pillow that is softer than that of the person to be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And when he extends his arm, rub that with his hand the bloodletting tool for two or three times; and then strengthen it with a thong and wrap that around twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And for a tightness that isn't equal, or for a tightness due to excess, then prohibit the flow of the illness. Or if it's due to alleviation, then prohibit the body of the illness entirely.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And when the tightness occurs, you should rub that which is to be bled between their hands while the veins are swollen and can be felt.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And when the bloodletting tool is anointed with a little of an ancient medicinal oil; and then pause your left hand's indication on that vein, place your hand where you want the bloodletting, so that the vein lets out a little, and stop pressing upon it until the vein has been identified. Thus when you identify heartbeats you must proceed with the bloodletting from there, as those are full of air; and if you pause the bloodletting tool on that area it is contracted, then proceed the bloodletting tool, and reveal the bloodletting tool; and do not press upon the vein, and if you do, that one is pulled.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, you should know that the bloodletting tool should be held firmly and take care of all these reasons.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then pause the bloodletting tool again, but if the vein has been opened in one try, then you're done; and otherwise, continue that process, leaving your hand at that place for a while, or with haste, if the spot is not reopened.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the spot is reopened, or if the illness spreads, then you let it be for a day or two, and do not tighten the thong, because forcefully he will produce pus, nor during bathing.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And when appropriate, proceed with bloodletting again if it pleases you.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the appearance is small and allows for subtle illness, and you fear that it won't produce enough of the illness quantity desired, then proceed with bloodletting in that vein according to reason and adjust the appearance slightly. Do this with haste before the spot reopens; for those who reopen spots quickly after bloodletting, you should reduce the number of appearances.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	If you have already opened him as he should be, then do not go over him again, for there is no excuse for any mistake; and pause over that part of the olive's aperture, which alleviates the body's pain.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place than oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, administer olive oil apertures in every phlebotomy where there are many veins causing body pain, and do this with the therapeutic technique of cooling and dissolving when it is paused on one of those places, as pain is relieved and moves when it becomes thicker.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large abscess is formed in the area of phlebotomy, where oozing occurs, especially when only that lump has not been bled but rather that oozed spot, or at the insertion of the small vein, then you press, and pause over the area with an infused sponge soaked in water and salt, one cut. Then strengthen it for an hour, as it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And indeed, have the person perform this close to the seat of pain from that vein in accordance with their own or another's pulse.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there is any darkness or greenness in the area for several days, do not notice this; and if you wish, pause over that with some aloes or myrrh dissolved, or some extract of mint or camomile or something similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And if oozing occurs from abscesses and prominences, you should perform phlebotomy on the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then place your hand on that, and if you later feel softness, apply pressure to it with your hand. Then, that prominence is bad and dangerous; hence, make sure to pause over that with any of what we have said, as strong blood will flow from the blood artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply plaster in the water where it is bandaged, so that the area endures, and then treat that with the other treatments while it is being healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And indeed, remove from the blood to each man according to the amount of his virtue and according to the color prevailing over the blood as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	And if the blood is black, then you let it drain until it becomes redder; similarly, if you find it thickened, then you let it drain until it becomes thinner; and similarly, if it's sharp, within which you keep its sharpness.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And it's best for the one who is full and strong, needing blood extraction in a lump, to widen the phlebotomy on the vein and have the phlebotomy be deep.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for the one who is pale, do the opposite of that. And indeed, extract it in many oozing spots, and make him lie straight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best thing to be administered in phlebotomy of veins is that it be a cross-section section, not piercing.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of phlebotomy saves from blood flow and nerve paralysis, and it is more acceptable and safer than phlebotomy according to width and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And when it is accustomed to cause fainting, you should perform phlebotomy, and indeed, cure that before the phlebotomy with a little of the infused water of milflowers or simple diluted oxymel; and extract some blood from the body in three spots or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is diluted with composition, then take before phlebotomy a drink of mirra infusion or aromatic honey syrup, with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar ones, or an aromatic and fragrant syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs, you should perform phlebotomy, and it is caused by their blood's movement, then indeed, have them drink water from meat and a slightly fragrant syrup; use aromaticity with garlic, and limit his feet to that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes we have mentioned in the division for treatment of fainting due to evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And if someone wants to strengthen their arm and dissolve their blood gradually in another spot, for which phlebotomy is through evacuation method, and the strength of them being pale, that drains the blood little by little, so it's according to the quantity of their strength on a continuous day.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	And if someone wants to strengthen their arm and gradually drain their blood again, and their body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	And if someone wants to draw their body's blood in the opposite direction from where it declines, then have this done on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	And this blood of which the movement is already drained and it's sharp causing fever, then have him drain his blood in a spot and make it large, with an insertion that causes fainting if there are any oozing spots, since you will have maintained all the conditions for phlebotomy; and place your hand on the pulse of him must be this blood flow, so that no death occurs instead of fainting when the phlebotomizer is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not do this when you want to move the arm and drain blood again, as soon as the opening of the vein is closed and it becomes difficult to drain blood, then press under that with vehemence and slightly bend his extended arm, for this is too harmful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Have him lie down until he is bled again; or keep this with the sharpness of the phlebotomist that coagulates in the opening of the vein from the blood; or pause over this with camphor, or myrrh, and compress slightly under which the blood will be forced out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then smooth that out and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity prompts you to cause evacuation of the substance according to that, and it is not an excuse, then prick that area over that location or in another arm on another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The vein referred to as "the arm's string" is drained in a location of the dark or basilica veins, when they are not obstructed or hidden; it consists of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the bloodletting procedure for the patient is that the sick person dips their hand in hot water until the lesion becomes red and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then strengthen over that with ligature or tourniquet; and also perform bloodletting according to the transverse direction, not laterally nor longitudinally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And if the incision is wide and your bloodletting is such that you bleed over the joint of the hand there, a little.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of the substance is prohibited, then you immerse your hand in hot water and let the substance run in the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	Maybe if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from immersing your hand in hot water, and similarly, keep the body of the substance warm in hot water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the bloodletting for this vein is better than for all other veins; it leaves you without a pulsating vein or nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And bloodletting of the wrist of the right hand is related to the diseases of pregnancy.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of the bloodletting procedure for this patient is that you strengthen your hand with ligature or with your own hand, as you have it placed in hot water, until the vein swells up and is clearly visible; then perform bloodletting on that transversely; and if you incise all over it, do not let that bleed again.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And remember not to finish your hand with bloodletting, for it leaves the nerves of the fingers exposed without skin.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then immerse your hand in hot water and let the substance run through it; if you do not immerse that in hot water, the substance will clot in the opening of the vein, and there is no flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And like extracting the substance according to the quantity needed, then you press on the vein with oil and salt so it is not consolidated too much; similarly do this throughout all branches straight.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	Maybe the youth of the bloodletting for that on the left hand is related to the diseases in milk.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do something similar with the bloodletting of this as you did with the other one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the youth of the saphenous vein in bloodletting relates to diseases that are in the parts on your side, similarly as with pregnancy and retention of menses, and diseases of the lungs and ulcers in thighs and old chest pains, and they relate similarly to diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the bloodletting for this patient is that the sick person dips their hand in hot water and does friction over it until veins appear; place your hand on the chest joint with a metal rod; the location of the visible vein you should do towards that spot, and from there its branches spread on the chest face.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And thus perform bloodletting on the larger vein or if it is necessary to increase it, then you do it towards that spot, which is better and with salt.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform bloodletting on the chest face, then you protect yourself from the nerves that are on that part of the chest face; pause your bloodletting at the location where you bleed across it, as if you wanted to incise it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And if possible with bloodletting.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	Maybe if the discharge of the substance is prohibited; then you immerse the person's hand in hot water and let the substance run through it until evacuation occurs.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the bloodletting tool misses in the first attempt, then do it again with bloodletting on his one part, where the location is salt; and don't fear its evil, rather protect yourself from nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly do for the saphenous vein of the other hand in equal manner.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And regarding the sciatic vein, as we have said, you should do it towards the hollow of the wild part.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The youthfulness of bloodletting for this is in the buttock pain when it's due to substance congestion.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the bloodletting procedure for this is that the sick person bathes and steams themselves, then strengthens their arm from the elbow of the longer side up to above four fingers on a long, delicate bend; which only appears in this manner.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, then you perform bloodletting on that according to each organ that is possible for you and in the transverse direction, which is better; or incise that through incision or puncture that through suction, where the location is salt.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in the dense, thick area of men's thighs; and if you find that, but does not appear to touch, then perform bloodletting on some branch of this, and it will be that which appears behind both sides of the chest towards that auricular and annular.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And protect yourself from nerves, let blood flow as much as you want through the veins.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then loosen the constriction and place your hand at the site of the phlebotomy cut, strengthen the area slightly, where it will be somewhat healed later.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Regarding suction and the quality to use those [items or tools].
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Suctions are from leeches, or from air, or from blood.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And suction is performed in two ways: one of them is through incision and blood extraction, and the other is suction after incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this suction that follows incision is done in two ways, whether it's with fire or after using fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the places where blood is extracted through incision are in fourteen parts of the body. The first place, on which suction is made, is in the navel area, and it's the last part of the head; the second place is halfway down each side of the throat; suction from the chin leaves the jawbone but not the mouth; suction from two spatulas; suction from alohoster, and that's at the tip of the penis; suction from two fire tools, and they're two handbreadths apart; suction from two quills; and suction from two thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And suction does not remove blood but from small superficial veins in the flesh, thus it lacks effectiveness like phlebotomy; nor should suction be done with fire or after using fire on any illness made by overfullness inside that doesn't allow the body to fully evacuate.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If necessity requires suction due to illness or continuous pain, administer that throughout the entire month and at its end, and in the middle of it and at any other time as needed.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is for those who experience the multiplication of blood within when there's need for extraction by suction and finds in their head serious congestion and excess; among them, there's overfullness and irritation on their face and head, and also their neck; it's among these that there's pain on their face and forehead, darkness and confusion in their eyesight. Among those who experience the place of suction; for those whose laughter is multiplied; among those, they find taste of blood in their mouth or that their tongue becomes swollen and discharges blood; among them, their sleep is multiplied, and among those who sweat blood during sleep, or others that seem to resemble these symptoms.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when times occur in any of those causes, especially if it's around the third or middle of the month, then commanding suction to be performed is necessary as long as more than three hours have passed since dawn.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the youth of neck suction is that when it leads to congestion in the head and also into what infiltrates the eyesight; but know that such corresponds to full evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this suction is at the site of phlebotomy for cephalic issues.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it's not written that one should use what is full of blood flow or in which there is catarrh, for this gives great harm to the person.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for that reason it's not fitting to use those elderly methods, and in the heads where illnesses occur.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	And for the one who remains continuously over it upon it is commanded forgetfulness; thus know that you should order the suction operator to pause his hand slightly away from the area where you've placed your cushion, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	And alcohol suction is at the site of phlebotomy for the black vein and basilica: thus it leads to asthma, constriction in the neck, and division of the lymph nodes, also causing coughing and overfullness.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And know that the alcohol suction should be kept slightly on, if removed beforehand it causes weakening in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the suction with hagdahan leads to sudden headaches in the head and eye problems, migraines, feverishness, and toothaches; it's at the site of phlebotomy for the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And know that you should command the suction operator not to press their hand too much at incision so as not to pierce an artery and allow blood flow.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And mouth suction leads to alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gum, and resembles symptoms that are from illnesses within the mouth, and is at the site of phlebotomy for allicherec which is between the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	And the suction that's performed on the two spatulas leads to heatstroke, which is caused by overfullness of quality.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the suction in both parts inside the fire tools leads to youthfulness of phlebotomy from three veins, they are basilica, black, and cephalic; it extracts blood from all those superficial veins that are in the flesh, as well as those small veins from other veins that allow access to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the suction operator not to proceed with incision, where the area is stripped of flesh, and leave your nerves and arteries intact.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it's one suction on which hemorrhoids are suctioned and leads to the hemorrhoids in the anus as well as sores left behind.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And it's wise to command the suction operator for a large suction, and with leeches, where the area needs strong drying; his soft drawn suction is fine when done with incision as well.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Strong windings in the joints lessen through clear manifestation, which bring on the sensation of pain throughout the body, and confirm the presence of old ailments in the limbs, stomach, and uterus, and cause menstruation, confirming the condition of obstruction and discomfort; they are located in the spot for a double phlebotomy, alongside the neck, and in two small punctures.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, it weakens all the body and causes fainting during sudden movements in men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And with the winds, they ascend from youth to youth among the winds of both sides.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the winds is that you stop the wind when it starts to see and continue through well-aged, do not prolong the position of the winds, more pause those slightly, let them be slowly, and let the humors come to place for equal advent.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease repeating this, continue until you see the place already turn red and swell up, and that the fever of the pain appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you scrape it off, gradually repeating the heat one by one, and more carefully consider in the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	That person who has a rare kind of flesh that heals slowly, you should scrape him once and not more, so that the place does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the wind director to expand the scraping and stop a little, and always heat it with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if there is thickening in the pain, you should know that you need to scrape twice, in the first scraping you open the way of dissipation to the pain and the fluidity of him.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	And in the second one, during the examination, look for the extraction of the thick pain.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the pain is very solid, then it should be done with scraping for a third time so that it achieves its end.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And gradually, when we want to extract the pain little by little or a small amount, until it reaches one scraping.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want extraction of liquid pain, we scrape with more scraping; and if we know that the pain is thick, you should know that you need to scrape with wave-like scraping.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the end of scraping is at the depth of the chain only.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the chain is thick, hard, dark, and his pores are tight, you should know that the points for the suction cups should be greased more gently, open more decisively; if it's during summer time, likewise use oil of aloes or oil of violet, or oil of melon seeds, or oil of camphor; and if it's during winter time, then use oil of narcissus, or oil of iris, or oil of chamomile, or that sort.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick and rough, then use oil of turpentine, or oil of benzoin, or oil of aloes, or oil of juniper, and similar types of oils.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	And if the wind director has large pores of thin flesh, you should know that oil is prohibited, and it's recommended that for this place where the suction cups are near to suctioning, they should be washed with water or with turpentine-soaked water, or with water from grapefruit, or water from borax, and similar types of treatments should be applied.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for the one whose pain is of liquid humidity, wash his suction cups with vinegar or with water from myrtle and sumac, and similar types of treatments should be applied.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for the one whose excesses are thick, wash his suction cups with old vinegar or with water from sweet basil, which is marjoram, or from the decoction of juniper, or chamomile water, and similar types should be applied.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it's important that the suction be done before bathing; you should know that it should be taken close to the bath for an hour or two, and that sleep near to the suction should be ensured.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is needed is for the person administering bloodletting before the act of suctioning, to regulate the wind.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	And you should consider at the beginning: when it's necessary for the one who is to perform bloodletting or the one giving suction, if they have bile and wind over his sharp pain and inflammation, then he should take cooling causes, such as vinegar lettuce and milk drinks, and spinach, and julep, and similar types.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And let his meals be such as roasted meats, furred animal meats, and meal seasoned with herbs, and similar types for him.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for the one whose complexion is rough, it's recommended that he drink essences of almond oil or almond essence mixed with vinegar, sumac, and wine fragrant between old and new; and it should be advised to him to limit his drinking and eating, and pause meals of roasted meat, cannabis, pears, small furred animals, and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it's important that the day of suctioning and bloodletting his drinking should exceed his meals.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it's important to give him to drink in some hours before for those with tyraica alfarac or medicines containing musk, such as musk oil, or cinnamon before suctioning or bloodletting or nearby, so that the main limbs are comforted and the pain is dissipated; but it should not be recommended to take that rubbing.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	The suction cups that are results of scraping should be suction cups that are applied above the navel, and on gout, over the umbilicus, in the areas of the elbows, and the armpit, for these limbs do not suffer from scraping by themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not sought by those methods but rather the irritation of the member's nerve ends, as with a suction cup on the breast in mastitis due to milk flow obstruction; and we use that to dissolve excess wind and relieve viscosity in the member, similarly placing one over the abdomen and the umbilicus; for that dries out the member and calms it down, eliminating the pain associated with wind.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And when placed on the testicles if it happens during their erection or ejaculation, through the power of irritation they make a person lose their erection and eradicate the ejaculation from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	Similarly, when it is placed on the thigh and the area of excessive wind in those confined.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these suction cups are applied with grease, not just that; some treatments are done with fire as well.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some treatments involve boiling water in foot sores due to diseases of the feet.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And that's why the suction cup is filled with a large amount of pus, either it's just hot water or water in which herbs suitable for the remedy have been steeped.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	The method of administering a suction cup with fire: the size of the opening should be as wide as two fingers; we formed it accordingly. The amount of pungent substance is as much as one palm's width; place it on his back, in the location where the pain is at the point where the veins are, as large as him, and make it small according to the quantity that enters with a needle into him.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Make cuts from the arm or lemon, with thick slices, lion, equal and clean, such that it doesn't allow the member to deviate from its position over him.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And at the middle of his back crosswise between the arm or iron, where a candle is placed when it's set ablaze.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this large suction cup is from the one we described; and use less wax according to the foot sores and the state of the person using it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the suction cups for children and those experiencing exhaustion are different from the ones used by adults and those with severe symptoms.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this suction cup on fire over the member is that the wax from a decent wood torch in front of a small candle of beeswax, place that one over the middle of the back cross at the middle location of the suction cup, so that the fire be lit around the area to prevent burning of the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And place it over the body part of the sick person, and let it be on the stick we've mentioned. When using suction cups and they do not hold up the stick that steams above that area, then the suction cup will soon dissolve.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And apply fire according to its method, and repeat this if you need more of this treatment.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	Mud to the suction cup that is administered in pleurisy, with water, without any back cross or stick, and it is not administered unless it's filled with water, and placed only on the body part.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is how it's done: This suction cup; the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive large quantities of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Suction cups are not administered in the mouth of limbs but in those parts of limbs where it's impossible to place suction cups due to their small size, like the throat and gum tissue; or on naked flesh such as that mentioned and the nose, similar to them.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those ones you have found as blood-sucking devices that are in the hot waters used for purification.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And let them rest in hot water for day and night within which they become accustomed, without causing any harm to their stomachs; and remove the body through bleeding and suction cups; and clean the sick person's body until it turns red; and place them on him.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And once they are filled, in case.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to use grease from the body with suction cups, it is better to do so during adolescence.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the body with warm water and proceed with hot water; and clean it and squeeze it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the body of the disease lasts towards the location of the blood-sucking devices, and this is its result, then you put a wet cloth in cold water, and place that one over it until the discharge is eliminated.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the disease is multiplied, then sprinkle it over him with vitriol trisated or gallstones and similar remedies that stop diseases; until the disease disappears; or place the ashes of the mayts on his body, let them rest so that the beans adhere to his body, until the disease disappears.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if needed, repeat the blood-sucking treatments, whenever it's possible to change those ones.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if blood-sucking devices are not allowed to be suspended, then wash the body with recent disease or leave a needle in those areas where it steams disease; and let them rest, so that when there is any disease they quickly disappear.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to go away, grind a little bit of trisated aloen or salt, or ashes over those and chase it off quickly.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the treatment for the lower part: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter discusses necessary procedures in the art of medicine; it deals with the treatment of fractures and accidental dislocations in bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, child, know that this chapter is known to both doctors and laymen, and even those who for time may not have read the works of the ancients nor understood a single letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this method of the scholars on earth is kept private; I have not forgotten what I learned over time; and I did not include anything that was not supported by extensive reading of the works of the ancients and studying their understanding, within which I extracted knowledge from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And also direct towards experimentation and study throughout my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter everything that comprises my science and on which experiments were conducted; since this is summarized for you others and relieved from the occupation of extension; and shorten it at the end of shortening; then show it at the end of description; and form it into various forms of disturbances that are administered there, as done through the addition of description, similarly I did in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	A summary and collection of fractures in bones, from which it is necessary to start before we begin recalling the parts that are fractured or different for each.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Know that in the prologue of this chapter, we speak of summaries of speech; and chapters whose understanding is what the artisans focus on at the beginning, based on the truth of those; these are you and those who are quick to learn or acquire this noble art among you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And thus say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or compression occurs, then you should attend to the beginning with bloodletting or correct it there, or at any time if no cause is forbidden, such as excess of vital energy, or from which the event occurs, or rather in old age, or during intense heat, or intense fever.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then be content with food that includes herbs, rabbits and crabs; and forbid large meats and fill instead with various foods and all foods that fill the veins of sinew, so you can rest assured of a pus abscess, and if you do not fear leakage of material in the body.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their initial position where they usually recover.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, then you should feed the patient with nutritious foods rich in energy and bulk, such as foods made from ground wheat cooked in water, rice, carrots, pork, stomachs of cows, hams, fresh meat, and similar large foods. Under this regimen, there is a slight coagulation of pus in the fracture, which is beneficial.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that bones mature when they are in young men and in old age, it is not possible for them to continue as such and become consolidated according to their nature due to the desiccation of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they consolidate and remain consistent according to their nature throughout time due to the desiccation of those limbs. They are consolidated and remain consistent for what is theirs at the end of youthfulness; such as the bones of young children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature adjusts and corrects on the broken bone from every part any cause similar to glue in which there is a thickness that adheres to it and strengthens it during which times of conglutination occur and settle at times, within which come the end of strength and firmness; such as fire at the beginning, where you do not forbid it for its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary that you stop feeding the patient with foods that contain gravity, viscosity, and bulkiness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	A variety of fractures according to the diversity of limbs.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the species of fracture are various according to the diversity of limbs, a fracture of the rib bone is different from the fracture of the skull bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from the fracture of the leg bone; similarly, all other limbs differ among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I conclude with a recall of every species of fracture, detailed in their respective chapter separately from the other.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	A variety of fractures within oneself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	A variety of fractures occur in their own parts; one is curved fracture and another happens as it occurs in the stars. Sometimes fractures are made according to the length of the bone: these are the fractures of the thumb and asterisk and those that proceed or do not proceed, such as when writing preparation is made and it's called fracture at the tip and disruption in the head, and small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for every species, there is its own disturbance in the restoration according to that which will come from recalling their distinctness in their respective locations.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A variety of signs of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And thus we know a bone fracture: it is the bending of it, and the prominence and adjacency of it to touch, and from it when you press it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And when it's not visible or palpable in the location of bending, and if you touch the bone during pressure and the patient doesn't experience significant pain, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	There might be the possibility of being twisted or having a small crack, then don't allow that under your hand and apply compression to all; pause over them from the medicines in which you remember to approach that moment, which suits the area; then stretch it gently through subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	Know that when the area is curved and does not split into two or more parts without affecting its structure, such as when it swells throughout the entire part of its anatomy, then you should start from your own time to rectify the deformity that has happened there.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if there has been a cauterized abscess, then smooth that over several days until the abscess ceases; and adjust it according to any method you know of for elevation and skill.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	Know that the restoration and the adjustment of your area are as delicate as in the bone where it occurs internally.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And strengthen that according to what you remember about it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If in the bone there are swellings, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts, if it's a hand or a foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two strings or with one string and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And make your position so that you pause the member at its natural location evenly, while stretching the parts of the broken member outward; then force yourself to return those additions according to any method you can apply in their respective places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And observe so that your strength does not fall upon the patient during your operation or injury, and force yourself according to your ability to apply one bone to another of its better forms as a companion.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And make sure that in that useful moment you touch with your hand there, and if you find any different cause here, correct it and adjust it according to the amount of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Avoid excessive extension and compression; even as some doctors' motions cause the formation of cauterized abscesses through their operations, or cause contraction in members like we have seen with their swollen motions.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And connect, and achieve balance and a good operation and tension of that member, along with rest and tranquility; advise the patient about this and make them avoid touching it during their vigil or sleep time, observe its change and agitation, note its weakness, and perform all its movements according to your virtue; wait until you see if the position of the member is one where discomfort is assured, which causes pain when felt in the position of the body part. Then ensure that by changing it to another position like this without feeling any pain; observe that the position of that must be straight and even so that when restored, the member does not incur deformation.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the tension in the member is what you should seek. Know that broken members vary in their size, in their magnitude, and in their form.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small, like the arm and as you said and is easy to compare with them, then ensure that the covering is of a very soft cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And for those that are large, like the thigh or abdomen, ensure that in these there is a layer and hard covering, so that the stiffness of the layer connects the large member from all sides with equal tension, lest any blemish occurs.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And start slowly, and begin your operation for correction, gently place them at a spot on that fracture about three layers or four depending on the member's size; then strengthen your hand slightly on this.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And move to that more superior part of the fracture site, and strengthen gradually so as not to apply your tension on the place where you have strengthened the fracture site.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And slowly stretch the layer around the fracture site a little, and gradually soften your tension as you take hold of a large portion from the location.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And take another branch and wrap this second swelling over the broken part with layers, then move towards these layers to the more recent fracture site. And in your operation focus on adjusting tension and softening that area as we mentioned in the first layer above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And pause between the layers of linen or cloth that matches the curvature of the fracture, if there is curvature in it; and otherwise, do not stop at any cause.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And pause on the other branch, and adjust over these layers that are roughly made just now, if there is no swelling or cauterized abscess in this area, then pause on that which has the abscess and causes swelling; leave it for a few days; then strengthen over those stars.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the stars have a cylindrical shape, and be formed wisely; or they may be made of wood; or of palm leaves; and let each star's width follow this shape and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	And ensure that the star placed over this fracture is larger and more refined than the other stars, with the length of the star according to what has been read about its magnitude and size in relation to the member; then strengthen on these stars from another branch according to your first tension; and observe it for improvement as we have said concerning tension, so that your tension is more based on the fracture site, and the longer you stretch from the fracture, the less tension should be required.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it is known that during pregnancy and subtlety, the threads become thick; if the threads are thick, as I have seen in several operations on certain individuals, cutting them during their cord tension, this is a large mistake, when the constriction was equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And thin threads are inconvenient, for you will not achieve what you want with constriction in those you wish to apply it to, and do not think that between here and there is a span of less than one finger.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient has been located at the ends of the strings near the constriction in the sensitive areas, then place this cushion under your foot or a piece of white wool inside so that it does not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures occur as injuries, and there is disruption in the sequence, and I will recall this in that case according to singularity in the Capitol.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that not all broken members are treated with stars on the first day; this is because when the member, if it is large, cannot be placed over its stars until about three or five or more days, depending on your confidence in the development of pus from the cautery.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of applying plaster to which the ancients resorted, those who applied them on fractures, dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of applying plaster as reduced for the restoration of fractures, convenient for complex injuries and mostly for women and children, which is about what does not feel heat or friction: it is that you take powdered rice flour, and this is the starch that comes out when rice moves in the mill walls.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And do it like this, or sieve it as such with chicken egg white, and prevent the formation of the not-thin nor subtle; then use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of applying to treat fractures, dislocations, and twists in the restaurant: mix assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, nux vomica, and myrrh, each in amounts equivalent to a thousand grains, all together making one eagle's weight; add myrrh and aloen in five eagles' weights; mix alochil in twenty eagles' weights; then blend them with water or the yolk of an egg if the patient's skin is irritated; and apply this ointment which has good composition and restores fractured bones gently, aiding to strengthen limbs for men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another way of applying an ointment that helps with fractures and twists: mix myrrh and white alum in one eagle's weight; myrrh and aloen in five eagles' weights; acacia in six eagles' weights; and Armenian mastic in twenty eagles' weights.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All these are ground in a mortar with the twisty part, they are sieved and mixed with water or chicken egg white then applied.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method for applying plaster to joints and bones separated from their places, and accidental pain occurs in those and cracks and fractures: take twisted wool thread and immerse it in vinegar and oil of cut fat then place it over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	In this plaster there is not instantaneous restoration, it expels pus from the cautery and eliminates pain properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take fig leaves and leaves of salvaged poppy, crush them together and make a plaster from it.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A shortened plaster method administered for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution of pus remnants: take grated pine tar, chamomile flowers, violet blossoms, rice flour, from all parts of .1.; All are ground and mixed with vinegar if the member has not been cut.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it has been cut, then apply this to water of squeezed moisture or to water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of applying plaster that promotes faster resolution than the first one when pus is persistent and requires restoration of the member: take grated pine tar, garlic seeds, mallow, honey suckle, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile flowers, from all parts equally; everything should be ground and mixed with water of sauerkraut or double water or vinegar depending on the quality of the member and the color of its recovery.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	Mentor or Aphrodisias does not advocate freely spreading the mixture on a broken member for its restoration, instead recommends using wax and oil mixtures rather than any other cause; it is recommended to be of medium thickness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	It is seen that when the joints are broken, the restoration of their health and the causes leading to dryness from small heat quality, such as myrrh, plants and similar items, should be considered among those causes we have listed.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A method of dressing for healing injuries and pain: take equal parts of ground ashes from burned human skin or hazel bark ash, and another type of ash, along with salt. Mix them thoroughly, sift them, grind them to powder, and create a poultice with this mixture.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	Determine the amount based on how much pus is present and when it starts to subside. You should consider whether there is no pain or swelling and if the bone is not broken, then you do not remove any bones for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if you encounter pain, swelling or inflammation at the site, then you should remove or intervene immediately, and keep this dressing on it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a cloth and a wet sea sponge, submerge that in hot water, then wash the area where it is within you until the pain stops and the pain subsides; then let it rest for an hour. And place on it wool soaked in vinegar or oil, then cover it with another layer of the same during night, so long as you are sure there's no pus under your scabbing, and to allow the swelling of the limb to subside, ensuring that the pain is relieved for you.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And again apply that tightness repeatedly with a small dressing and don't tighten it for your first strain, and do this until the injury is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you notice that the pus and heat and pain and swelling and all other accidents have completely subsided, and you need a dressing or tightness again, then continue doing this as you started, equally.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no cause from those we've mentioned happens to the limb, then don't remove it but wait approximately three days or four, or five, or seven. And some burns of all this are left for twenty days according to how you appear with the release of the limb, as we've said, during which time the fracture adheres and it comes close to clotting the flesh over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust with more tightness than your initial tightness altogether, and adjust according to the enlargement of the patient's thigh meat, as the memory of that occurs.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	And if you notice that the fracture site is already dried and exhausted more than it should be, then know that nourishment cannot reach there; hence soak that completely in hot water every time; do this for all three days; ease the tightness a bit, and through this operation bring nutrition to the limb, which heals slightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	And that which the folks who restore limb fractures do differently than when restoration begins at the start, according to how it heals, and is restored in accordance with curvature, is an error according to their operation, and great fear; if this were done correctly as they expanded the Ancients' in their free writings and healed them.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I haven't seen any of theirs do this, so it's more reasonable that this doesn't happen.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter 2: About fractures when they occur in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are blows, and their shapes are diverse, with distinct causes. Some fractures occur due to impact from space, where the impact remains entirely inside the skull, leaving it intact, just like in a blow on wood, thus this type is called 'ascial'. Or the space impacts part of the bone, then cuts into the flesh but doesn't penetrate the rear end of the object; and this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the severity of these two types of fractures can be great or slight, and for crushing or pulling fractures; and the cause for them is impact against stone or striking on rock, and they are similar in nature.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture either penetrates closely to the sinew, leaving the bone intact; or it occurs in the facial part of the bone. The severity of these two types of fractures can be great or slight.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And for a fracture that expands in the bone, in the subtle weakness of the hair follicle, thus this type of fracture is named 'capillary'.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And this is the fracture that happens due to impact or stone hitting, and it looks like them, causing some layer of the bone to enter its parts inside, and it occurs in the concave area, as when they are hit with an axe and the part of their entrance enters the inner parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And most notably, this occurs in the bones of wet bodies, such as children's heads.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And for all these types of fractured bones, they are heavy like stars that are separated.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will come back with a review of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I know all these types of fracture through detection on those and through inquiry about their smells and examination of the putrefied flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary type is known in this way that it's revealed over the bone and is washed away, with its edges examined, so that the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	And when considering the treatment of fractures at the beginning, consider the symptoms of the patient, and thus if you encounter symptoms that clearly indicate an underlying condition such as vomiting due to cholera, expansion, loss of understanding, bleeding, fainting, acute fever, and sweating or heat, in addition to other major symptom patterns, it's likely that healing won't occur.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you encounter unforeseen incidents during treatment, you hope for recovery, then you start the treatment of the patient.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	This cause is that if you are affected by the cold in eating as it affects him and this happens on winter days, then seek to study at the back of your skull on the fourteenth day completely in order.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is on summer days, then seek to rest on the back of your head for the seventh day, having ascertained that what remains in your skull has been corrupted by heat, and that incidents occur which we have recounted.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the heat, covering the brain, and is in parts that are cut and burned, then seek to engrave the prescribed part and grind it, as I will instruct you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And you measure the head of the patient affected by the cold, uncovering over the skull according to custom and manner as best as you can according to the figure of the disease, making it lighter on the body.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you, you must detect the skull, pus or abscess discharge with a cautery, then you resist him against this, and you do as you instructs me, by smearing the area with infused oils and rubbing oil, ensuring that the abscess is sedated; and you make sure of blood flow. Then start around the skull and in removing him.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be done according to one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one way is that you cut the skull with a straight incision tool, this is his form: Then administer another incision tool next to this, slightly lower than the first one; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer more with the scalpel that is slightly further than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And you should know that you need several types of incisions, among which some are further than others; and among them, some are shorter than others and they end at the tip of their extremities, and they are made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them for ease in percussion on the incisions so that you don't damage the skull and harm him.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the skull is strong and hard, then seek to puncture at the circuit in front of where you administer the incisions with the drills, which are named non-deep drills.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called like that just for the ones that do not reach the end of the skull inside which is close to him, where at the drill tip is a round end or margin resembling the edge that remains on the skull as if it were sharp like an edge or small circle, which should not be submerged and pass through the thickness of the skull.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient for you to use many of these drills that suit the thickness of each skull, within which is present everywhere in all tests of the brain, the tip of which is sharp, the quantity in length and width should be according to the amount of thickness of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three kinds of drills: The quality to puncture in the circuit of the broken skull is that you stop the drill on the skull and turn it with your fingers until you know that the skull has penetrated; then move the drill to another place, stopping where you can take the quantity of the thickness of the ray or around this.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then cut with the incision tools which are between each ray of the skull, make that subtle cut on what remains in height as we have said, when you remove the skull, or with your hand, or for some other reason using certain instruments which you will have equipped for this, such as forceps and fine tongs.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And you should know that with all caution the incision tool does not touch any part of the brain.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And so when you have made the incision through the skull and separate it from the brain if it continues with him, extract that part, and you measure and compare that against its roughness in what is like an incision tool of another instrument similar to a scalpel, but moreover seek for it to be more precise and more subtle than other scalpels.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if there are any small parts of the bones that are petrified and solid, then take that with ease using those instruments; and then treat the wound with linens and ointments as we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other way of operation is lighter, far from pain, which was said by Gualia and by lauzec through great suffering; and this is what he says: It is necessary for you at the beginning to start discovering the part of the skull in that place where the fracture is most violent and most apparent. When you have discovered that part and stopped him there with the end of this slow and cheerful incision, here is its form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the lenticular part is round and does not cut any cause, while the sharp part has two parts ahead in length, as you see; so that the lenticular part fits to the brain against his sharp incision on the skull.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then you hit on the incision of one part with a slight angle so that you cut all the skull as easily as it has been turned, and you be sure of heat that no damage occurs in the accident you fear in any manner. If the doctor was the most common and ignorant among humans; certainly, and if he was sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When any cause is attached to the bone in certain places of bones near the annular lesion, that material comes out from his extremity through the oblong incision, and it is removed easily, which is removed from his internal organs and his flesh.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the flesh, and what is adhered or leftover from the bone is the skin around him, if it has bumps and subtle depressions in him, then you must smooth out that roughness and remove those small depressions with a fine razor blade which you have prepared in number, using different quantities so as to possibly apply them at all locations in accordance with each's convenience and drain the pus from these according to where you are performing your operation on this broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And make sure to apply in your judgment when you sharpen the bones at the beginning of each application from these razor blades, and then use close to his subtle pus from him, and do not stop doing this until you reach the point where you need to drain all the thick pus and the subtle pus from all of them.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	With every other minor capillary fracture and subtle fracture, make sure to apply treatment according to what you lost regarding rectification of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And this is why it isn't healed over all those that have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And we have shown on what has been written about large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the flesh contracts when you drain the bone, then make sure to take lint according to the amount of the wound, immerse it in oiled water, and place it over the wound; and also take another piece of folded or tripled lint, immerse it in vinegar and oiled water, and place it over the first lint; and do so with a small amount of pus that you can apply to it, without injuring the skin; then administer oil on top of that, and don't press it unless the wound demands only that much.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Let it rest with this treatment for one or two days until you are sure of the pus discharge; then remove it and apply medicines that prevent excessive drying, such as linseed oil, flour of arsenic, powders of alum and artemisia, and substances like those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you should apply powder of these medicines that is finely ground on the wound, such as dry ones; universally, administer any medicine with properties that cleanse it without causing irritation.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And follow your judgment in this respect that the wound during your treatment should be clean; it should not be within the greasiness of ointment or any other substance; nor leave an irritant behind. For when adjusted over the brain's flesh, it decays and spreads there, which results in malignancy spreading to the body nearby due to this harmful quality.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the skin of the head, like how his bone changes and much more so when treatment is neglected for him; then observe that if you experience accidents similar to what we have said about these matters occurring in the body, know that this is harmful throughout his entire being.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not experience blackness but rather the color from the medicine placed on it, and this blackness is due to the nature of that medicine causing that coloration, then make sure to take one part of honey and parts of oiled water three times. And make these lines with lint, then place this over the skin; and treat it with healing spices as needed until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	Chamber three.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Regarding the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken but divided into two parts at once, or a few times over the forehead, due to there being two bones in him, where the part left is cartilaginous, and it isn't broken; it doesn't hurt him directly but causes swelling and deformity and nasal obstruction.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then make sure to insert your index finger into his nose, and equalize that fracture internally according to your index finger's direction, and outside it too, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this according to your ease, and be careful not to cause harm throughout the body due to your operation.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the forehead part of the nose, and your finger doesn't reach there, then make sure to align at the end of the ray where a small thickness occurs.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should mimic this procedure.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And assist him with the restoration of his nose on the first day after the fracture, if it's possible; otherwise, wait approximately seven to ten days for pus discharge.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert a piece of lint cloth into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part; or place two pins, if the fracture is in two parts, and adjust them according to the thickness of the pin as much as it fills the nostril.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And refer to some of the ancient restorers who place pins in silk bandages, which are changed every day; yet I don't see this practice myself. Rather, it is important that the cloth be filled with albumen soaked in water mixed with powder from sulfur; and have the pin stay until the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And in some instances, insert into the nose instead of a pin, to prevent excessive pus from being wrapped in lint cloth, which is made of lion's skin; and because there has already been a strong fracture in the nose with the body not preventing inhalation.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this reason is not something you need; if you want, do it, if you don't want to, do nothing instead.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another abscess should form, place the nose on a wet cloth or on an oiled and fluffed blanket, or use a lamp.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	Otherwise, if no abscess forms, then cover the affected area with flour made from sassafras and powder of chestnut leaves; and place your hand on their forehead, and do not let anything cause the nose to bleed.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	Otherwise, if they break the bones of the nose with small fractures or healing takes place, then cover so that you separate over those, and remove them with instruments suitable for those; and place your hand on the separation, and cure it with what promotes flesh and consolidates, and cover it with a plaster suitable for that.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if an internal wound occurs in the nose, then cover so that you cure it with remedies and administer lead pipes inside until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw that I leave is broken and its fracture is not in the flesh, observe that when the fracture is only external, and is not broken into two parts but is curved towards the inside, then its knowledge (or understanding) is slight.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And thus, if the fracture is in the right side, insert your left index into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is in the right jaw, then insert that same index with your right hand; and drive the elasticity of the internal fracture towards the outside parts, with your other hand on the outside part of the bone; do this equally accordingly.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the jaw fracture has already separated into two parts, then cover so that you administer extension of both parts according to rectitude while it is possible to achieve equilibrium for it.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is the commotion of teeth to disruption, then strengthen those that you hope will break under the wire of gold or silver or copper; and place your hand on the broken jaw with a cloth, and place your hand on the patient's large square blanket, or one person equal in length to the jaw; and let that lie above according to how you understand the tension of him and what suits the application, while it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to take rest and tranquility, and stop eating for the lion's service of his food.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you estimate that it has already been altered in some manner, then take your time and release him on the next day; and properly correct what is already altered in him, cover that with moly powder, with duck album, or with flour of sassafras, because when you have removed his lion's fur, cover that with a lion's wool blanket.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And once this is done and the plaster is placed on him, and if the position of the bone has not been altered, let him go, do not release him until he is healed and strengthens the fracture; for this broken bone is strengthened in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another gout occurs in the knee, then administer what we have said about the remedies during his rest until he is healed, and let that gout be reformed.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is in the flesh, then consider if it is a piece of bone separated or stuck, then you need to separate those stuck using what suits for removing those from the stones.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the wounds in the flesh are stretched, then you should widen them with a scalpel according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have removed those pieces and that wound is not reformed again, then if the wounds in the flesh are wide, do so; and otherwise, cover that with one of the plasters suitable for that and allow it to heal.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the sternal (or sternum) when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Gouty pains occur when the sternal bone in front of the muscles is broken, and this fracture can be caused in three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Or it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts other than by pieces; and this is easier for the restoration of him; or if there are pieces in him, then it is difficult for the restoration of him; or perhaps the fracture is in the flesh.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And in that operation, when the fracture is in the flesh, you must have two assistants present, so that one holds the aid and follows the broken sternum, and the other extends his neck towards that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then join the fracture with your thumbs while it is being made into the shape according to what you see, and do not let there be little elevation or depression in him.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then cover so that you pause against the patient's expectation of cloth or wool, and let its size be according to your need; extend and elevate the sternum and bind the swelling with your hand while joining the fracture as you see fit.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the end of the sternum to the outside parts because it is prevented by the preon, then cover so that the patient lies on his back with his head raised, and place a hand half the size over the muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister presses the patient's muscle to the parts that are left where the os of the furcula should be elevated like in the front part, and then you correct the fracture and align it with your own words.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel sharp pains in the furcula and it aches, then dig through to that area and remove those pains with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is trapped in the bone, then you invent an incision for you among the scalpel tools that you have equipped for this task, because after placing the furcula back in place gently as needed; and this tool is made of wood or iron with which this is its form:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It is like a spoon with this being its curvature; and it's width according to what you need of it, depending on the size of the bone or its fragility.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length of it should be according to what is possible in the operation; that there are two ends like sometimes, and one end should be wide while the other is narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the wound disruption from the incision you made when removing the pain in the bone is wide, and you're sure there's pus in it, then adjust the two wound edges with stitches.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear pus in it, then you use the wound with bandages and powders according to the quantity of the wound's incision.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if pus appears, then soak a cloth in vinegar and oil rubbed with honey, and place it over that area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	Mays: when the narrowing of the bone occurs along with a wound and sectioning area, then you apply a plaster made from flour of mill mixed with egg whites, place it on top of the lion's stop, and place honey over that area. If you need more of that, take it out, and additionally use an inhalation, which I have from the Saracens, which should be long, its width is one palm or around that; then place this plaster powder over the plaster and the cloth; also take a thin table knife, whose width is three thumbs in length similarly; then wrap that around with a cloth, and then wrap that cloth with the knife on top of the fracture area; take another inhalation like this, roll it over the neck of the patient and the lion's stop, leaving the lion's nose uncovered and leaving the patient's mouth uncovered as well. Then compress that plaster all parts, when times when the narrowing of the fracture gets more severe, and that is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And all, if the knife doesn't cause a wound to the broken bone; and for you to see the lion's mouth every day, so that when the ligament softens or you notice the knife has healed over again, then you correct this and strengthen the bond.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And place the lion's sleep on the neck of the patient, and have its nose of the patient breathe in the night for a small pillow; so that with this, let his auxiliary by the back of him be elevated, and thus is elevated the fracture of the furcula to elevation of the muscle; or let his arm of the patient be tied to the neck of it.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not move the ligament if it doesn't swell or pus occurs in less than twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you have seen its face in this manner, and adjust it in the narrowing, repair it and make it smooth until it is repaired and the fracture of the furcula has coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it becomes strong and comfortable according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some cases are made in months of that time.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol. vi.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Recovery from fracture of the shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula tart is broken in the left area of your body and not broken through it, but only at its margins.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when your body is broken - and it's broken in the middle of your body - and it's not known but by touch, then according to its fracture figure you prepare it and reduce that as per its natural figure. You do this with all means and methods of workmanship which are possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place on the area, a mixture of flour with egg whites and lion's stop. And then cover it with a double cloth powder; and then cover it with a thin table knife tip as per the quantity of the entire spatula or more than that little bit.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	Mays: if you find the knife to be concave in some of the areas of the spatula, then you fill that concavity with lion's stop. And then you adjust the knife according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen it from above with a long inhalation, and tighten the knife inside until it doesn't heal over its area.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the ligament every day; in all times when it softens, take another treatment and strengthen it and adjust the knife if it heals over its area.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And keep the lion's mouth on its backside there.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five days.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligament, and be sure that once it started from these bones, do not fear nor its dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you are dealing with the bone location and place the chain there, then you cut over it, take it out, and do as we have said for the fracture of the sternum in case of pus appearance here.
Capitol .vii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Regarding the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot, in some cases, is broken at the midpoint of its place and heals there; however, its ends must heal without becoming swollen or fractured.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And concerning the injuries when his middle is broken, it tends towards the interior parts and events occur within him, causing great pain, difficulty in movement, coughing, vomiting; this is revealed in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of him is that his thigh be placed over his knee, and a cushion is placed between his shoulders; then pressure is applied to his muscles, and his back is adjusted against the hands of two assistants, and one carefully works on the operation, according to all possible techniques and in accordance with what suits, so that when he returns the bone's shape as it should be.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place an ointment and poultice over him, covering it from above with a fine table made of soap or chalk, as you envelop that in cloth; then carefully place that on the broken bone without causing swelling. Work it according to the curvature of several places, strengthen it with firm bandaging; and consider its tension at all times, and when softened, strengthen it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary that the disturbance causes destruction or pressure, or pain, or abscess that occurs in this place, then remove and untie this one and eliminate that which you have caused with this manner of treatment; then return to adjusting the bandage within which he will heal. And reduce the bandage if you see this on the skin; and adjust the bandaging so that it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Regarding the restoration of the ribs when they are cracked.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You should know that a fracture of the ribs occurs only in places where there are bones that span both sides; and from their ends, on the front part of the body, this friction does not occur with those that are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the awareness of it is not hidden from feeling; you should inquire about it among these questions.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be this way that you equalize the fracture according to possible techniques, so that it is covered as it should be, and then apply an ointment and strengthen the broken bone with a table, if you need such.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the rib fracture tends towards the interior parts, then it causes severe pain and puncturing, just like puncturing that occurs in someone who has pleurisy, because the bone puts pressure on the membrane; this also causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, vomiting of mucus; and this is difficult to heal.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the Greeks have dealt with such matters through exercises.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And they say about them: cover the food that causes inflammation in the abdomen leading to bloating and windiness, so that the stomach becomes inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the exterior parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	You may avoid this by not making it the cause of generating pus in a cautery, if it does not happen; and if it already happens, then help with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they say that you should place it above the winded and adjust so that it sweats with strength; it is like reasoning, but however, it's feared that the windiness will cause excesses to accumulate in the area due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And they say that you should: cover the area with wool that is submerged in a cautery oil, and place powders between the ribs until it's filled, making sure the bandage matches when you envelop that according to curvature; then heal the thigh through pleurisy of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the constriction of the thigh causing severe pain does not tolerate it, and the bone presses the membrane against puncturing teeth, we fear for the thigh; then you should cut over the area, expose the broken rib, and place something under that instrument that preserves its sharpness, which follows from memory, and insert the bone with ease, removing it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And adjust the two lips of the wound if it's large with suture, and heal that with bandages until it's healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if pus occurs internally, then you open it and place powders in rubbed oil over the area, and heal the thigh with this that affects the pus internally.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And when healed, place him on his side where he sleeps, until it's healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Regarding the restoration of a fracture of the vertebral column and the neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some fractures occur in the bones of the neck, affecting their articulation, similarly with the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if this happens to someone else and you want to know if they will heal or not, then consider that if their hands are already softened, numb, and dead, and cannot make those move, nor extend them, nor strengthen them; when you pull on them with your own fingers or stick them with a needle and do not feel any pain in those, then you know it is not healing, and during the months of dispositions, it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you can move those and feel the constriction with your fingers and puncture them, then know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the thigh heals through treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the spine in the neck resembling water and want to know if it is healthy or not, then consider the feet of the patient.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	And when you find that it is already softened, apply to those situations which occurred in the hands, and soon as he sits on his stool, you will notice strength and digestion according to his desire, and sometimes he rises from his stool and wants to urinate but cannot, then you know it's fatal, and then you do not interfere with the treatment of him.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	May if no cause occurs from those, the cause is better and more minor.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment of him is that you focus on calming the inflammation at the point of the puncture with a cauterizing needle over the spinal area torn and oozing pus, or in places between the ribs; place your hand on that spot for some days until the inflammation of the puncture subsides.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place one of the poultices soothing and moist, and press on that spot with your hand; and command the patient to rest and have calmness and not sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that the root of the tooth socket or some cause has been separated from him, then take care to heal on the neck and remove that bone; and adjust both edges of the wound, suture if it is large; and treat that with alcu's remedies until he is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	May if the root of the tooth is broken above the gum line, this is the end of the socket, then take care to place your left hand's poultice on his buttocks, and hold that broken tooth with your other hand according to possible symmetry; and afterwards apply a plaster and ash on him, if you need those, and treat that.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken roots in him, then take care of that, hold that, and treat the wound with the treatment that precedes until he is healed.
Capitol .x.	Capitol .x.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of restoration of the anus.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the anus are broken, and if they break, then their fracture is merely communication at the ends of those and are inscribed along the length and decline towards the inside parts; this happens to the patient pain in that spot and puncture, and when it's a fracture, the area becomes numb.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of him is that you extend your hand over that within which there is the fracture, which is the shape of him.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the end of him, then you hold that according to which it appears to you through equality when it's aligned within as it resembles its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	May if the fracture is in the length or declines to the sides already, then you make the patient lie on his belly while preparing yourself for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have held that in place, apply a poultice on him, and afterwards place ash of wood or coal ashes on the spot, and press with strictness over the area without fearing of puncturing the fracture or moving the star.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And fill that hollow with what fills it while that accepts the pressure according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on his side or without his back.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	May if pus occurs in the wound, then you stop extending him and his restoration until that pus subsides from the wound, and apply what soothes there as it's preceded; and afterwards return to his restoration, and treat that accordingly.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if they occur in the gum or are broken, then you should remove them.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol .xi.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Of restoration of the fracture of the助手 (translated as "adjutori" which seems to be a typo or non-standard term, likely referring to an auxiliary bone or structure).
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adjutori is that which is between the shoulder blade inside the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of him can be done in one of two ways, of which you take wood flat of medium thickness according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And if they are located in two extremities two muscles, then he should be suspended from the elevated location.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And let the patient lie on one elbow; and afterwards, extend his broken arm onto the pole until it reaches the nipple in the middle location to which the curvature of the pole is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And suspend over that some heavy cause, or let the servant extend that to the sides; and command the doctor to treat that with his hands in such a way, until the fracture returns as he wishes.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the patient should be laid on his back, and hang his neck from his collarbone with one hand; and command two servants so that one of them holds what is hanging down from the fracture with his hands; and the other holds the mess behind him; and each of them extends to their side.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be more forceful, then you press on the fracture with your hand and on that with another hand, and both of the servants should extend to their own sides.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then you should place half of the muscle over the nipple and the other half should be moved away from the muscle.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly if the fracture is near the knee, then cover that area and that knee with something.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Then facilitate that work and finish it off, and once the inflammation has been equalized according to what is covered and applied properly, then strengthen that so an abscess does not form after.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If an abscess does form after the cautery, then smooth out the constriction by the 7th day, and place on them knitted woolen bandage in between two layers of oil-soaked cloths as it rests on the abscess, and then strengthen that.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the method to strengthen that is to place the plaster over the fracture, and then place an envelopment of new cloth around the plaster; and adjust your arms on that support, and place your hand open over their own muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth and support your arm over that support for them to be in a position like stars, if you do not prevent any cause of the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use the stars.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And that is to place over the fracture that star which is larger and stronger than the other stars; and place between each star the width of this one, and let the length of the stars according to the breakage be added by three digits from all sides.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen over the stars along the constriction which I mentioned at the beginning of the treatise.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And that your constriction over the place of the fracture be more strengthened.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when much has been facilitated for the fracture, let the constriction become smaller.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so if you change the position of the stars and the constriction as we have said in the time when you restore the member to its original position, then do it.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess after the cautery, then let the constriction and the stars be smoothed out by the 7th day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the ligament in all directions for three days so that it does not occur at the pressure point or swelling; or is prevented from food reaching the limb by adjustment of an excess constriction; and therefore correct all this as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	If you are confident that no cause will occur from this, then do not release the ligament but wait for three days or longer.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let their sleep be on their back, and their hands are on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place on the support a full plate of wool in between, and consider at all times of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not disturbed nor dissolved, or that the ligament is softened; therefore correct this entirely according to your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And provide the food of the patient according to the order we have prescribed beforehand, so that the food is delicate at first until it starts being strengthened; and then place that you make the food richer for them.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	And the custom of the support and the patient's chest is that they should be strengthened in 40 days; then let them be released and have baths and are treated with ointments which correct those.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is laid bare and rubbed, then do not release that ligament and stars within days or within two months.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol xii.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	An arm is composed of two bones which are called the forearms; of which one is small and that's what we call the wrist, and the other is large and it is the one laid down on top of the small one, from the side closer to the body.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And a weak break affects only the larger forearm, or the smaller one, and it breaks at the same time.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small forearm is broken above, then the restoration of it is easy, and its healing is easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the break affects the forearm below it's bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And even worse than that is when both bones are broken at the same time.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	And so if the bone that is broken is the small forearm above, then it's convenient for the doctor to restore it, that you facilitate a slight extension until that one is equalized.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	And if the large forearm is the one broken, then place an extension more vigorously.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both forearms are broken at the same time, then you should perform the reduction movement much more forcefully.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you should place the hand's figure to restore it and the extension of the arm on a pillow, so that the wrist is above all other digits, before than any other digit, and the little finger is lower than all other digits, and the back is on one knee bent.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a pillow in front of them at the height or straightness of their body, so that the back is not forced to work.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And then let the attendant extend the arm from the side closer to their body or to the ligament, and another attendant extends similarly above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then let the doctor equalize the bones as long as he reduces that according to the best figure that can be.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there are deviations in the bone's structure, then you must reduce all piece to its place by your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears as a separate deviation that cuts the connection and is not within your hope for restoring it, then you operate on them and keep that according to the method we mentioned above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If the fracture is due to an illness, I have already dealt with this single case, and therefore proceed with the treatment of that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess appears during your recovery process, then you should lay out a cloth with ointment-soaked and white wax bandages, making them of medium thickness between roughness and smoothness. Then cover that area tightly with the cloth inside which the abscess can drain; afterwards replace the bandage and apply a plaster made from ground clay mixed with oil, and place stars above it; then let this star plaster rest over that fracture, slightly spreading pus in all directions.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of the stars on the arm is indicated by major dispositions or whether the fracture is in one place or two at once.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And place your bandage tightly on the spot of the fracture strongly and vehemently. When it is easier for the stiffness to go up from the parts above the fracture or from the lower parts of it, then place the bandage a little moistened according to when you are beginning the treatment process in relation to the single case of the illness.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that cover the fracture should be moist and wet, neither hard nor rough. The paste applied on which they are strengthened should be of medium thickness between subtle and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and its condition for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if there is any cause that requires correction, such as when something happens to the limb, then take a bath in hot water until that pain ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the limb rest without strain until it has rested, and then return to applying the bandage.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the stiffness has already been softened and the bone has already grown back to its original state, then correct all this with your own strength.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if the nutrition is prohibited from reaching the limb due to excess stiffness; then take care that you slightly soften it and leave it for several days until the nutrition flows back to that area, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	And if to the patient nothing happens of those causes we have mentioned, then take care that it is released about 20 days or roughly around that.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then have the hand of the patient suspended by its own strength in movements of agitation, and make it sleep on its back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored within 30 days or 40 days, or a slight fracture is restored within 28 days, and all of this depends on the disposition of the complexities and the dispositions of strength.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of fracture of the wrist and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that in the wrist and the joints of the fingers there is fracture, and it does not happen to them but simple swellings.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when there is fracture or swelling in the hand, then take care that the patient keeps laying down and stands before it on its feet according to equality, and then place the hand of it over that extended.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And have the minister extend the broken bones and the doctor equalizes those until they grow back in good growth.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then take care to place plaster and wadding, if there is no abscess. And then place stars according to the amount of the area; and you have already wrapped that in cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	And if the swelling is in the inner parts under the palm of the hand, then make a resemblance of a bowl of cloth, and command the patient to hold that on their folded palm; then let it be strongly held with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the star be made of cloth in which it floats, so that the body is applied to the palm; then strengthen that according to what you take care.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	And if the fracture is in the outer parts, then take care to place on top of stars and another star from the part left on the palm, so that the hand may be opened and straightened; then return the bandage, as when the hand revolves with the fingers at the wrist.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if there is a fracture in some of the joints of the fingers, then if it is the joint part, it should be equalized according to what you take care and then strengthened on the palm; if you wish, place a small star upright so that the fracture may be elevated and not be crushed.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	And if the fracture is in other fingers, such as at the middle joint or on the index finger, or on the ring finger, then it should be equalized and laid on that particular joint; or they should all be flat according to continuity, which is better; or place a small star over that point, as we have said about the joints.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider in your recovery and afterwards the disposition of the abscess and opposition - during your operation - to what you take care when any cause arises from those, according to the repeated narrative.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of fracture of the bone in the leg.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone in the leg, having swellings, is broken and is declared by feeling as it converts to the part in front and to the upper pus.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done in such a way that the muscle is strengthened over the fracture and another muscle is left under the fracture, and the patient lies on his belly and his face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then, according to their quality, the surgeon extends all the ligaments to their side when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If it is near the curvature of the ankle, then the ligament is directed towards the heel on the side of the ankle joint. So that when the extension reaches its limits, and the other ligaments leave the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	Similarly, if the break is near the heel, then the ligament is made directed towards the heel, and the extension is performed on its sides.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the surgeon equalizes the bone in both of their hands so that it reduces according to its natural shape, and the bone is united by good union; then cover with a dressing and bandage, if there is no pus formation in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If pus occurs in him, then you let that heal for a few days until the pus comes out through one of them, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage of his strictures is made: cover the fracture with a hard bandage and fold it two or three times, removing any excess; then wrap around the area so that it reaches to the ankle and the curvature of the ankle.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert the long needle between the ankle and the area near the heel on its sides, extend the ends of the needle from the sides passing through both parts, then rotate around the ankle and ankle so that excess bandage remains.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And place on the ankle at the location of that fracture points, and place one rod above the bone of the ankle.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill in the gaps between the ankle and foot with many cloths, so that the bandage can coagulate.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then start with a strong bandage in the middle over the site of the fracture with three or four wraps, and as much as possible away from the location of the fracture, your bandage should be smaller and softer and wetter.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And extend both ends of the needle through its sides until it reaches into the chest cavity, strengthen both ends of the other rod's points so that the ligament does not move from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And let the bandage lie on that area, so that it does not cause corrosion or pus formation with cautery nor swelling and resembles those; if any of these causes occur, then prepare to have a breakdown in him, and adjust accordingly as we've mentioned several times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If in the bone there is a hole where you can put it, then adjust that as much as possible according to what is possible; and if not, do something on him and continue with that until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And some of these times strengthen this fracture of the ankle in another way that fits with your rods, as we've mentioned in the manual and on the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of him done in this manner, do not cause the patient's gait to be limited; and if it is restored alone, another as was applied on his leg, then it is necessary for that ankle to be inoperative.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the ankle is strengthened in about ten days or a few months, and all this depends on the diversity of compositions and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	About the restoration of the fracture in the ankle joint.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	And know that fractures to the ankle joint are not uncommon, but they occur through several times twisting.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	And if a fracture occurs to him, then it is merely a crack or strain in its sides, and this is due to either a cold or heat, and all of this is determined by the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of him is such that it should be equalized whatever breaks from its parts with what was mentioned, added and united according to what is possible by proportion, ease, and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then place the plaster and place a round rod on that if you need it from that; strengthen above with bandage as is suitable.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended in other fractures, as well as pus formation with cautery and similar ones so that it resists against any incident as long as it is convenient for him until he heals.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	About the restoration of the fracture in the ankle.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	And know that in the ankle there are two bones, one of which is thick and is called by the name of the ankle; and the other is thin and is called easy.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And accidents to any of the types of fracture as it happens with both bones in the arm, and thus the restoration is done like the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation for him is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if two bones are broken at once, the ankle turns in all directions.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if it is fractured with the thin bone, the ankle turns forward.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if it is broken with the thick bone, you cannot do anything about it, and these are causes that are not within your abilities.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension, proportion, and ligature of the rods according to this equalization.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture in the ankle has no obvious symptoms, then let the extension be mild and softer, and bring it to your strength.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	In the abdomen there are reasons for operation on the arms, and it is when you equalize the stars that complete your entire operation, then you will take weights of metal rods which are placed under the causes which are in solies, and they are made by turning branches of palm; remove those to which small stiffness belongs, and do not exceed the length of hands, and make them as long as the length of the abdomen, and inside the pus place these.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then envelop each bandage with two layers according to the length of it, placing one over the side of the abdomen on one side and the other side of the other side, and have them inside the pus at a location in the chest.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then tie the two stars in three locations of both extremities and at the middle one. With this structure, the abdomen is prevented from bending to either side, it stays in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And already a rod of metal has been administered according to the length of the abdomen; and place the abdomen so that it preserves that movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	Especially ensure you do this in a fracture, and when there is that particular disease.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And consider each day the abdomen and study it from back to front, and protect it from abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and if any cause of those occurs, then keep it so that what goes into it is for its healing.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the heel bone and bones of the foot and fingers.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	With the heel bone, it does not occur to have a complete fracture; but with the bones of the foot, fractures do happen occasionally; and with the fingers of the foot, few fractures occur, and they only occur to them during months of dispositions.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if fractures do occur in the bones of the foot and those bones are elevated above each other, then the patient should lift their foot onto a prepared ground like this:
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And place one foot on what is elevated from those bones, and press that area, apply pressure, and equalize those areas until they return in the locations.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then place plaster and cover it, and place a small table under the belly of the foot on which there are two padded heads.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then strengthen that area of the foot with its structure descending, since you have enveloped that with cloths and for other reasons as well.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And as it passes three or four days, then you loosen the ligament, which you will find that the bones are equalized, they are broken or dislocated, and the operation in those is like what you know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	And if some fingers are broken, then restore those, and equalize them like I have recommended to you in the restoration of fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And place the broken finger with a star according to the length of the finger, and make it slightly higher than this surface which I have recommended to you, and strengthen that area with its descending structure.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	And if what is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then place on each finger a star of its quantity enveloped in lion cloth, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of the belly, and stand on one of the heads of the table through the belly so that the tongue has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you not to forget that you do not consider all the causes which I have mentioned to you in the other fractures of accidents that we have discussed; and keep yourself ready for every accident so that what goes into it can be healed.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	On the fracture of the thigh bone, and bones of the knee, and of the spine of man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the thigh bone is broken, then make it rest on its slope, and then incline that slightly towards the side of one, and have it held behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife raises the thigh bone to the knee, and do this in the thigh bone as it is expected; and the woman should be bent down, and lift the two of her child gradually, so that all of this occurs forward like how it's expected and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place powders on her back, and when she wants to urinate, relax the knee so that it's easier for her, and let her urine out, and return this according to the method by which you mixed this at the beginning, and then return to her original powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or approximately that duration, until it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take an animal's bladder and place it over her thigh with a tube of aloe; and insert the entire bladder into her thigh, and then blow through the tube with force so that the bladder is inflated inside the thigh, which returns the fracture.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be filled with knee and stay for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the knee of man or woman is broken, then administer in its restoration and adjustment what we have recommended about the bone of the hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is straight does not get concealed in these nearby fractures that rarely happen, especially with those who have some knowledge and understand my free advice; for this fracture means to you in the main roads of navigation in its restoration and adjustment, so understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	When in the groin area of the man when it is scratched, grasp it with your hand and place the groin there; then press on the patient's abdominal cavity wrapping, making sure to wrap it completely, and let it rest for three days or around that time, allowing it to heal.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XVII.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of bone fractures when they are infected.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for the one who suffers from bone fractures infected, and especially if the bone is large such as the femur or the humerus, or similar to those, you should care for them and use suction instruments on them immediately if the conditions of suction therapy suit you just like we have described.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the infection begins to flow out, then you should take care of him as needed, applying powder over the reddened area that is affected by inflammation if there is no other cause presented.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that day, and do not prolong this, if it does not cause abscess formation.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	If an abscess occurs, then you should let the restoration of him happen within nine days, until the abscess discharges, and do not approach him on the third day and fourth in total, where you will cause bad accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If the broken bone is prominent above the exposed cavity, then you should take care to reduce it and equalize it with your own hands in a way that facilitates this and limits excessive movement.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If the extension is not to your preparation and the equilibrium of him with your hands, then you should reduce it with your hands using this instrument; this instrument made of iron, its length being seven or eight dits and its width according to the size of the infection; and for this reason, every doctor needs three or four of these according to the amount that he needs in treatment in all types of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And if it is soft, and with a slight hardness for fear that it might fold during the operation, you should compress over it during surgery.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And if it has an acute extremity with a margin in all its extremities; and let the normal size of him expand outwardly and towards the parts internally.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is his form:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It is called in Greek "voluntz atelarem" (or "willing hernia"), so it is a small palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So you should allow the extremity of him to be raised above the prominent part of the bone when it is paused.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And push that in a groove until the bone returns, and equalize it with some equilibrium.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And so, try to equalize the ends of the fracture among them, and if the broken end is subtle and does not take that instrument well for access, then you should insert the end of his bone into a place where the instrument can reach this.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot reduce the bone of all as we have advised, then cut it with that which suits him among the scalpel instruments which we said; or cut it with one of the saws in any way that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then carefully remove what sticks out in the bone from roughness and small remnants.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and upon the reduction the patient feels intense pain, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and from this you should give him rest for the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration to the bone is completed, then immerse cloth in a black antiphlegmatic ointment, and especially during summer, do not apply wadding or any other cause over the infection if it contains oil, so that it does not cause him to develop inflammation and putrefaction.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then apply powders during the completion of your restoration to the bone, and leave the infection exposed so that you can scrape it with scalpel blades and use bandages according to the size of the infection.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And take all caution that you do not damage the infection on the fracture, for what doctors have done in this way causes them to die or the patient's body or bones to corrode or severely suffer, it is health.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if your narrowing is slight, soft, different from the constriction of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the infection is large or a bad infection, and you fear certain bad accidents that we have mentioned, and you feel pain in the place, then do not take care to apply powders over this, but use hard bandage cloths instead of powders and support him with these.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And as soon as the infection starts to develop in him after one or two days, then remove the cloth that you had placed over it with vinegar, and from our usual remedies provide ointments for infections, such as tetrathrefarm and similar.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is advisable for you to loosen the bandage and consider the infection each day in the morning and evening until it is consolidated and solidified, and know that the inflammation should flow from him towards the remaining parts with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the infection lasts for several days and is not consolidated or removed by him of the powder, then know that here are the small ones that you should apply ointment over as long as the infection persists.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And from those joints that are separated and removed, those that are not separated and put the member and cause pain, you must carefully remove them according to which it is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if it happens that it is black or greenish, then it's inflammation, or another kind of corruption and putrefaction. In this case, you should carefully consider which one among those suits the treatment method for the condition that will be preceded by a detailed explanation in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And when it comes to the place where there's the most smell, show your patient: when the bone is cracked, press over the limb like the bones of the knee and helper, resembling those of large limbs. Don't assume damage from this, nor the removal of the blisters that form due to this would lead to death; lay it softly in that place where it can stay, which will gradually reduce itself by its own after about 20 or 30 days. And then treat the wound if you see it, and if not, leave that one alone.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Regarding the treatment of gangrene that occurs in the aftermath of any fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	These blisters occur in this gangrene in the aftermath of healing from a fracture, especially near the joints, and are characterized by the swelling figure of the limb; forcefully prohibiting movement of the limb from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the gangrene is recent and administer medicines that have a stanching effect such as aloes, onions, garlic, and others, which resemble these. You should take some or all of them, and check if they are effective in stopping bleeding, or if they help with whitening blood from sweat, or if they promote healing, and place this over the gangrene on a poultice, and ensure proper constriction on it for good compression.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And leave the constriction without removing it for a few days; then gradually remove it and repeat with another one until the gangrene recedes. Or weigh over that piece of lead descending, as lead has the property to reduce whatever inflates in limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the gangrene has already turned hard and been removed, then if necessary make a small incision in it from above, and remove the excess or pus inside. Or fill that with some herbs until it recedes; and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Regarding the restoration of fractures when it is restored, and here we discuss about adjusting the limb subtly rather than according to its natural state.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and here we adjust the subtle limb and its tension not according to their natural state, these are only reasons for doing so: from which one is an abundance of joint fluid and ligament adjustment made not as it should be. Or due to excess constriction within the ligaments where nutrition can no longer flow in the limb; or due to an abundance of superfluous ointment; or due to excessive unnecessary movement; or due to weakness in the patient's body and debility from it.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to give nourishment to the patient and make their blood flow inside where their strength is multiplied in them; and take baths; and apply warmth and joy upon them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And place wax over the limb, because the wax draws nutrients to it or continues ointment of your oil with hot water, so that nutrition flows and returns to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Regarding the treatment of cracked bones when they are restored in a twisted manner and you prohibit their operation based on what is observed.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens that the limb has been restored around its healing of tortuosity and swelling in the cracked bone with gangrene, indeed so that the shape of the limb is fed, however, nonetheless the limb does not prohibit its natural operation. Therefore, you must accept the word of him who says that this limb was newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Just as there are many old medical and restorative practices which have done this in our land, and this operation is highly criticized leading to great fear of its sign which indicates death.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	And if limpness and gangrene are recent, then it must be treated with hot water in which are boiled soothing herbs such as vervains and grasses of the mountain, or wild thyme, and similar; this is done by applying a poultice soaked in a mollifying preparation like almond milk; or it can be treated with mucilage from the roots of the mountain and wrapped with gauze or oil from camphor, and then covered with that; or figs can be pressed and tied with colom's dung, and similar to those named consolidating medicines.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And some times they are dissolved with gentle continuous rubbing on the wettest parts, and movements of the limb are administered throughout its entire body at all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	And if tortuosity has already advanced and is forcibly hardened turning into hard parts, causing there to be the necessity for treatment with iron, then it must be that pus above is drained and the continuity of the bone is dissolved, and that is done by removing excess gangrene from that metal using fine incisions, and administration is made easier in this situation with diligence and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	When joint pain occurs due to cold fluids penetrating each part of the body, especially when it manifests in the feet, doctors typically refer to this condition as gout.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of some joints in their place, making movement impossible and causing the limb's figure to deform. This results in pain and significant injuries for the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	So when a dislocation occurs, you must immediately puncture and reduce it as quickly as possible. If the reduction is delayed, the location gets stuck, making it difficult to perform the reduction of dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And when dealing with it, ensure that neither the patient is in pain nor stretched during the immobilization process, as forced movements can cause cramps and severe pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When this happens, you should take care to apply the flambouyant (a method of treatment) on the patient's leg and ensure that it is left in place to allow the abscess to rest; then, the limb should be bandaged with cold water and oil, and quickly reduced for ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And the entire limb is treated according to what was recalled about it in its original place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already arranged the chapters on dislocation according to how they are preceded by fractures; from the upper part of the body up to the lower part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the jaw, here it goes.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So when the two jaws are dislocated and if there is a twist; and treatment of both occurs according to one of two methods: either they are partially reduced back to their places with minor movement, made soft somewhat; or they are completely dislocated and fully so, within which they become soft in the joint part where saliva from the patient flows out and cannot have that nor can close their mouth, and the tongue of them is enveloped by its own saliva.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation is minor, then within major positions it returns by itself with little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	When the dislocation is complete and full, then it must be administered a gentle reduction for that, and not delayed entirely.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And let the attendant hold the head of the patient, and have the doctor place his hand on the side of one of their joints in the direction of the jaw dislocation within the mouth, if the dislocation is from one part; or insert both hands at once, if the dislocation is from two parts, and the rest of their instructions be outside those among which are equal; and command the patient to cease moving their jaws and let them go towards every part; and the doctor equalizes the jaw and places it back into its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially when both jaws are always dislocated, then administer diaphoresis with cold water and oil, so a slight reduction of both takes place and do not delay the total reduction of both, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And once they return and are equalized, when the mouth of the patient is closed and it isn't softened, then place over those powders of lard on a cloth, and let it be made with wax and oil rubbed; then have them treated with soft massages.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head between two pillows, so as not to bend it towards either side; do not force them to eat anything forcefully for any reason; have their food be forbidden meat until such time that their pains are softened and their jaws are no longer tender; then allow them to eat whatever they desire.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And let this be administered with ease, and do not exert yourself about the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking, and rest, until the jaw is relieved and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two jaws when they are dislocated in some time and have not been converted to their original places is difficult, then convulsions and frequent heat occur, and forcefully you make the stomach of the patient upset, and forcefully there arises a colic vomiting.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you do this, know that it is disastrous; and convulsions cause death in the person who experiences this within three days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the treatment of dislocation of the sternum and extremity of the muscle, here it goes.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The sternum is not dislocated within the chest due to its continuation with the bones; and sometimes it gets dislocated outward from its place, which is acknowledged by feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And restoring it is that the patient lie on their back and extend their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And apply your palm to the spot with firm pressure, which will cause it to return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And place an ointment and powder on that area, and strengthen it there.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	And the extremity that touches it and is continuous with it, isn't dislocated in any day; then you should reduce and equalize it according to what we have said and according to your equipment.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And place an ointment and powder on that area, and apply a bandage, and have the patient remain in bed with rest until it heals.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this treatment, reduce the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	From the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated in only three ways, of which one is when it is dislocated at the insertion of the tendons to the insertion on them.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is when it is dislocated at the top of the muscle, and this is done with traction; and it is not dislocated at the rear parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And mostly it is dislocated and sticks out from the bottom parts of the insertion on the tendons, and mostly in those with few muscles, slightly it's dislocated; more in those with many muscles, they stick out out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And often such injuries occur due to blows or impacts, and the muscle of him has a boil caused by heat from the cautery, and it is freed because already being dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then know that you should work on this while he is over-heated, and then proceed in the treatment of him.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is known that the dislocation is when it's at the bottom parts of the insertion on the tendons; thus you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the intact muscle, which you find among those with obvious differences; you find in the tip of the muscle a concavity and place the tendon on the top surface of the muscle as in one's hand, and for him under no circumstance can his hand reach its armpit, nor can it be moved further by all sorts of movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it's dislocated from the foot or near it, then you immediately find a clear indication of touch, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And for this dislocation, a slight reduction is done when it's cool and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of him is that the minister raises his hand to the top parts on him; and place your feet under the tendon of him, and lift the joint with strength at its own place, and the minister raises his hand of him, and extends that towards it; and place that there so that it returns slightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	And if by what we have said it doesn't return, and it's due to the beginning of the dislocation, several days later, know that the patient should be immersed in hot water, and an application of soothing and softening ingredients like rosemary, fennel, and caraway in water is given, and this should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And the patient should be laid down on his back and placed under the tendon of him, wait for a blanket that is equal in lightness and tightness, and place the doctor's arm over the head, lift the muscle tip with strength, and pull the hand of the patient so it doesn't hurt at the bottom parts on him; another servant holds the head of the patient, so it doesn't hurt at the bottom parts on him, which is when that immediately returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce that second according to this manner: and what you should do is present a man who is much longer than the patient, and he stands on the side of that left, and inserts his muscle under the tendon of the patient, and lift the tendon of him above the parts on him while the patient hangs in air, and another servant pulls the hand of the patient from the bottom parts on his belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	And if the patient is slight, then know that there's some other cause that needs to be suspended, because due to its weight, it causes a return of the dislocation immediately.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it's reduced easily according to another manner: and you place in the ground a long stick whose head is round like a mortar's handle, not thick nor thin, and have him placed under the patient; then put on his head a sheet as long as the length of the stick, and the patient stands according to the length of the stick, and extend his hand at the bottom parts on the other side; and stretch your body from the other side with strength, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction of him is difficult due to all the causes we have said, then use this cure: and you should take a stick whose length is that of two arms, its width should be four digits, and its thickness should resemble the size of the tendon according to this shape:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And place sheets on his round head so that the stick doesn't make the patient fall.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And place the patient's tendon under him, and extend his hand or arm over the stick between the bottom parts on him, and hold the stick against the support and the arm and the end of his hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And place his arm on a step ladder according to its width, and his hand extended at the bottom parts, and the other side hangs from the other side, so that the joint returns immediately.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And as the treatment of him is completed according to any manner possible, then know that you should place under his tendon a pad made from equal quantity of wool; and prepare plaster with powdered moli ashes and fennel's egg white on all parts of the muscle, so that it's mixed above them; and strengthen your tendon against tightness in decent amount; and let the mixture be applied over the plaster, and the hand of him is attached to his neck, and it's left alone, and the hand of him isn't hurt for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And when food is digested properly, within which the member is relieved, it becomes much easier for his recovery.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then the food should be given closer to seven or five times and an exercise is performed; and thus if it is closed without being softened, then already he is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated due to dampness that affects it or for some other reason, then when this happens, you should administer three burns on that area, according to what was said in the chapter of cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this has been done and around seven days later the ligament and joint are freed, but the joint is not closed, and the plaster and the tightness have been reduced on his several times, but it cannot raise that arm to its upper parts, then you should know that these nerves of him, which are at the head of the muscle, are already cut or extended or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is made on the foot or the calf or behind parts, the reduction is done with pressing and extension to the chest, within which it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And administer the other tightness on that side, and cure it while it is being healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if the recovery is heavily affecting in the limb and delaying his movements, then the patient should use hot baths while that heaviness is relieved and returns to its natural state of the first.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Regarding the treatment of a dislocated shoulder.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; it is dislocated in all directions, especially towards the front and rear sides. The dislocation of it is not hidden from you when you feel its vibration or touch it according to whatever figure it has been dislocated, and when adjusting the dislocated shoulder at its place, this is clearly stated to you, that the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor can it touch upon his own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And put the shoulders (should it mean "cotyl" or "shoulder joint"), and as soon as you reach to its hollow of cautery, know that if it reaches to its hollow of cautery, reducing it becomes difficult, and without strength he is not cured completely; especially when it's at the rear parts, which is worse than all other types of dislocation, and with more pain, hot baths cause death on this.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of him, which is that which can be reduced, it is when his hand should be stretched towards two breasts, and his arm should be spread out, and the doctor's hands are on his shoulder and him, and you push the joint with the heels of his teacher's hands or within his palm's edge as he returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is in the front parts, then it returns like this that bends his hand towards his own hand, within which he hits the shoulder at the edge of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey to reduction, then administer vigorous extension and strong force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And that two ministers should stretch the arm, and they keep this vibration of two ministers so as not to be hindered by the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then you should turn his arm around completely as it is wrapped in a long folded cloth or ligament.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, grease that with some oil so that this helps in the lubrication of the joint which facilitates it; and then you should push the joint with vigorous pressure as it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then the reduction of him is known that he should be laid on that plaster where there's stiffness and flexibility with beef albumin, and it should be stretched in tightness descent; his arm should be suspended from the neck, and it should be left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then he should be freed; and thus if the joint is formed in its place, then you should free the ligament of him and leave it.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint is not strengthened, then you should repeat the plaster and the ligament, and leave it for some days until it gets stretched; and then you should free that.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	And if there is heaviness near the reduction of the joint for him and his position is in movement, then administer hydration in bath and subtle friction, and compression, as he feels relieved; or place yourself over the joint alone, on that part of motion fatness; and then you should bind it, and leave it on the bone during day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then support that and place him in the bath; and when he gets wet, then you should rub the joint with an early friction, and then repeatedly apply this over it alone, on that part of motion fatness, once, and the second, and the third.,
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already spread within the liver's interior, having reached its limit.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place yourself over that wet and scalded crack of cow's body and strengthen on it; and do this several times, which gets wet and returns to its position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Regarding the treatment of a dislocation of malassen, which is of the joint that exists between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Malassen of the hand for a few times is dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is easy, however it's opposite for other joints; yet you should perform the reduction quickly with him when he is dislocated before his place gets wet or when there appears the hollow of cautery.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the dislocation is that you place the wrist joint of the patient on a table and have him extend his hand, and the doctor places his hand or palm over the verge of the joint, and pushes that in such a way that it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it may be considered whether the palm has already reached in the belly of the hand. In that case, the patient should place both hands on a table for you to extend and reduce; and if the dislocation is previous, then both hands belong inherently above the table, so that the doctor's hand falls upon that verge of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And so if it returns at once, well done; and otherwise, then strengthen that as you apply heat to the point of puncture and let him be; and do not go on with this, for otherwise you neither bear nor are able to reduce his, since they pass through him days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	And so the joint should be manipulated according to its degree of curvature; and do not blame the patient for any cause, since his hand is softened and cannot support any cause; then you understand that the nerves are crushed or torn, and hence it lies within him instead of being strengthened with a cautery near the edge of it, making it stronger in that way as to give him some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And when the malaise has returned, then place on him the plaster which we have reconstituted, and let it be laid and strengthened for three days; and afterwards gently move it and leave it, and exercise his hand.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	And if the movement of him is continued and occurs in him with some gravity, then apply that with hot water and with rubbing for a while, until he feels relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Regarding the treatment of dislocation of fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some remedies cause dislocation of fingers in every direction.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one finger of those is dislocated towards the back or inside of it, then stabilize the finger and push the dislocation out with your fingers until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And support the tip of the finger, and suspend him from the part where he is dislocated, and let him be for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And suspend that and extend it until he feels equal in that his day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when she wakes at night, let him do as that narrative dictates, and do not cease moving it during the day and exercise with movements, and let him rest at night; and do this for a few days until he is straightened.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And pretend this if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, let him lie towards that part and do this for your first operation, until he is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do this when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder blades (glenoid fossae) of both sides.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When it happens to any of the shoulder blades or collarbone in a complete dislocation, and so you reinforce them with hot ointments on those places, then there is no cure, for death stalks the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the elimination from the patient goes beyond his will and he cannot hold it; or hot baths soften some parts of him, or his legs, or his arms, or one of them; or heat softens a shoulder blade in its place, where heat softens and hot baths are given to remove those to four quarters.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	And that has already been heated behind and is called glibozitat.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The treatment of him is that then you consider if the glibozitat happens in childhood, for then there is no cure and no healing from it.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	As for those that occur through impact or through percussion or through similar actions, the ancients have said that they have lengthy treatments on how to treat them. However, I have abbreviated the one from which you can excuse much of him due to its proximity to my understanding and explanation, with which I have presented this and detailed it using various instruments of the latter.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And he says that in glibozitis that happen in front in the feet, there is neither need nor healing for it; similarly with that which happens on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And only those are cured that happen directly where I recommend them, among those.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And that the patient should be extended over his face on a pillow quite close to the wall, and should have his limbs stretched out so that he does not wrinkle his feet.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And put a straight stick down, planted in the earth at the end of the pillow around his head, and another stick in advance of his feet at the other end of the pillow.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And let the minister hold the stick, and do not fix it in a hole; and another minister holds the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And cover over the head of the patient and leave the small hair on his beard firm; extend the tip of the beard to the stick which should be at his head, let him lie in it; and tighten the other bandage over his hips with his knees, make sure they are straight; and adjust all the bands and let those lie on the other stick which should be under his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the surgeon extends the skin at the thigh joint, and does not cut both limbs and the muscles in his places where they are fixed, but rather do not make them as tight as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the surgeon places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or places one on that spot and supports it with a table, and adjusts his feet under the table as he returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If it does not return in this way, then take a table whose height or length is about three spans, and excavate on the wall which we said is near to the patient's side where it intersects with the end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the top of the table on the spine, and the surgeon places his feet at the other end, and straining so that the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open both sides that are twisted by the hand; and when you have to dig in the earth, you must place the head of the patient at the rear end of each limb, whose length is one span. You must also place their head at the rear end of each limb. The distance between any two limbs should be a span, and this has been done in every limb, and all are firmly fixed on the ground so that they cannot move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And add one more limb to which is attached each thigh, and it twists in the two grooves of both limbs.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a groove in which the limb forms, whose length is about one span in this where it twists. And in the two other limbs it resembles that one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then strengthen the muscles you've stretched on the feet of the patient in the groove where you have to place its head, and the muscles that you've stretched on its thighs in the groove which is where you should put his legs.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And you must place each groove and have a surgeon twist the grooves with his hand, and the surgeon adjusts the spine as we said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is how the groove looks:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And once the spine has returned and the area is adjusted, then cover it with a powder plaster applied to flour, and cover; and then place on top of the plaster an area of table whose width measures three digits or approximately those, and the length equals the size of the yellow substance where it is located, and over the joint part of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then apply on the muscle as we said, and use the patient to absorb subtle nourishment so that it heals.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any concern remaining in the area at the end of recovery, then cover that medications that soften and cleanse are administered during the long period before starting the table, which we recommended; and this lead sheet has been administered in that area.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And some injuries occur at the back of the spine on both sides, and it is twisted by that dislocation; and this is the bone that has already injured so that you must not take precautions against this medicine which would cause your death to occur.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Regarding the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Understand that only dislocation affects the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle, not to those what happens to other joints with small movement and curvature.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways: it can be dislocated internally towards the parts inside, or externally towards the parts outside, or forwards towards the parts ahead, or backwards towards the parts behind.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And mostly it is dislocated internally, and slightly externally or backwards.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation towards the inside parts is that when you adjust the healthy hip to the body, it becomes longer and the waist is more prominent than the healthy one; the body cannot bend its leg, forcing him to straighten his back. This is how he forces his waist to be bent at this point, because his thigh has already reached this far here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of what happens to someone who suffers from dislocation is towards the outside parts, it's that his injuries are against this incident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of what happens to someone who suffers from dislocation towards the ahead parts is that he extends his healthy leg according to a compliment, however it doesn't bend that knee pain which exists in the backside. If one forces this condition further and cannot proceed towards the ahead; and his urine retention occurs along with his inability to walk; you should support him on his heel.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of what happens to someone who suffers from dislocation towards the back parts is that he doesn't extend his backside, nor can he bend it forward that bends his inability. His leg becomes shorter than the other one, and his back straightens up; you should support his thigh on this area.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The treatment for these types of dislocation involves considering the situation. If the dislocation is old or ancient, and it has already been treated to this extent with your approach, then in that recovery process you should not take precautions; therefore, there mustn't be any anticipation made during that treatment.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In the case where dislocation is recent and it's one of the four types of dislocation, you should aim for returning to that position where you'll move the joint outwards towards the inside parts and then towards the outside parts. Move it forward and backward, making him return this way without needing any other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If it does not return in this manner, then you should prepare to use force and extend the space under him, or around his hands, or whatever is lying over the space above the pelvis; and another should extend their hand above against where his hands are, so that they rest on the patient's fingers. Moreover, firmly press against the side of the thigh, and have another hold the end of the ligament gently.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And if it's an extension of him or inside the space up to the bend in the part of the sternum, or behind the part towards the back,
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And if it's the extension of all those in one place within which, the patient is raised from his earth-bed and hangs down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it's good; and otherwise, then fully any method that speaks of its own treatment is necessary.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of your own, when dislocated, and the dislocation is inside the parts, have the patient recline on his side there; then place the ligaments over the side of the thigh at that spot which between the head of the thigh bone and the spot left by the bending. Moreover, extend the ligament from the side of the bend in the part towards the other part of the sternum.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another should firmly grasp the patient's arms, and flatten the large area of the thigh bone on the malunhonest leg and extend the parts outward through strong extension; when that returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this kind is of more minor treatment for which this member is reduced compared to the other kinds.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	And if you excuse yourself and do not comply with this kind of treatment for all, then you should have both feet of the malnourished person ready at once, moderately forcefully, over both heels and both pelvises.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And if the length of each by quantity of four is spoken about, and the abdominal wall extends more than the other by quantity of two.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And so the malnourished person should be suspended over the head of the pole, and in the standing position; and if the length of the earth is quantity of two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And so instruct a strong young man to decrease the head of the thigh bone; have him suspended with another malnourished youth, and let the other young man exert strength on the thing, when the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	And in the self-reduction, when dislocation is to the part outside, have the malnourished person juggle according to what we recommended in the golden age; strengthen the ligament over the abdominal wall properly and over his feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And two poles should be placed, one under the foot of him, and the other on the head; moreover, place two adjusted poles under the middle of his buttocks where wet cloths are wrapped, so that the malnourished person is not dampened because the pole is between his thighs, so that you ensure that the extension to the parts left does not pull away.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each should extend in his part, and the doctor with his hand encircles the reduction according to art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	So if you comply with reversal, it's greatly good; and otherwise, pause on that diligently and thus as we said in golden age for that equality.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	And let the malnourished person juggle gently over his sides there quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the parts frontward, then you should have the abdominal wall extended moderately; and according to this midwifery narrative about the body; and the doctor holds his right palm on the malnourished thigh bone, and coaxes that with his left hand, and by that coercion pauses that extension to the parts left towards the part of the pelvis.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And when the dislocation is in the parts back, then you do not have to extend the malnourished person over the parts left, and he's elevated on the ground; instead, you place him over a hard cause, as if you were doing massage if his width is dislocated outward, according to what we said about lying down on two widths; and it's over his face and the ligaments are extended, as we have said, almost entirely.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And let compression be administered on the table at the spot where one finds the joint.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	So when the reduction is completed according to what we've done - and the sign of your own reduction for you isn't hidden, that is, extend from the malnourished person two parts, and when you adjust these equal signs and the malnourished person extends his own part and expands this excess, then you know that the member has returned according to what we've done - then you adjust both things and stop with the dressing and pull inwards so that width isn't exceeded in any of the parts; and keep the malnourished person at rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then, untie the ligament and dressing, and compare one part with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	And then, if you see these equalities in continuity, you will know that the dislocation is already closed, and thus let the malnourished person go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any signs of softening, then you should return and dress that again, and extend it according to your first construction, and let him rest for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then release that one, making it take a walking break in any place for several days, until it is comforted.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter xxxii.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the humerus.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The humerus is dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated outwardly, inwardly, and more to the left than to the right. And it is not dislocated at the front.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation is that you command the patient to press their knee against their thigh; then you will know that the humerus is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all its ways is that you straighten the patient's body while making them extend their knee if they can do so; hold your hands on their face and place their foot between your feet. Then, have them press their elbow against your palms, holding it firmly by your thumbs over their dislocated humerus with strength, and another should extend their knee until the dislocated humerus returns to its position.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of restoration is that their knee adheres to their thigh with ease, without strain.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then plaster that area and have them press their knee against their thigh. Afterward, apply the plaster for one bandage period of three or four days, and then remove it again.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not let the patient walk around for a few days until they are healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	May it be if the restoration of your knee is excused, then administer forceful extension to the tendons as was detailed in the previous narrative for the hip's treatment.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter xxxiii.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of dislocation of the tibia.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The tibia is sometimes slightly displaced due to minor injuries, and at other times it can be dislocated by force, and the displacement of the tibia occurs either inward or outward.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation is that you will notice the swollen ankle moving towards the part where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment for the displacement of your leg is a slight restoration; you should extend it with ease on your hands and keep them equal until it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	And in the treatment of you when it is dislocated by force, you should have the patient lie straight and place a strong and valiant assistant behind their knee at the middle point of that area.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then place your right hand under the upper part of their foot and your left hand on the lower part of their knee in the area where the cleft is.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and by two sides on the left side, and extend the left side; press the toes of the foot from the right to make their knee bend.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And perform these two ways as we have discussed.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then press the toes of the foot towards their knee in the third way, and you are at the cleft.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if it returns in one or two ways according to this manner, and if you find their foot even, it's good; and otherwise, then on them perform the operation again, that is which returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	May it be if you are forbidden to restore your knee as we have recommended, then have the patient lie on their knees on the ground, and stretch a blanket firmly on solid ground under them, place their thighs between his legs, and you already wrap a cloth around them so that they don't slip.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the assistant should hold their knees, and have another assistant extend their foot towards their hands or against the tendon that lies over their elbow; and have each assistant extend every hand against the extension of their own side, and the blanket is between the thighs of the patient holds him, so that his body is not pulled to the sides opposite his extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor evenly restores the displacement with his hands, and another assistant holds the healthy knee at the sides where the displacement returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the displacement returns and you are declared the health of the restoration, then pause the plastering and strengthen it firmly on those tendons, and join their foot to the knee.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful or guard against the nerves which are behind over the tibia, so that the tendon above it is not overly vigorous and injures him severely.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then let him rest for two or three days; and if the tendon has softened, stretch it again.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then release him on the third day or fourth; and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	May it be if he is forced to go before that space, no assurance is given that the displacement will not dissolve and corrupt him again; therefore, this does not accept treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if it happens to him that he develops an abscess, then be careful that you administer in the cure of him what we preceded with our narrative, in another location for treatment and ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter xxxiv.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	And let the one that is dislocated be equal to a slight extension of its joints; and what is not difficult, in advance it is easier.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	And if the dislocation is in some joints of his foot, then be careful that you have the patient stand on a level spot or table over their feet as though they were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand on the foot, place your hand over where it hurts at the joints, and apply pressure while pushing with your foot in such a way that it returns to its original position, and you see that it has already equalized and does not appear again at the same location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place your hand under the patient's chest with a board that supports all of their body, on which there are two points, and strengthen it with firmness for three days; then release this tension and have them rest from walking for several more days, until they are strengthened and recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capitol: Chapter XXXV
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the species of dislocation that occur in disease or in fracture, or at any time.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any cause of those occurs and you handle the treatment and restoration in that manner, it often results in death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And because of this, do not judge the treatment of the patient based on it alone, but rather by someone who is wise in the art, with long experience, merciful and compassionate; slow, not eager nor presumptuous; they should use medicines that are purgative only for such purposes, leaving judgment to divine decision, not to themselves, but to whom you expect salvation from loss, in alleviating sickness, and in which you show some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then it is necessary to quickly make the reduction while the cause is still at work, before a purging occurs with the cautery.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then, if the limb returns as we wish, then administer the regimen which purges with the cautery and treats the disease according to what suits the patient from dried ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation occurs with fracture and happens in the separate joints, then you force their articulation, and do it as we have said about simple diseases of that which was discussed about those locations.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And according to your skill, avoid the one who manipulates you in the paths of fear as my teaching precedes you; that is better for you from God, more permanent to your glory, and more health for your true self, which you will see at your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	So end the words of Al-Bucasis perfectly from which God be praised.
Amen.	Amen.
