Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Albucasim begins his words.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh children, I fulfill this book for you, which is the last part of medical science, by adding it to your knowledge, and through its explanations, and through your declarations, it appears to me that I should complete this treatise for you, which is a segment of my operation in my own person, which is surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	The operation on oneself is confined to our region and our time, which has left this science in jeopardy, and its traces have remained; and without it there would not be much knowledge of surgery from the ancient books, which correct these errors and exaggerations within those passages where the interpretations of the science are closed, and prolonging the force of one's body and art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I should revive this order of the treatise in this manner according to exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and for compatibility with the forms of the tools such as cauterys and other work instruments, a declaration addition is necessary, and for preparation which is required.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The reason why there is no great surgeon in one's own hand in this our time could be due to the length of medical art and the need for experience before being trained in the science of anatomy as taught by Gualia, where they knew about joints, their forms, connections and separations; had knowledge of bones, nerves and lymph nodes, their numbers, and how they were arranged; and about pulsating veins and quiet ones, and about the places of their emission.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And this is why Hippocrates said that in his name, there is truth, but mainly in the work of small things and notably in the art of one's own hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have already mentioned this in the introduction of this book; whoever does not understand what we have said about anatomy, should beware of falling into an error that could lead to the death of people, just as I have seen too many cases where some are formed in this science and abandon it for its own science and experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	I have seen a doctor who fell into a scrophulous abscess under the chin of a woman and had to incise some neck arteries because so much blood flowed that the woman died among his patients.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who was about to remove a stone from a man who had been suffering for some time with this condition. The stone was large and it was removed by him using a piece of the bladder; that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I already attempted to remove it, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the location under his hip, he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who was paid by the Duke of our land for surgery, and was treating a black slave who had sustained a fracture on his leg; taking advantage of his lack of knowledge, he removed the fracture from the wound, covering it with powders and stitches on a hard structure, not allowing air to enter the wound.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And after that, he removed it according to his wishes, then he bandaged and left it to dry for several days, and I instructed him to remove the stitches; this also happened when the leg and foot swelled with an abscess, leading to loss.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I attempted this for him, and prepared to remove the stitches, achieving calmness and alleviation of his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, the corruption was confirmed in the member, so I could not control it, and the corruption would continue to spread within the body of the patient.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who pierced an abscess of cancer and was inflamed for several days, causing great suffering to his lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	This is why the cancerous ulcer is pure of melancholic humor, so it doesn't spread throughout the body, but rather that there's a member suffering from which all is affected.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, children, it is necessary for you that the operation on oneself be divided into two ways: one where healing is associated with it, and in work where there are major dangers.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already mentioned this in all parts of this book where there is operation with error and fear; it is necessary for you to keep this in mind and be cautious about it, so that the pages do not accuse you or wrong you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your weapons for solicitude and protection of God, and your patients for happiness and strength.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best path by God's grace for the sake of salvation and possible success, beware of the terrible diseases with difficult treatment, keep your weapons away from what makes you afraid; because recovery in your faith and your name will not desert you: it is what remains for your glory, more even in this world and later on in your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gualia already said in some of his monikers:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Don't treat terrible diseases with bad doctors, for it is better to not have heard their names."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have completed this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The division of the book begins, and the first part of the first section starts.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first ordered chapter within the section on the feet, about the forms of tools and the instruments of cauterys, and what is necessary in an operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, concerning dryness and puncturing, as well as blisters, and plagues, and the extraction of arrows and resemblance to those; a complete chapter organized on the forms of the tools.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, concerning restoration and dislocation, as well as the treatment of twists and resemblance to those; an organized chapter within the feet, on the forms of the tools.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On the use of fire (for cautery) and acute medicine, and recollection of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	And here begins the discussion of all free topics.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I will tell you about the quality of those affected by this cautery and its aftereffects, and when it is forbidden to apply cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	So I say that the discussion on the effect of cautery and its aftereffects is long and tedious, subtle in knowledge, and secretly concealed; many wise men have spoken about it, and they disagree with each other, and I am afraid of going too far even by mentioning a little from their discourses.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And thus I say that cautery affects all components universally in terms of matter or sex matter, except for two components, which are the tail components.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the tail and in the dry condition there is matter that gets dried out; some argue that cautery benefits this area, while others argue against this, stating that it's not convenient for a patient with a quality or dryness condition, as fire has qualities and dryness. It would be inconvenient to use cautery on a tail and dry matter when you want the disease to be cured, since fire is associated with qualities and dryness, and it goes against treating a condition where the body needs moisture and warmth instead of drying out.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And he who says the opposite of this argues that with cautery, youth is achieved in all tail and dry diseases that come to humans. When you compare the human body and its moisture content to the condition of fire, you find that the human body gets rid of it.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say based on the discussion of this, something that I have experimented with for several times myself.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, I must not touch on this topic that has already been thoroughly discussed in the chapter about cautery for later use, and I have come to understand the variety of human body components and the disposition of diseases among their members, as well as the causes of those diseases, their accidents, and the duration of those conditions.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In the other components, there is no reason for fear, especially in diseases that are damp or wet; all doctors have agreed on these issues, and they are not divided about the use of cautery for youth in such conditions.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, children, about the secret of healing through fire and its goodness, concerning cautery with burning medicine; because fire is simple, its action affects only the member that is being cauterized and does not spread to other members in such a way as to cause minor harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	And the action of burning medicine extends to that in members where it's applied, and it strongly brings about a difficult healing process and a strong weakening.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	And fire, through its superiority and the goodness of its substance, does nothing other than excess. We have come to know this through experience and years of service in studying the art, based on the truth about causes; thus, I justify the length of my discussion because if it were not for the fact that there is no freedom to read such secrets about fire, as well as the quality of its operation within bodies and the elimination you perform which expels diseases through a philosophical demonstration which would clarify things in your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, children, that they disagree about the time when it is best to perform cautery and favor the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is convenient at all times; for the inconvenience due to time accidents are submerged in the youth of what comes from this, and especially if cautery is for pain or necessary pains, strong ones with pus, which do not suffer delay since they fear those which come with malice, which outweigh minor harm entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And let this not worry you, or children, those who only value common folk and simple doctors are saying that it is not advisable to apply cautery at all times for the healing of such diseases; they fear certain consequences.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the reason is not so much due to their concern about this, because cautery is merely a form of medicine that alters components and dries out the moisture which causes pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	However, unnecessary cautery over medicine due to its utility and the virtue of its operation and greatness of its master.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that the disease may return at some point in time depending on the nature of the body and the location of its disease, as well as its virtue, and what is prepared in the patient's body from accumulating superfluities within it, as well as what has been introduced to it through food or resemblance of those causes; so that if cautery was administered for a subtle disease with few superfluities and moisture, even if cautery is done on teeth due to pain and resemblance to that, it may not return the same pain in this patient, rather this can be done for smaller cases.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And the common term is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this is the professional language, not what I understand from it, for they believe that neither this nor any other cause leading to cautery is a cure.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the reason is opposite to this; and I understand that cautery is the last resort of medicine not simply when administering the methods of treatment in some illnesses, and those medicines do not provide relief. Instead, towards the end of the cause, one administers a cautery, leading to this outcome.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here onwards, it is understood that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to my understanding which is shared by many common people and doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they used to say that a cautery made of gold is better than one made of iron, and they did not say this in any other sense but due to the equality of gold and its limited nature compared to its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they used to say that the location of a cautery does not cause scarring, but this is not absolutely true, for I have already experienced this and found out that it only causes this in some types of skin, and a gold cautery is good and better than an iron one; however, when you make a gold cautery on fire, you do not specify this, as the heat depends on the quantity you want for the hardness of the gold, and to receive fumes; and if you place the flame over it, the gold melts due to the heat. And in case of heat, several sheets are produced so that the craftsman can work according to the occupation of that one.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this reason, when making a cautery from iron, you should do it more lightly and more precisely towards the accuracy of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already organized this chapter on cautery according to sections, and I have arranged those of the section inside the feet for you to ask what you want from them.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Regarding the cautery for head pain caused by coldness and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first section.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery brings moisture and coldness to the unfortunate event of which there are two causes, they are the cause of swelling and inflammation, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the ears and behind the ears, as well as sleeping, tooth pain, and the stomach area, and universally for all illnesses that come from coldness, such as paralysis, spondylitis, and stroke, and similar in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The method of this cautery is as follows, first command the patient to be treated with a laxative medicine on the head for three or four nights, according to what suits the patient and their age and their custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command the patient to clean their head with a razor, and then proceed to shave them between their hands on a fallen bench, making them lie down on their feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And place your palm's edge near the nose's tip between their ears.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, when your designated area is reached, mark that spot with a trial, and then ignite the olive cautery of which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And place that over the marked spot on trial, in such a way that it descends, while your hand is gradually forced inward, and you rotate that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And lift your hand slightly and observe the area, and if you see that any quantity of the head is already exposed to the air, like the quantity of fat, then lift your hand. And if your hand does not return to that iron, in another one, if it is cooled down, so that what I have told you can be seen from the air.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the area, let that rest for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And place it on the scorched spot in the air and let it rest until the skin burned by fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the area with turpentine ointment until it heals.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they used to say that when the wound opens up, so much better the scar gets, for it is better and more rejuvenating.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they used to say that the canal is cauterized inside the mouth, and that the cautery remains until a part of the characteristic of the bone becomes attached.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then let this part stick to the bone like this, and then let it heal.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And they used to say that when the cautery reaches the bottom, it strengthens the bone until it falls into the bone, and this is the form of a small aphecati:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And estimate from that place the fumes of the head expire.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And let the wound be open for a long time, and then be cured until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	May be that these two types of cautery are not exactly as you see them in all, but only in some people according to their fear; let this rest, for what is best for your health, when it happens; so the head is cleansed by means of continuous application of salve like we have testified on other parts, and especially when the head of the patient has a hot nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is better and more for your sake, so I advise you to use that one with health.
Capitol segon.	The second section.
Del cauteri del cap.	Regarding head cautery.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When throughout the entire head chronic and prolonged pain occurs, which is long-lasting in the patient's body, using headrests, pillows, cap cushions, plasters, hats, collars, caps, and other similar items, especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that relieves without exacerbating its symptoms; then consider that if the head of the patient has robust creation in its nature; it does not endure much heat or takes a large amount of fire, then this head is cauterized by another cautery; leave him only one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then apply a cautery on that above his forehead in the region where the vein splits.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Incise the vein and expose the amount which we have measured; apply a cautery on that behind the head in the place where it is called the "vessel," - and that is the place where suction is applied, -
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And hold your hand in this way, do not expose the mouth, for when done like this, the patient experiences a great different kind of pain compared to all other head cautery pains.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I advise to perform this cautery in its place, for it is said that this type of cautery which involves burning the ears and the back of the head as well as the occipital region is more subtle than when the middle part of the head is burnt; this is how it should be done.
Capitol ters.	Head high.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Regarding the non-traditional application of cautery for migraines.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When the pain is localized in the head, or when it's confined within the skull, medicines to relieve the pain should be applied to the head. Then follow another treatment method, which I have mentioned earlier for various illnesses; and if all else fails, then using cautery becomes two-fold: either with acute burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	The medicine for burning cautery involves taking a small amount of sulfur, heating it until it starts to smoke, and then using the hot ends of two heated pieces of copper as the cautery tool.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then pierce the area of pain in the temple with a small sharp knife, just before doing so make sure to locate the vein and hide it inside.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And apply strength to it until the descent is stopped by constraint, and then let it rest in that area for three hours; and cleanse and wash with sulfur, letting the wound heal for two or three days, and place a compress dipped in oil over the affected part, allowing it to cool.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you observe, do this using some burning medicines that I have written about in my treatise on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	The cautery using iron follows this manner: heat it until you can create this form for the cautery:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	It is called the key of the lock, where the head of it is thus shaped like a clove, and in the middle part of it there is a small protuberance.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place your hand on the area of pain, hold - to prevent the heat from damaging the skin which is exposed - and move the small iron piece back and forth gradually at a speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount that gets heated due to the specificity of the vein like most parts do, raise your hand so that the artery does not get heated as well, in order to prevent bleeding.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak the compress in salt water and place it on the affected area, let it stay for three days; and after that, apply the oil-soaked compress over butter, then treat with ointment until it heals.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And when you see that it's necessary, apply the cautery at the tip of the knife following the usual procedure. Be careful not to cut into an artery in this non-traditional migraine treatment.
Capitol quart.	Head quarter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Regarding the application of cautery for traditional migraines.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat migraines as we have described for previous treatments and as detailed in the divisions of illnesses, if those methods do not provide sufficient relief, due to issues with the illness itself, then consider this: heat the knife cautery until it glows white hot, meaning place your hand over the area of pain along a line that's most affected by what we've discussed earlier, or right there; pause for a moment and apply strength there before piercing the skin and entering into the skull.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is essential that you guard against the continuous jaw movement, which can harm your ability to chew, and ensure that the tongue does not get burned along with the nerves that control it, as well as prevent muscle spasms.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it's concerning the risk of bleeding from an artery which gets cut during the procedure, there is fear in this operation, especially for those who don't know what they are doing and lack experience; leave the operation as started.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will remind you of the order for dealing with bleeding incidents due to vessel rupture according to this method in this article.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this method of cautery does not provide enough relief for the illness and finds the patient tolerable, apply the cautery in the middle of the head as we have counted, and treat the wound until it heals.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see fit, administer the cautery that we have described for the treatment of arterial constriction on the part of iron, using two knives for the cautery. This method is better and more effective compared to others.
Capitol .v.	Head .vi.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Regarding the application of cautery for earaches.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there's pain in the ear due to infection and it is treated with antiseptics and another treatment which I've mentioned in the division, if the pain isn't alleviated, then heat up the cautery; this one is called the 'puncta' type, having this form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And if it is necessary to make points near the kidney, then guide them around the entire area of the ear as if rolling a wheel, or in the circuit of any times where pain occurs.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Continue with the use of the ear's tip cautery little by little until you find where it hurts and try to test.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery hits all points in the ear, and you find that way, then properly treat the areas inside where they heal.
Capitol .vi.	End of part I.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Regarding the cautery treatment.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Turtura that is cured and treated with cautery is merely of the species which come through phlegm, as we have said in our sections on illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cautery for the species that cause it due to drying out or muscle spasms of nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that species of turtura using jerry-cabbage soup and headache remedies, and do not confirm your treatment, then when you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first being the tip of the ear, the second a small spot on their temple, and the third is the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause your cautery at the opposite side of the afflicted part, which healing does not manifest in the healthy portion.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cautery is to apply it at the tip on the right side of the ear somewhat above the root of the head, and on their temple elsewhere, whose length should be according to the length of that spot. Then place your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the mass of the disease is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is how it should be done with the cautery, which is a specialty of surgeons, and its form is in front of the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it's rather subtle that you should do this with a little bit of caution; and when dealing with excess fatness for a little while.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area where it is ahead in the process until it heals.
Capitol .vii.	End of part VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Regarding the treatment with cautery for old apoplexy (stroke).
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we've said but do not confirm your treatment, if the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize that area with four cauteries: over all their head's roots; and with the cautery at the midpoint of their forehead, as we've said; and apply the cautery on the tongue.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of applying the cautery is done according to what was discussed above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And when it has been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and more towards the back; and then treat that which progresses.
Capitol .viii.	End of part VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Regarding the treatment with cautery for forgetfulness caused by phlegm.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	And if given to the patient at mealtime large jerry beans and pills that help digestion.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then shave the entire head of the patient and place a center-applied plaster as described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And leave it for several weeks, which is the method of applying cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to that method order which I have already described.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if they are already cured well; otherwise, then do this for the patient three times on the last part of their head, which should descend from the more prominent part of the head to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause between each cautery for as long as the process dictates, and then treat the cautery according to what has been done.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you are added to and the patient tolerates it, then apply cautery in the middle part; and if your addition is greater, then apply the cautery over both roots.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And treat that area until it heals; and let the olive oil be like the one described beforehand in form.
Capitol .ix.	End of part IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Regarding treatment with cautery and general alleviation of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	And when you are in the process of digestion for the head with jerry beans and what we have said; then shave the patient's head, and then apply cautery in the middle of their head, and apply the cautery over all their roots, and apply the cautery on the last part of their body, and do three applications of cautery over their neck spines.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary for the illness of body alleviation in many patients and the patient tolerates it, and the illness is strong, then apply cautery with four applications on both neck spines, afterwards applying the cautery until the disease matter of them is burned out, and lift your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then treat that area until it heals, and this should be olive oil cautery.
Capitol .x.	End of part X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Regarding treatment with cautery for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It should not be treated with cautery if the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And when you digest the patient's brain at mealtime with jerry beans and the other treatment which we have described in the section where the patient is large and tolerates medicine rejection, then proceed.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it's a child who doesn't tolerate the medicines, then administer headache remedies and chewers for digestion improvement, before that for several days, to improve food assimilation.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the patient's head, and apply a cautery in the middle of the head in its correct location according to the previous method, and use another cautery on the back of the head, and on every haircorn of their head, he applies a cautery.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerates well, then apply the cauteries I mentioned, while having paralysis-inducing and calming effects on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And use an olive oil cautery as previously described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is a child, then apply a subtle cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the treatment of melancholy with cauteries.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted wetness and weak, fatty tissue, then apply the cauteries we have mentioned in the region where paralysis occurs.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excess declining to melancholy, and the patient's body is wet, then give them to drink what purifies the brain as described in the previous section of this division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the head of the patient, and make a reasonable loop from it around the circle, and place that loop in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And if the patient is sixty years old, and has been treated everywhere.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply an ointment; it's as good as an old sheep's wool remedy.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm that over the fire for a mild heat measurement, which it says to endure when increased in him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then place that at the middle of the head on the circle, and let it sit until it cools.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this to the patient once a week for an entire week, or within his other regimen of taking medicine until he is healed; or if you want, apply a cautery on it and make small punctures according to what pleases him, otherwise have your hand with a heated cautery in order like that: this is the type of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And place that buttered slice on it, either hot or greasy from fat.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the treatment of descending water with cauteries.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you are informed about the beginning of water in the lungs based on the symptoms I described in this division, then start and give the patient to drink what purifies his head, and protect him from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that sugar dissolve in water until it is sweetened for a few days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then instruct the patient to raise their head, and apply a cautery on it using a cautery in the middle of the head; and apply another two cauteries on both temples if this is the beginning of water accumulation in both lungs, or one if it's the beginning of water in just one lung.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Let the cautery touch all veins and arteries that are left from the series; and place those cauteries in that length around the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And watch out for bleeding when it's being treated with cautery; and if you see the patient's bleeding, stop and give them some medicine that is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will come with knowledge about the extraction of arteries and removal of those, as well as caution against bleeding.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some days are when it's treated on the neck between the two bones with two heated cauteries placed one after another.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the treatment of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the lungs are old and originate through veins and arteries located on the outward face of the head, when it's confirmed that excess phlegm is present, then apply a cautery using the one we've mentioned in the chapter about the beginning of water accumulation affecting the lungs. Apply a cautery at the middle of the head and two cauteries at each temple area. Also apply two cauteries on each neck bone area around the temples.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you experience weakness, then apply a cautery over the entire length of the ribcage at the end of the eyebrow with small cauteries.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the treatment of nasal odor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you are treating the patient with what we have prescribed in this division and if your treatment isn't improving, then prepare and give them to drink three cups of broth for three nights; and then shave the head of the patient, and apply an olive oil cautery on it.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then apply a cautery using thorn apple on each eyebrow area, with small cauteries left above the eyebrows.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And watch out not to burn that artery when doing this.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the method of using the thorn apple cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the treatment of lung eyelid softening with cauteries.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the lung eyelid becomes softened due to illness or wetness, then apply a cautery on that eyelid with this moon-like cautery. Here is how you should do it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you do this treatment, apply the cautery over both eyebrows slightly with two smaller cauteries covering the entire area, and they should extend to the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the overhang.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press your hand too much on the cautery, but rather according to how much the fleshy part of the eyelid gets heated.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On the cautery of the eyelid when the skin turns into the parts inside and at the palm of the hand.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the skin of the hand turns into the parts inside so that I prick the hand, there are two ways to do a cautery, whether it is by fire or with burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If it's a cautery with fire, instruct the patient in front of this so that they shave their skin like those who are circumcised, until they are extended and equalized; and if you prick that part, then at its origin, then strengthen the hands of your patients so that they do not become infected as long as the skin is being made.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	So when they are extended and equalized, then rest the head of the patient in your place, and move towards the eyelid of their hands, with a mark where it resembles the shape of a hawthorn leaf, and make the starting point of the mark near the skin.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And move towards a little cut in the pus of a hen or in the pustule on the hand.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And move to apply the cautery with which this is its form.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And move to cauterize over the figure that was marked, little by little in spots seen, while burning the surface of the cord which is like a hawthorn leaf, entirely seemingly so.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And a sign of the health of your work is that you see the eyelid of the hand already contracted and the skin of it elevated above the prick on the hand.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And lift your hand and leave that for three days, then move to place on it a small cut in the middle while the scab is raised.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And move to treat that with ointment until it heals.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	And if there is some cause that returns towards their origin and the eyelid becomes softened, then do another time the cautery on that whole area as you did at first.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	And if the skin remains in the eyelid, then cauterize that until it rises to its natural place and becomes equal, so that the skin does not hurt the hand.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And the cautery with burning medicine is like this: command the patient to shave their skin until they are extended and equalized, then move to make the shape of a hawthorn leaf out of a piece of cloth.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take known soap and live ash with it. 1. Take this mixture, then mix those ashes well with water, do it quickly so that it doesn't cool down; spread this mixture over the cloth which is made like a hawthorn leaf shape, place that on one hand or both; apply to each hand a small cut in the pus of a hen, and the head of the patient shall be in your place.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place that over the medicine and press it slightly but don't let it burn; within which the patient feels the bite of the medicine, which bite is like being bitten by fire in them.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when the medicine's bite continues, then shave off this medicine and apply it to your designated place; once the bite stops, then reapply the medicine with water; then consider whether the eyelid has been lifted as it would be after washing away from the scab by fire or incision, which happens now; if it does not return again over that area of the medicine on the spot where it did not take hold and does not deteriorate, then consider your operation completed and ensure the hand is contracted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And move to place on it a small cut in the middle until the scab of the adjustment is eradicated, then treat that with definitive oil or another until it heals.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And this is necessary for you, you must guard your operation with diligence so that medicine doesn't fall off the hand, and if the eyelid becomes softened after a few days and some cause of skin pricks on the hand, then apply your medicine to that area from which the eyelid is softened, precisely like you did at first, and move around it until it heals.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the shape of a hawthorn leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the hands of men are diverse according to their size and smallness, so according to this is your contraction done.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And let there be no concealment of the path to rectitude towards that which is studied in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cautery of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the hand.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat fistula with what we have said in the divisions of male diseases and do not give your treatment, then this is how you should cauterize that: command the patient to place their head in your place, and have someone's head between your hands as if it were their own without being hurt or disturbed by their head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And move towards making a small cut in the pus of a hen or in the pustule on the hand.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And using the cautery tool of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	Which is curved, like the shape of a reed or a bird's quill, from one end where the cautery is applied.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see, it goes penetrating into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want to remove it, do so as if trying to pull it out.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But whoever is curved is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And press the fistula if it has opened, then treat and dry that area of the patient.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it hasn't opened, then open it and remove the pus from him.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And press with the hot cautery that is well lit; hold it as close to your hand as possible but slightly beyond the nostril opening, so that your hand does not move or disturb the patient. Then pause the cautery on the base of the nose and let the pus come out and then clean that area.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And indeed, if during the beginning of your cautery it enters the mouth, that is good; otherwise, then apply the cautery once or twice, as required; and leave him thus for three days. Then press onto that place with a bandage and in its vicinity you should apply dry antiseptic, so he may heal.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if more than ten days have passed and he is not healed, then press onto him with the corrosive acid medicine when the hole has been revealed, and scrape as necessary in accordance with his head doctor.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another way of using the cautery on a fistula which some earlier doctors said: place yourself at the site of the fistula and perform it there, then press onto that fissure with a thin metal rod that has the shape of this: And place in that spot an amount the size of one's fingernail of melted lead; hold your hand in good position so that you do not disturb the patient as long as the molten lead does not reach his nose; and then when pressing onto the patient's nose with a cloth or water, let the lead cover the site of the fistula and heal it through marvelous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we've said about the cautery and treatment, that's good; otherwise, then it's necessary to administer nostril surgery and reduce the fistula to inside the nose according to where it naturally resides.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Regarding cautery treatment for a cut on the foot.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Wounds often occur in tears, especially in children's labia.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Then in treating those tears as we've discussed with you regarding sections and avoiding excess treatment, then use this small surgical knife according to this form that I describe:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And make the size of the incision according to the thinness of the blade.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	And press that initial cut into those tears so that the cautery reaches inside the opening of the tears.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And continue treating it with ointment until it heals.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Regarding cautery treatment for a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When there is an abscess in the uvula or on the palate or in the teeth, and if it bursts, heals, ages, and the vein is disrupted, causing a fistula, then you treat that without excessively healing. Instead, use the cautery according to the quantity received inside the fistula, place that ignited into the hole of the fistula, keep your hand so that the flame reaches the opening of it, and do this once or twice at the end; then continue treating it as we've discussed about treatment until it heals.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And indeed if the healing has been removed and it's healed, that is good; otherwise, then it's necessary to discover the location and clean out the rotten tissue according to what comes in his head doctor.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Regarding tooth cautery and gum soothing.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and teeth are swollen, and you treat those with medicines but don't consult further, then place the patient's head in its usual position, and press the cautery using this form which will come close to doing so. And when you hold the thumb on the tooth and quickly introduce the lit cautery into that spot, keep your hand a little inside as long as the heat of the fire reaches the base of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then remove your hand, and press the cautery several times as you wish according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And let the patient rinse his mouth with salt water and keep that in it for an hour, then wash out that area, so that the swollen tooth is reduced and the soft gum is hardened and the moisture is dried.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Regarding tooth cautery for toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is due to coldness, or if there's pus or worms involved, or you don't treat it with medicine, then perform cautery on that in two ways: either by applying the cautery to the surface of cattle, or by using fire for cautery.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery on the surface involves taking cow dung and boiling it in iron. Then take that into your hand and wrap it around the tip of the instrument, then immerse that into hot dung, and place it over the painful tooth quickly while it's cooled down.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then, apply some heat in those places so that the power of fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you see, immerse wool or cotton in the substance above it, place that over the painful tooth, and place the burning iron over it until the heat reaches to the tip of the tooth's root.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, when using the iron or fire for cauterization with heat, you must wait until there is a crack in the metal or iron itself, and should it cause any injury to the patient's body, the heat of the fire must not reach into their mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then heat the cautery to its desired shape, place it over the tooth and hold your hand beneath the heat so that it is cooled; do this several times until the pain increases or in the next day or the following day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And you should let the patient's mouth fill with good substance due to that heat and keep it for one hour, then have them rinse; this is how the cautery is used.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And apply the cautery wherever you see fit as long as it's within your capability.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is how an application should be made with the tube:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the treatment of hernia through cautery.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernias are due to phlegm and impure fluids that do not respond to medicine, and you observe a slight digestion in those cases, then heat the cautery to its desired shape following this method. It should have two straight ends so that the smoke from one end causes the cautery to burn towards the other end, place the lit part of the cautery over the abscess once, and if necessary repeat with another application until it reaches the root of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and let it sit for three days, placing a damp cloth on it in a container until what has burned by the fire becomes swollen.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And after that, treat with ointment and bandages until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the tube or iron for this treatment would be as follows:
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the treatment of ulcerous wounds and constriction of bile.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When moisture enters the pulmonary channel, especially when it is due to cold body constitution, you should have the patient begin treatment with laxative medicines and heat. Then, apply cautery to where the gallbladder is located in the area of swelling.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to let the cautery reach the gallbladder, nor burn until it is too late for your patient, rather just a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And apply the cautery with another instrument to the joint of the throat at the lower end of the spine.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And treat your patient's elbow in the same manner as before.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And after that, treat it with what was mentioned until it heals.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the treatment of lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are due to moisture, the patient's lung does not have fever or rash, it is an old cough, then apply cautery with two instruments on the sternum in the areas of swelling on the neck and chest; and with another instrument in the middle of the chest between the breasts; and treat elbow as previously mentioned.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let your treatment consist of pricking with the cauterizing instrument that is called a point; its form should be known from the section on piercing ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points in these areas; and treat it with what was mentioned previously until it heals.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And the cautery has three steps for this treatment: you can do three cauterizations in this manner with each application.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the treatment of a condition located at the head, specifically related to the pineal gland or third eye.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating moisture and does not return in time you should place its dislocation until your patient returns to their usual self, and by making a slight movement it also gets back into position as we have demonstrated. Then proceed as previously mentioned first reduce the dislocation, then let the patient lie on their head or on their side; next raise the spine which is located in the part of the skull opposite the tips of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated towards that inward direction.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat two points with the cautery; this is how it should be:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then heat the spine so that it penetrates into the other side; and here, the figure of cautery treatment will be as follows with four cauterizations.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And make them subtle according to the amount of heat needed; this is how it should be:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some applications are adjusted according to this count, and for these cauteries they are numbered VIII.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place it on the salted iron of the cautery, and have your patient lie down comfortably, ensuring that their body is not strained for any time until they are relieved.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is above and towards the inside and it happens like this, then apply a cautery on the muscle with a needle-shaped or moxa points cauterization, which confirms the joint and increases dryness and heals the patient.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the use of cautery for the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is an inflammation and moisture in the stomach that exceeds its normal capacity and increases in quantity for the patient, and if you continue with these methods of treatment without considering it, then you will find that the patient is over their diaphragm, extending their limbs and belongings, and apply a cautery three times: first leave the foot for the amount of one digit's width on a needle-shaped cauterization, and at two cauterizations leave from both sides of the cauterization, forming a triangular figure; and extend those that are not properly fitting so they will not leak.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cauterization is equivalent to the thickness of two thirds of the diameter of the chain's groove.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if you follow this shape for the form of the cauterization, and if you wish, cauterize with a large cauterizer in the middle of the stomach according to this shape; this is a cauterization according to the circular form like this:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And when the stomach is cauterized at the point that is frightened by this cauterization: and you touch the stomach with the point according to the quantity you want on the attempt, then apply a cauterization at that point; and then treat it with treatment until it heals.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the use of cautery for the rectum.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the rectum due to coldness or moisture or excessive strong wind that exceeds its normal capacity causing overflow, and if the patient heals with what we have said without considering it, then you will find that the patient is lying on their back, touching the rectum with three cauterizations according to this shape, spreading this half-width around the rectum below the iliac crests, and observe when they are in the supine position.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cauterization be according to the thickness of a finger, and make the cauterizations according to the length of the body right.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And don't hesitate with your hand on the cauterizations.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of water that sticks is equal to the thickness of the diameter of the chain's groove, and it isn't properly adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if not standing, then they should lie down, which has already extended their belongings, and lift their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cauterization:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauterizations with a surgical knife, when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And remember not to overdo the cauterization process, and ensure that the groove of the entire chain adheres so that it adheres to all parts of the body, reaching into the intestines, where the chain is delicate. Know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On perforating an abscess in the rectum with a cauterization.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is inflammation or an abscess in the rectum and you want to know if that abscess is inside the rectal flesh or within its covering, then if it's inside the rectal flesh, the patient experiences increasing weight and pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it's within the rectal covering, then the pain is intense and sometimes that has already exhausted the doctors in treating him.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	And let the patient lie against their chest; then touch the location of the abscess with your hand; and heat the cauterization which resembles a rod, whose shape was described in the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize at that point and within the cauterization where the entire chain is charred, where it reaches up to the appendix, where it heals.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And treat that through treatment of other abscesses until it heals.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this form of cauterization except for the one that extends from what you study in the art of medicine, and from which most patient discomforts are known; but there are some occurrences where you may apply heat on this operation, but otherwise follow mine, as it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the use of cauterization for burns.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient cauterizations for burns using the aristocratic rods should be made according to this method, and you should take a long, dry rod that is found from the aristocratic rods, which has the length of a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse that in oil and set it on fire, and apply a cauterization with that rod at the location between the continuation of the sternal notch and the neck; and make two small cauterizations at this point, one slightly descending to the side where there is beard, and at another cauterization at the point where it descends between the fifth rib and the sternum, descending a little towards the back; and make another cauterization in the middle of the chest; and apply another cauterization on the stomach, and three cauterizations from the back parts; and make one cauterization at that location which is between the two shoulders, and make two cauterizations from both sides of the chest, leaving a cauterization between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not think that you are burning with your hand on the cautery, but rather in the midst of suffering's manifestation it is at work.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And it was said by some old men that among the men who use iron cautery resembling rays and fire, they insert that into a location between the backbones, where it reaches from there to there through the wound, as we have mentioned in the case of the wound on the leg.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this puncture with cautery there is no fear of death, yet it happens that you die suddenly in the place of the fistula where healing does not occur.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cautery of the gums.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat gum disease as we have said about treatment in the division and do not apply your treatment, then if you need to use cautery on them, there are three ways to do it, all of which involve lines. The first method is to make three or four lines along the length of the gums according to the figure of the gum cauteries, which I have already shown.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery, the width is about one finger or slightly less, and the method of the cautery is the same method that we have described in the cautery for the leg equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not move your hand on the cautery; and let the patient lie on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way to cautery, namely that you light the cautery with two streams of fire, a technique we have described in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and raise the patient's body so they can extend their left leg without pain.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And make your elevation such that you raise the body according to the length of the person, so that cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And move both streams inward, ignite the fire, in that place where those penetrate the body from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And remove the cautery; and thus you perform four cauteries.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see fit, use three streams of fire for cautery.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you treat the aftermath of the cautery when it has not been able to heal after too many days; for this is as important as the previous causes in treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On cautery of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Apply cautery not in cats but properly in dropsy.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat dropsy with the methods of treatment that we have described in the division and do not apply your treatment, then you should use four cauteries around the umbilicus and one on the stomach, and another on the leg, and another on the gums, and two cauteries between the ribs of each side, and a cautery on the right side of the thigh, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the length of the body.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then soften the cautery until it can heal for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And don't remove the patient from treatment near the cautery as this can cause two misunderstandings, and it should be accompanied by supportive healing measures.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery where it is applied to the abdomen should be a cross, according to its previous form, and when it is applied to the leg it should be in the shape of an olive as it was before.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On cautery of the limbs and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the limbs swell with excess water and are filled with salty fluid, it is that you apply cautery to the limbs on top of the leg up until the area between the wrist and the elbow, and hold your hand above the cautery and do not twist it; and then raise your hand, and do not turn it completely as the salty water drains.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	This is the shape of the cautery: and then make two cauteries on each thigh, and for every item, make a cautery at the end of the blade.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And make the cauteries according to the length of the thigh: lay one end on your knee and the other towards the middle of the thigh; and for each thigh, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the opened wound open for a long time for its own sake that some water may drain from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then treat those causes as we have described them.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On cautery of the abdominal region.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdominal region is affected by friction and moisture causing swelling, it disturbs digestion and retention, which are in the stomach and intestines. It is treated with the methods of treatment and not applied, and sometimes when the patient feels a disturbance due to an excess of water, then you should apply cautery on large areas over their stomach according to what was previously described for stomach cautery, around the belly button circle and four small cauteries in the subtle umbilical area, with a cross-shaped subtle cautery; and another one over the navel, or with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if there are excessive wetness and the patient tolerates it, then apply cautery on the navel and over the intestines, and strengthen your adjustments with two cauteries on the stomach and near the groin area, which is a complete cure for young people where you will not be mistaken.
Capitol .xxxiv.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Concerning the cautery treatment for old boils.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they occur naturally causing old boils or ones filled with thick humors or corrupted moisture, and they are treated as we have said in the division and do not provide your cure, then apply a cautery to three spots over the pus you leave behind on either side of the two small and triangular points, and perform the cautery above the belly button for another two times.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that the stomach of the patient needs warming and their food is not digested, and their face has become flushed, then apply a large cautery on the stomach according to what precedes; and do one cautery on the back of the neck, and another on the chest area with the handle of the cautery, leave the cautery open for some time and let it heal naturally until they are cured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Section 35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Concerning the cautery treatment for abscesses near the anus.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove the anal tissue, then use the assembled cautery that resembles rays.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Place the ignited cautery inside the anal abscess, and continue applying your hand until the heat of the cautery reaches the outlet of the vein through which the infection travels.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Do this once or twice; if abscesses are too many, then apply the cautery to each one as we have recounted earlier, and after that, treat those with the ointment you provide until they heal.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you apply a large cautery on the buttocks, it heals faster in youth.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Section 36.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Concerning the cautery treatment for fistulas that occur naturally in various parts of the patient.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	If nature does not comply with the procedure we have recommended in its place, and the patient is scared by this, they will be cured with cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	So when any patient has a natural fistula that is old and filled with healthy tissue or corrupted moisture, then the pus you need to let out should be drained with care using a subtle method. Therefore, determine the depth of the fistula from the mentioned method beforehand.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Place the cautery that resembles rays and ignite it.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then place the ignited cautery in this fistula, according to the depth of the method you've determined.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Continue applying the cautery until those rotten bodies are burned out, whether it's once, twice, or three times, according to your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful not to burn the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes towards the bladder's body or towards the intestine, then avoid all those areas; and do this only when the fistula is in a meaty location and you think it doesn't penetrate deeply.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And treat the area until they heal.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed off, and all the materials have been removed from him/her, but still remains for a long time, then know that it has been completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not completely removed from their body, then know that it is penetrating or within their organs, or falls due to those causes for which memory will come back in their location.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Section 37.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Concerning the cautery treatment of ulcers.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in ulcers there is pain due to cold or due to thick wind, and the thigh of the patient becomes hardened, then you should drain that ulcer with cautery on each ulcer and apply a cautery near the handle which recalls memory for the treatment.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And strengthen lightly with cautery at the second small one, so that three linear cauteries will come, and thus they heal faster in youth.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Section 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Concerning the cautery treatment of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When you encounter a bladder that is weakened and softened by cold and moisture to the extent that the patient does not retain urine, then apply cautery in the area where there's pus left behind on the bladder, starting from the skin of the buttocks. Apply one cautery on the right side, and another on the left side of the patient.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery according to the amount of pus; apply a cautery on that in the lowest part of both sides, or do two if it's necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And use handle-like cauteries as instructed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Section 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Concerning the cautery treatment of the womb.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is cold and moisture in the womb, and thus pregnancy is prohibited, and the menstrual periods of the patient are corrupted, and their induction is delayed, and abdominal pain occurs, then you should know that this area should be treated with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said for bladder cautery; and apply one or two cauteries in the area where there's pus left behind on both sides, and use handle-like cauteries.
Capitol .xl.	Section 40.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Concerning the cautery treatment for the dislocation of the hip joint.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture accumulates in the area of the hip joint and causes disturbances in its location, and a sign is that the thigh extends over the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	The location of the dislocation is found in the patient's thigh bone.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then you heat the patient's leg at the junction of the water pathway with a point-like cautery, as when testing in the circuit around this point, and because you will try it in the circuit itself just like that, and so that the joint falls to the middle location of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And regarding the cautery mentioned earlier, its form is applied in the process of cauterizing the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not at your disposal, then cauterize it with three other large olive wood cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And apply the cautery according to the intensity of the pain in the entire chain; then treat that part where it has been healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs at the junction of water, and it is caused by friction and moisture, healing the leg with what we have said is sufficient, without adding anything else. If there are large humors, then heat the leg with pillules made or artificial ones; then cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of cauterization in this case follows two methods: one with burning medicines, or cauterization with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	There are two known methods, of which one involves cauterizing the area at the junction of the width with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and make those well deep.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	The space between each cautery is the size of the said intensity, and whether it's an olive or large cautery.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	May some flames heat the middle spot on the head of the spinal cord where there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize with the circle as described in the treatment of dislocation of the water canal, that being a circle which encompasses and burns the pain throughout the entire chain.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cauterization for a wet heat when pain adheres to the water and does not extend within the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	And if it extends within the thigh, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the thigh at the place where you will turn the leg which causes pain; and with one cautery over the cleft for four fingers slightly to the part above.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if it's a knife-like cautery, then the depth of the cautery follows the intensity of the pain in the chain.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the leg turns such that the pain is spread between the areas close to the knees, then cauterize there where you turn it with a cautery through three points or four or more if needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the leg turns such that pain is left in the knee region of the thigh, then cauterize there with a knife-like cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And when performing any cauterization, be careful not to end the cautery point where it burns nerves or major vessels, because thus you may injure or constrict the leg.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen several of those who will cauterize over the cleft and finally in the cauterization process, with the fire-filled bed that allows the tumor to achieve the foot, and burns through thoroughly destroying all of the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And soon an intense abdominal solution occurs, and thus death follows.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And several wise people say about the cauterization of water, this is how it should be done: make a circular shape like a piece of iron where its circumference is as big as one palm; and make its opening according to the thickness of a finger bone or perhaps slightly more.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle place another iron; and the spaces between them are the size of a small coin or slightly more; make those circles open in two parts, and the length of these nails is one coin or two coins; and on these make marks with iron to fit inside the circles; this is how it looks:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	And place it in the fire until it heats up and emits sparks, then place it on the junction of water, having the leg against the side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And thus cauterize that with three round cauteries in one area.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then let that heal for three days; and cover it with ointment, letting the opened wound heal for too many days; and treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis: oh children, of this kind of cauterization we have used some for the fear of examining it, and because of that, we have found those who examine it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	Of those who undergo large cauteries to you, find the place for you.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Cauterize with medicines that stick, you should make two circles each with a perforated arm where the smell of iron's door comes out; let the length of the walls be as long as two nuts or so in their naturalness.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the spaces between each are the size of the said intensity; make them below and above, so that they contain themselves among each other according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then press on the part of the bladder where the patient is lying, and place your hand on the part of the bladder; and then take some urine and heat it between two circles, and the quality of that should be to a small fire little by little, and keep that for an hour's quantity, and let the patient endure the biting sensation and the adjustment - as if the biting sensation was like from a fire - until the biting sensation ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand to the instrument and remove all the heated water from the bladder with two-fold water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then let that (the treatment) last for three days and press on that lump until the color of the adjustment improves, and let that continue for some more days, and speed up their recovery; this is the final stage in young age.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointment until it's healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is spread within the thigh or chest, have them lie in the position containing water as it's done in the bladder operation.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is how to do urine cautery, and I have written about that in the treatise on correcting medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for the ash from both lime and charcoal is half of each, mix these and pause in a new wave where the part you leave should be pierced by a small rod according to the quantity that fits into their fire.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And then pause by pouring another wave over it, pour live alkali and charcoal into the doubled water which captures those to the size of your finger, and once you understand them under your hand for good compression, let the heat that emerges from the sharp water in the left part of what you've left into the overturned wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, pour it over live charcoal and new alkali, where this later will have a strong acuity, which is administered in surgical operations of medicine and in cautery of other limbs, where this operation uses fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some of the medicines for which are used to be cauterized broadly, such as thyme and honey, wax in water that have been boiled together.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gaulia recounts a procedure and treatment of an ancient operation and treatment for bladder pain and sciatic vein pain, and it is so beautiful that one can see its benefits, and says that no other treatment is needed, and that it is healed in this manner as was recommended, and it strengthens the intestines already within that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be near a vertigo cure, and if there is no vertigo cure, take fresh fig leaves; then mix this with just a little of oil and place it on the water where the pain is, or on the thigh, or chest, and tie it.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it stay for a quantity of three hours or until the patient feels relief from adjustment.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put this in a bath and when the body feels reddened, put this on fire, where the pain ceases and they are healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that one should not use cautery with these medicines but rather facilitate the body's evacuation.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Mays Escorches states that when there is a wound from a goat and the veins are constricted, it quickens their movement; and if you use cautery for them in this way: take wool and heat it with ancient oil, and place it between the elbows and the armpit.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take a dried goat wound and apply heat from fire inside which charcoal is made; and then place the patient on wool until it expands.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And repeat this process, and do not stop doing this until the tingling sensation from the biting reaches into the water and rests the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This method of cautery is called cow's tail cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the treatment for pain in two [limbs or areas].
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some pains are in two places due to various causes such as impact or striking, or overexertion of evacuation, and by causes similar to those, through the infusion of wet material causing pain.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery is not for all cases but only in this singular type which is done through the effusion of abrasive material.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	So understand, facilitate the patient's evacuation with pill forms that resemble them, which are made over two areas where there is pain for three lines according to the length of their body. Because tests in each line require one or more cauteries depending on the tolerance and effectiveness of the patient.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And do the cautery treatment with point cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, perform three or four point cauteries along the medial clavicular line according to this method:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On the treatment for bleeding with cautery at the onset of jaundice.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Several symptoms occur in this illness in infants, and the sign of its onset is that it affects their structure under the skin causing swelling and elevation along with movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you find that in the lower part of the back and the nape area where it begins to rise above other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you do this and want to stop it, then apply cautery on the point in a circular manner as follows:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	Let the cautery be applied over all parts of the spinal column equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, apply the point of a small or large cautery to the circuit of the spinal column.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be evenly distributed among them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then cure the area inside so that it is healed with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Make sure that the cautery is not applied to yellowness caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On gout and joint pain cautery treatments.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold fluids that permeate every part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, it is commonly called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus, how gout caused by friction is cured using the method of treatment and not with remedies for pain, it is then treated with cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you should apply the cautery near the site of evacuation in the foot's joint circuit using pointed cautery.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And use an olive oil-based cautery, which is its form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If the pains ascend within the veins or to other joints, and these points are detected, then apply the olive oil cautery over each vein or three or four times across the entire part of this olive oil cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	If these cauteries are necessary for you, then apply the cautery and do not press your hand too much on the cautery before, simply around the size of the cord.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	If the pains are in the tendon or both, then apply the cautery that we have mentioned in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	If the pains are only in the chest and it is called gout, then puncture along the muscle circuit as they move, puncture on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	If the pains remain in the wrists, then puncture along the muscle circuit on each wrist and over the pulse of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If the pains occur close to several days or in the arms or muscles, then apply the points of all parts of the aids.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not allow the patient to recover well and receive medicines, for if good treatment and perspiration is removed with this cautery, it will lead to healing, God help us.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On gout and joint pain cautery treatments.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When you detect rupture in the lungs and saying that the intestines are coming out before the belly, and this is how they start to happen nearby, then command that the patient leave his food for the day and use mild remedies so that the opening of his stomach can decrease.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then have the patient follow between your hands on his back, and command him to keep his arms so that there is no more opening or appears of the intestines or hernia.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return that to your fingers and try the rupture on the bones of the ankle, marking the end which is similar to half of a circle in the lower parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat up the cautery like this:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Let it be red hot and emit sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then return the hernia or intestine to its natural position, and place your hand on the area to prevent it from coming out again.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them. Another servant is on their legs, another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery on that sign with your hand on the point of the cautery, and guide it into you until you reach the bones of the ankle halfway through the diagonal; repeat this procedure if you have not achieved your goal in the first attempt towards the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe the movement of the hernia carefully during your cautery treatment, do not move that hernia too much that might cause death or other serious harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you use the cautery near the bone, do not perform your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And be aware that the size and measure of the children's cautery should be subtle according to their size and strength.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then cure the area of the cautery for three days with oil until the scabs from the burn are removed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The patient should lie on their back for 40 days until the wound and injury are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And be aware that you should limit the patient's food according to the duration of their healing time which stretches out his stomach, and ensure that the hernia does not protrude due to the effort to heal.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when it is time to remove this after about 40 days, administer food gradually, and keep him for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let him work less and consume food and drink plenty of water, as well as avoid vigorous activities, so that when he uses this complete regimen for healing, he will recover completely.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will explain the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the belly, at the beginning, and it is desired that they do not relax, then you should cauterize this rupture from him using a round red-hot cautery according to its size, let it be as long as the tendon like another third part of his; and then cure that with what we have said, it mustn't be adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And they would say that for the first time, rupture should be treated with a triangular cautery according to this form, since it is done in attempt:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and a line is placed across the width in the middle beyond the rupture, and another line above it; then place your hand on a triangular cautery; for the first cautery is more delicate and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol. 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Regarding the treatment of torsion.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain persists in some limbs due to impact or percussion and the pain lasts for a long time without benefiting from medicine, then you should treat it with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And for the size and smallness of each limb, as well as its properties and development, and the location of the torsion and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if the first cautery helps, it's good; otherwise, continue with more cauteries; for customarily in those pains, points are made on the limb closest to the body, so that they get the necessary cauterizations inside the patient's body.
Capitol .xlvii.	Capitol. 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Regarding the treatment of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some leprosy lesions are treated with cautery for a long time, and especially if the type of leprosy is due to the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And when you want to cauterize it, consider if the leprosy is contagious and treat it with what we have said in the division, not this one or that one, and fear for the patient's body that corruption might spread throughout his entire body and all his flesh, then cauterize it at the head with your cautery: on the middle of the head, and on the second closest to you; place your forehead at the end of the hair; and both on two corners; and one behind, on the neck or back.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finish with your hand on the cautery a little inside where you start in the mouth, and if his movements have changed, so that his expiration of thick vapours is alleviated; then cauterize over the wax according to what is needed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread to the body and is manifestly evident, then you should treat it with those cauteries that we have said for the head; and on the cautery over the tip of the nose, and on two cauteries over each cheekbone, and on two cauteries over the two neck vertebrae, and five on his shoulders, and a large one on the neck near the spine, and one on the shoulder blade, and two on his elbows, and one on each elbow, and two on his thighs and one on each thigh, and two on his knees, and two on his muscles; then cauterize it over all joints of those mentioned of the limbs and feet, and on every heel of his feet, and on his flesh depressions.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And guard yourself from the nerves that are on the shaft do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Some lesions are treated with a cautery on the bone of the pharynx and another in the mouth of the stomach, and another over the oesophagus.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more accurately you apply cauteries, the better they heal and the less pain the patient feels; and know that the body of the patient is already numbed by the cautery, just like when you are sore from exercising.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And know that the cauteries should be large or small according to the limbs and joints as indicated by the types of tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And after that, treat the cautery with cornmeal mixed with honey and another treatment until it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol. 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Regarding the treatment of numbness or paralysis.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a limb is numb or paralyzed and has been treated with medicines, bandages, and it hasn't healed, then you should treat the numb limb with cauteries according to its size or smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery go slightly inside the fold of the calf.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And after that, treat it with ointment until it heals.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And some lesions are treated with a cautery for numbness which affects the limbs and feet, as well as the neck vertebrae, you can see the nerves that serve that limb, and the numbness is relieved.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Don't assume this unless you are knowledgeable about the anatomy of limbs and the exit of all moving body parts' nerves.
Capitol .xlix.	Capitol. 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Regarding the treatment of warts that are characteristic of a disease.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When warts are old and do not respond to any of the ointments of medicine for them, then you should treat them with a preon cautery for as long as it takes until the whiteness and color of the wart change, and the color of the wart changes.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And after that, treat it with cornmeal and lentils mixed with roasting oil and leaves of rhubarb, or with pigeon or apricot vinegar from each ingredient, mix half of each, then use this mixture to cover the area until it heals.
Capitol .l.	Capitol. 50.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Regarding the treatment of boils or abscesses.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and one wants to stop it, then apply a circular cautery on that area around the patient's body in the path where it has spread.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise say that it should be treated with a circular cautery in the middle place; however, I do not see this way, fearing that it might be an ulcer, as I have seen this several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is recommended to treat it with a circular cautery in the path of the patient as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Capitol .li.	End of chapter.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Regarding the treatment of ulcers through cautery.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some ulcers take time to mature, and this is due to an excess causing it, or because of the patient's condition, which weakens with age and has few vitality, or through time, and you want to expedite the maturation of the ulcer; then apply multiple small-pointed cauteries around the area; and let that excess be expelled during maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	And if you wish for the perforation of the ulcer with cautery, then heat up the cautery which is in this form: and place it at the center of the ulcer so that the needle penetrates.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you place the cautery in that location where you have set it, for when your arm's blood is relieved; then treat that area until it heals.
Capitol .lii.	End of chapter 52.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Regarding the treatment of corrosions with cautery.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a spreading decay in the member, which corrodes it as wood burns when exposed to a dry fire.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Then if you notice the corrosion in the place that tolerates the cautery as fire burns wood, then heat up small pointed cauteries and larger according to what is suitable for that place where it corrodes.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And apply the cautery around completely from every side, until you eliminate all the corrosion and do not leave any cause for it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And let that area rest for three days, and place on the cauterized spots, oil previously mixed until all the scabs are eliminated and all the corrosion is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And treat it with a meat-softening ointment afterwards.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	If in three days the healthy meat grows where there was corrosion, that is good; but if not, then apply the cautery over what has weakened in those corroded areas again.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosion is treated with some doses of a quick medicine, which that is half near the location of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, applying cautery with fire is much easier and faster.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already mentioned the treatment of this with quick medicine in the division, so take it when you have need from it.
Capitol .liii.	End of chapter 53.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Regarding the treatment of warts and similar conditions.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Warts are observed in the various parts of the patient's body that one calls a wart, and it is a large cause, deeply inserted, which affects the skin; and applying cautery to these follows two methods, namely, with fire-cautery and with boiling water cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Applying fire-cautery is to ignite the cautery like a small flame, which is made of iron according to the quantity that contains the wart from every part, and it should have thin grooves.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And let that ignition rest on the wart, and then move your hand with the cautery around the wart until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the wart.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Let it rest for three days until your arm begins to itch.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And apply a paste made from dried mallow leaves mixed with salt to that area, and let the paste rest on that for a night, so that this may be eliminated from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And treat the area with a meat-producing ointment until it heals.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if they are not eradicated, and warts occur on the surface of the body, mainly on the chest and the feet, then you should apply cautery with boiling water in those areas; take a small ball of iron or of charcoal or of ashes from burning wood, place that over the wart; heat up some boiling water in the ball slightly, hold your hand, and move that around with the compression of your hand all over it, press the edge of the ball against the root of the wart, and the hot water will find its way to the root of the cautery; then let the patient endure the taste of the hot water for an hour, and afterwards remove that, so that this wart coming from its roots may be eliminated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And do it like this for each one and then proceed with the other, making sure to cover all of them in your body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And treat those pus that come from the roots of warts, which allow meat-producing ointments to regenerate the skin.
Capitol .liiii.	End of chapter 54.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Regarding treatment with cautery for tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When experiencing a tremor due to friction on nerves or because of fever from a friction cause, or for any other similar cause, you should apply four cauteries or five over the ribs of the back, between each rib with one cautery; and on their feet, and above the stomach, place an olive oil cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the patient's tremor subsides, hastening the recovery of the illness from friction.
Capitol .lv.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Regarding the treatment through cautery for injuries to the heart.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body there are external injuries and pus-filled wounds that are made of thick corrupted materials; therefore, when they appear at the beginning stage, it should be treated by cautery over the entire part of the fistula using a fine point of a firebrand stick; or one with an elongated erestology; or using a slow lens-shaped cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And some boils are to be treated with cautery at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; they are not to be incised, and the excess is removed by doing so, and it heals those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it should be treated with an evacuation followed by phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Translation for "Capitole lv." is:
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Regarding the treatment through cautery of a flow from an infection caused by the incision of a blood vessel.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Too many boils that cause bleeding from a blood vessel should be treated by incising the boil which is prone to rupture, or by making an incision for abscesses or cautery of the limb, and then proceed with this method, it will be difficult to keep back such bleeding.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	So when such happens with any of them, you grip the pillow with your hand at the opening of the blood vessel, and place your hand over that area to hold the boil under which the bleeding remains until you do this with your stated method, so that it doesn't escape.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And place in the fire the olive cauteries small and large, for many numbers, and blow on those inside where there is a spark.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And take one small or large from those depending on the place and wound in which the artery has ruptured, over that vein gently blowing until you have held your stated method, then cauterize inside so that it is cut off and restrained that bleeding.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you hold your stated method and remove the cautery, then take another olive stick from among those in the fire that are prepared for this, so do not cease to do this one after another until the bleeding is restrained.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerves here, and that it brings other mischief to the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrain the bleeding in those cases, especially when the artery is large, unless you use one of four methods: or use a cautery like this which we have mentioned, or extraction when it cannot be removed, where if it can be removed its extremities are burned and the bleeding is restrained, or bind it with a string or bandage by making it tight, or place them on medicines whose virtue is to restrict the bleeding; they should be strengthened with powder in the tightening of the binding.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	Let whoever administers a decent restraint of this bind with a bandage and by tightening the fabric or due to causes of burning and appearance, do not apply anything but tar.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If this happens with any and the doctor or medicine is not present, then apply the aforementioned pause on that vein opening as we have said, and understand to make a large tightening of it inside so that the bleeding is stopped from the major part of the wound, and over the artery let this not be removed; and above the artery rub with water that has been vigorously rubbed out inside where the bleeding is cooled and thickened; and take care in which should be cauterization or the need for medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Regarding incisions, punctures, and blisters, as well as phlebotomy and boils, and their appearances.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are terms of Albuqurque.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already discussed in the first chapter about all illnesses for which cautery with fire is suitable and medicine that causes burning, and the occasions and reasons for it, and the tools needed for these, as well as I arranged the chapters of the rise to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I proceed in this chapter for that purpose, so that the one who seeks it may be relieved, then about what has been requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, let it be known that in this chapter you will find what is mentioned in the first chapter of cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because of that you must be cautious, for in this operation there are many boils that need evacuation which involve blood from which life is sustained by the application to the vein or incision over the abscess or opening for expulsion or purification of the boil or removal of arrow or incision into the cheek and their appearances.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all of those are accompanied by fear, trembling, and in most cases death for them.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that do not let this happen to you which is an error, for some boils must be treated using methods of men and other methods of illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And among them is one that dies from their illness and this means death for him, also due to the severity of what he finds in his illness, and because of the length of his illness, and fear which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And that one gives you their advice and it is called this, you are hoping for that health, and their illness is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And indeed, you must agree with the one who comes to see you of whom this manner is like; and your caution must be greater than greediness and your desire; and do not assume any cause about it except for certain knowledge that verifies what you should do, and through which a possible success can come.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the treatment of all your sick people with prediction and indication of what leads to their health, for in that is your help regarding acquisition of fame and memory, approval and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, children, God listens to your true understanding and does not withhold direction and protection from you, for that is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter to be distinguished by chapters according to what precedes in the chapter of cautery, for treatment of the head to feet, so that you may enjoy what you request about this and what you need.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water which is contained in a child's head.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this sickness, which often affects children, is due to the heat of their head and when old age begins, it increases in the child's head causing pain.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some swellings for unknown reasons which are not understood.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have not seen this sickness in anyone other than children; and for all those whom I have seen dying, it seems to me that they are marked by death, and thus, I see a finished work in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child's head which was full of water, the top of his head was always so magnificently swollen that he could not put it down due to the size of his head, and more than the humidity increased inside that became death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture either gets added between the membrane and bone, or is added outside on the skull.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	If the moisture is between the membrane and bone, and the pus is little, then you must make an incision in the middle of the head at one crack across its breadth, and let the length of the crack be about two fingers wide so that the moisture can flow out, and this is how surgery should be done:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture is more increased and the pus is larger, then there are here two cracks done like this:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is outside the bone, its sign is that you open all parts of the head's seams and when you press this against your own hand to its inner parts, water is squeezed out, which is not concealed like this.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if you make incisions in the middle of the head at three cracks according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And in the incision extract all the moisture; and strengthen these cracks with bandages and pillows; and on the fifth day apply oil over it, then remove the stitches and treat the wound with tallow and ointments, and strengthen the head evenly; and feed the patient with dry meat of little moisture until their member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And another way of incision is to consider the size of the pus collection and water accumulation which some swellings may be more at the occipital region, or in front, or on the right, or on the left; therefore pay attention to where the pus appears and the filling with water, and do this according to what is best for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that do not cut the artery and allow fluid veins to drain out of infection so you can evacuate moisture from it.
Capitol .ii.	Second chapter.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On incision of the arteries which are close to the ears, called eardrops.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When it happens in some catarrh or trauma to the nose or feet, and it is old this condition, and you do not consult about its treatment with medicines, then the primary treatment here is incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And when you want to incise those that cause the patient's head pain, then rub the area with a hard cloth so that you can see the arteries, and strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where is the pulse; and the places above the places which are close to the ears, they may be hidden in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And on the artery apply tallow, and incise each one at the opening of each sharp part leading into the bone, and let this be according to the breadth of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, enter the tallow inside the artery and thread this through the incisions in its parts above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be about two fingers long and adjusted, so when any vein is incised, the pulse is stilled at its exit point; which beats cease through frequent jumps.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	And if the artery does not appear at the centering point, then you must measure from the ear the quantity of space about three fingers wide, and apply tallow there, and make an incision into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And whatever removes blood is a quantity of wine one uncia. And strengthen the patient with more or less wine depending on the quantity which appears from the strength of the person and filling of the artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound; and if there remains above the bone any cause of the skull, then you must incise it so that no pus is formed.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with pins and strips of linen, and treat that with ointment from within to be healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old headache or intense pain occurs, due to moisture from agriculture and the quality of those pains in the temples, or if it's an old headache that strongly resembles them, then we treat with the methods of healing medicine, but this doesn't solve the issue. In these ailments, we proceed with the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or the cauterization of those areas as we have demonstrated.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The method of the operation and extraction is as follows: the patient removes their skin where it's located in the temples; understand that there's an apparent artery in the temple area, which you can see by its shape from their pulse, this is usually hidden in few individuals due to its intensity.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it's hidden, then the patient should strengthen their neck with some cloth; and place over the area a hard cloth or vaporize the location with hot water until you can see the artery clearly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then take the spatula, which has this shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you burn the vessel with it in such a way that you reach the artery; and afterwards place on it oil and extract that from the superficial parts until you extract that of the vessel and discover those of the tunics which are left there, from all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is delicate, then wrap it at its extremity with an onion peel, and proceed to remove a part of it according to its length which allows for the stretching of its extremities and their contraction. And do not create bleeding; because if they are not cut, no blood will rise up from them altogether.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate a little of the blood. Inside three times.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then cover it in two places with double strength thread or with cords long, and do not cut it until after the healing of the wound, making sure there's no blood flow.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut out the excess that is between two threads; and do this either right away or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that with a cautery inside the hole, using a surgical knife until its extremities are incised, and stay in the place of that half-done work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it's better for the patient if they have fever or are prone to chills; because cautery is caused by those causes that help in the final stages of moisture, therefore it's better in adolescence.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And cover the extraction of the arteries that you cut to your liking, they should be placed over the patient's clean dust, and treat them with dry medicines cause them to produce flesh and in heat until they are healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if during your work another opening occurs and there is bleeding from the artery, then you must stop the blood flow, either with a cautery or by filling that cut area, and hold your hand until the bleeding stops.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes are present to you at that moment, then place your hand on the area while the bleeding is slowed down, and wet that area with cold water until the heat subsides, and strengthen according to what is done.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is lighter in the extraction of arteries is that you cauterize the vein with this type of cautery having two needles, because you have placed both areas on the needle, and then remove some of them, with fire, until they reach the hole and cut the vein into two places, so that it becomes extended where there are its extremities, which are not hardened by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is how the cautery looks:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the heat of both needles be constant.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if there is more heat than two needles it's better, as long as they are sharp like two needles close to each other and do not cut the flesh at speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, if there is any thickness, heat the fire in those and cut the flesh slightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better in all works and much lighter.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space which is between two needles be the size of that mentioned.
Capitol quart.	Chapter IV.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On treating bodies with sharp and sour tears from the nose.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When it's sharp tears, and those are the bodies of veins which lie above the nose in front, and this isn't cured by any means according to medicine, then the patient's face already reddens and they walk as if it were a dance of mosquitoes, their noses being exhausted, moistened such that their skin is known, and their eyelids are scratched by the sharpness of the tears, they are old in treating those with this operation, so I'll proceed with this treatment.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you order the patient to scrape off the skin that is on their forehead, and then make three equal distance slits on the forehead according to its length.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the slit is two fingers: one slit should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the tears which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And protect yourself from the beginning of the arteries which are in two sides, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if it is the size of an opening that needs three fingers to measure its quantity.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if it's for you a sponge or moistened cloth, take them off until the sweat dries on them.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And place the tip of two sharp points, this is the form of the incision for him:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that starts from the division between the thighs and continues to the second opening.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Remove everything of that whole chain that is between two openings at the cheek which is above the bone, and do this for the incision to continue to the second opening.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And place the tip of this tool without the point and enter into the first incision another blade, which is called a scalpel, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place the sharp end of this tool should cut off the associated flesh, and place the tip of it inside the bone, and insert this between that and reaches the middle crack, and cut off everything related blood vessels descending from the head to the throat.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	May this incision continue up to that appearance of the bone, and do this in the middle crack between the other crack.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when a quantity of sweat has drained out, press on the places where the sweat is concentrated with hot cloths.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And place yourself on each crack where it is warm, and place there the powdery substances of wine and oil mixed with wine, and remove if it does not cause pus to form.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day loosen the bandage and administer large quantities of warm water or soup, and then cure this with balm in oil among others so that the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Capital .v.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the treatment of coughs by cathartic and descending throat parts from within the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When in the case of a hot cathartic and continuous, and sometimes emptying out the throat from the patient's thighs, and their examination is well done, and the eyelids are ulcerated with their hair loss, and at the back of the head there is acute toothache and consequent straining, then you should know for these occurrences that the materials and cathartics do not come from mere veins of the internal parts.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for those is this: tell the patient to scratch their forehead, and then make an incision in that area of the forehead right in the middle, a small one by the width (and start from the crack on the left temple into the right; and the incision goes into the bone; and extend your hand along the bumps of the temples which are rough for chewing), so that the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the sweat with a sponge or on linen and then place between the two edges of the crack with old linen or on linen pieces.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And after that, strengthen it from above with powdery substances of wine and oil so as not to cause pus formation.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you loosen this and that the pustule has already diminished, then understand that it washes out the bone starting from his navel flesh, and then treat this with the regimen of drying which makes the flesh sweat as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of mastic gum, mix them, make a paste from them, and apply this remedy to these wounds in the native flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Capítulo .vi.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Chapter VI.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All causes that cause pain in the ears are of four kinds, some or they are mineral like gravel, such as iron and salt, others or they are plant-based such as mustard or fava beans, or they are fluid-causing substances such as water and mixed wine and similar to them, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore when gravel causes pain in the ear or another similar cause from those causes that do not settle and grow in the ear, then place the ear to the sun, and if you see the gravel, then distill some substance of vinegar or wormwood oil for it, and then administer the extraction from this, and make the person sneeze with the condition, and cover their nose when they anticipate sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And place some pieces of cloth or wool on the circuit of the ear, and spread the ear over them, those patches that are heated by these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not heated, then administer extraction from this with the tool called epigean bistoury, which is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it has been treated with an epigean bistoury, good. Otherwise, then administer the extraction from this on a sharp stick made of wax-duplicated wood.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it has not been treated with this either, then make a hollow in wax and place the end of the tube into the ear canal and seal around the edge of the tube with softened wax or oil, so that it does not overflow except for the tube.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And extract from your nose against strong attraction, those that are heated as we have described.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	And if it is not heated in this manner either, then take alum or vinegar which has been strained through wool, and place some small amounts of it on the tip of your tongue, and apply this moderately around it.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert him into the ear canal for ease, and remove the moisture from the ear.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And so if none of the causes we have listed is found, then you must prepare to cut that one ahead of time so as not to encounter an abscess or cramp.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the way to cut that is when you start, touch the patient's saphenous vein and remove the blood according to the nature of it, and then make that incision between your hands and turn the ear towards the parts above, and create a small crack in the root of the ear; you must press the veins of the patient where it has been pinched by you.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the crack be in the shape of a crescent moon so that it reaches the bone. If the bone is intact, leave it as long as possible with suitable instruments; and while you work on this crack during that time use speed, and treat it until it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause that affects the ear is one of the fats that grows and inflates, then you administer treatment and extraction to it; but if it does not suit your disposition, then take a thin strip under tension according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And apply the excision of that fat which is in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And don't stop when you think that it is already moistened by the ear's vapor, and place this one in small lumps, and properly extract from those to the nails or with a subtle gesture, or with an incision as we described, so that the extraction of it is relieved.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	And in the water which enters into the ear canal, make the patient sneeze as soon as he starts, and fill his ear with some old cotton wool, and place it over that ear where there is water. If this way of treatment works, then it's good; otherwise, take small and thin stones and lemons according to their length, shape them into balls and warm them a little in the fire, and let the patient insert one of these into his ear canal and blow on the part of that stone inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	So don't stop with this method until all the water is treated within it.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And once the water has been treated, you should use paper or onion.. and put one end of it into the ear and extend the other end into fire so that it burns the upper part.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And place another onion and do this process as many times until all the water is treated, and remove it using a siphon, as described above.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	And if there's an animal inside that ear canal, if it's small, like that and similar to the patient, treat it in the same way as we described for the division; but if it's a large thing causing it from within, then administer its removal through gestures and fingers. The cause of this is easier than all other causes that affect the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	And when dealing with the removal of worms that develop in the ear, if you treat it using what we described for division and in the section on distillations and do not let your treatment affect, then observe the ear under sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if any worm-related cause appears here, then remove it with gestures or with subtle tools; but if there's no such cause, then take a tube and stretch out this one which is the form of that:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the subtle end into the ear according to the amount that suits your patient's need; and then suck through it strongly, doing this several times until all the worms are treated.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	And if it doesn't suit your disposition, then fill and seal the circuit of the tube with beeswax as we've described; then administer distillations that have already expanded the previous ones in worm treatment, which you can find detailed in the section on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your discharge be at the place where you pour in medicinal oils into the ear with this tool whose form is like this:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or reed, stretch them out, in which there should be a small tube, and on the plane surface.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And make it so that when you're dealing with the size of the canal's cavity here, if there's any necessity for it.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the reed and wrap it around the descending part of it with cotton, then pour oil into the cavity of the ear opening, or juice from some herb, or whatever you choose among these medicines in the tube - and that is inside the ear - and then insert the reed with cotton above it and press it until your hand feels the oil being expelled into the cavity of the ear opening and the patient senses the oil internally.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And whatever is inside the ear should be warmed by fire slightly.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And remember that the distillation you do in the ear should not be too hot, because the ear medicines do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of wax blockages in the ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes, some children inherit abdominal swellings from their mothers that are not perforated, and this happens in some men as well, wax blockage in the meat of the ear due to pus or flesh there; and this wax blockage is sometimes made at the entrance point of the ear channel which does not allow passage through movement, and sometimes it's outside the parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	When something happens in the stomach of a patient, which is not comprehended by experienced doctors, it's in the more difficult situations for treatment.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And when you can achieve that, just hold the patient's ear to the sun and observe in that manner.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if you notice an apparent protrusion, open it with a subtle incision of the kind this is shaped like:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end where its width is small, with one part sharp and the other not; and let the incision be of two lines long, so that it doesn't hurt the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the protrusion is through soft flesh in the ear or at the back of it, then make that with a subtle incision and penetrate it vigorously until all the flesh is inside.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the protrusion is in the inner part of the ear, then take a sharp line and carefully dig that with fire a little, and then place it at the back of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you have felt a protrusion due to the ear being crushed, relieve the pressure on it with ease; and be careful not to hurt the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then, in the ear, place a cloth according to the size of the protrusion which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are sure of the healing process; or dip something into water and grind it over the wound with the third substance and use it; and if you notice that the ear has healed, then proceed as follows: crush the substance and substitute it with another one which you cover in bandage made from cloth soaked with rubbed oil, until the pus pocket drains out; and continue to care for this until it is fully recovered.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If there is a leakage of pus, then immerse the sponge or cloth in water and place it over the ear, and use another treatment that restricts the pus flow, which is mentioned in the distillation treatise.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Chapter VIII: On treating atezil, which occurs on the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Atheyl which occur on the eyelids of some people are moist, while others have them in dry form.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then cut them with tweezers or scissors, and divide the parts of their roots from their stumps, and apply this substance to the affected areas after grinding it.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If there is pain accompanied by pus discharge, then you cauterize them with a small, pointed cautery tool.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is to have the incisions close and when the swollen areas return only if there's any remaining cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots burn up and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for granuloma that occurs on the eyelids of adults.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Swollen areas that appear on the eyelids of adults may be caused by certain reasons which accumulate into granuloma in terms of their size and hardness. Thus, due to its size, it's called a granuloma.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And there is an addition of thick moisture on the eyelid that you and I observe.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation in this case is that if you observe the granuloma extending within it from beneath the eyelid and is hard to touch all over; and its cause is minor.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then cut it across its width, and carefully dig out the whole area until it's empty, and hold that with tweezers and remove it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the start of this is not immediately visible to you if it's pus that penetrates through the eyelid in small increments, then there should be no cause for concern.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and care for this until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if there's little of it, you won't encounter any harm with that because the heat from this restores and renews this.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the large one is declining towards the inner parts of the eyelid you should remove from inside the surface. Then cut this eyelid and hold this granuloma with tweezers, another that you use to start, press this in all directions, and if the eyelid has been stretched by incision, there won't be any cause for concern.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And close to the incision, wash the eye with salty water; and care for this area until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On treating excoriation on the upper eyelid of a person.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Excarnation is the gray matter that's produced in the tunics of the upper eyelid, mostly affecting children, aggravating their health and causing them to have catarrh; and they can't see the brightness of the sun for which their tears are continually falling on it.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And you often have to let those irritants act on their faces all the time, and they sleep with their faces. Their eyelids are wet on their eyelashes, which are already covered in puffiness and the imminent appearance of excoriation is at their eyes; and when you press this area with your own fingers, you hear a scraping sound coming from those.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And one surgical method is in that when the ear rests on your head, and you place a cloth under him/her and make wax; you make a circle according to the amount of pus all around, and then press this over it while pressing with your fingers from all sides so that pus scraping accumulates in the middle of the circle. Then cut in the middle of this moisture with an incision across its width, and the incision should not be larger than the one made during tuberculin puncture.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	When in the hand position you must cut through the palm completely until it reaches the wrist bone; once in the later positions process the wrist by cutting along a white fatty tissue line according to the shape of the wrist.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract those on the sheets which you have enveloped between your fingers at the far parts, and move them with your right and left hand until they are dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to tighten in the cut so that at the opening, it does not go too far and you don't let it down.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If it does not reach your arm in the beginning of the cut, then adjust inside the cut by making a small facilitation while processing the arm; and then extract that as we said earlier; and prepare cloths for him in water and wine to soak them; place those over the area and strengthen those with powder.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And in this way, they pass salt on it while placing that at the cavity of the cut to ensure that what remains from that moisture is removed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If it happens that a boil appears at the spot, then treat it with plaster bandages until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On measuring the pulse.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When on the eyelids of the eyes are natural marks and are ancient, then those are to be considered as symptoms of illnesses such as constant tears, swelling of the eyelids and the inner lining where this is a cause for destruction of the eye which is called ophthalmia. The treatment can be done in four ways: or with a hot cautery; or with an acute medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization; or it's treated by ligation and suturing; or through needles as I shall say later.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And thus cut where you place the eye's head in its right position; then convert the eyelid of the eye to your left hand, and if it has been converted, that's good; and if not, insert a needle into the one that is at the source of pus within the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through from below, and this should be - close to the edge of the eyelid where the hair grows - close to the skin, then pull out the string above on the eyelid, and convert it back.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then create at the opening of the part inside the eyelid, have the skin adjusted to the surface incident to the major lacrimal duct towards the lacrimal sac; and then extract the string and place the eyelid with a small amount of cumin or cloth powder on it, and place your hand over the eyelid to test, as if it were a mallow leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, when measuring the shape according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, which has already varied among humans, for those who have a significant incision in the upper eyelid proportional to its level of swelling.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then place on the surface over the two lines you've marked, starting from the major lacrimal duct towards the minor lacrimal duct.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your cut is close to natural skin as thick as the thickness of a king.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the needle at one of the two corners of the cut, and then scrape that whole area, and adjust it according to the incision; apply both lips with glue or a fine thread over the tongue or wool, clean up any debris, and adhere what is excessive from the threads onto some causes causing swelling if you wish to do so, otherwise don't treat.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then let the thread stitches of the needles heal within three or four days, and treat that accordingly.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want, let the wound undergo its stitches, and treat it with things that dry and constrict, so when the eyelid is raised you seal off the wound area and add to him; however, stitching should be better, therefore this was done by our predecessors.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, in his anxiety about the eye, it is a good operation, and not in his fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And it's another way to correct this, and that is having the shape of a mallow leaf on the eyelid, then elevate the eyelid by three uncia measurements, spreading them according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it's not possible to do this, use the uncia measurements, and if this isn't equal, then take a needle with thread on it, place that in the middle of the shape, and place another string close to the major lacrimal duct, and the other string according to near the minor lacrimal duct, then adjust between your fingers the strings for equality, then raise your hand up as high as you're raising this amount, lift the whole cut area like we've described.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And adjust both lips of the wound for stitching, and treat it until it's healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If you encounter an abscess, then perform your incision or cut, drain that abscess with gauze and resemble it to the patient, applying ointment.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes some inflammations under the eyelid that their skin turns, then cut as you use according to what we've said about incision; however, stitching is more artificial in certain cases.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Cauterization with needles follows this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And you should convert the eyelid and divide the figure that is inside according to what I have recounted; then, with skill, make two canals or two subtle stars whose length is according to the length of the eyelid and their width is proportionate to the width of the socket.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already penetrated into the extremities of each part, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add whatever subtlety under this that is excessive on the eyelid of the eye, and strengthen the threads of each part with a strong tension, then smooth it for a few days; until the tension causes the wound to heal and be discharged and then falls off by itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it has been delayed, then break the thread at the corners, and afterwards cure the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Then when it is solidified, the eyelid is elevated and the skin does not pinch.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is how you make two canals according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	Make the quantity of length and width neither too much nor too little.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the elevation of painful skin on the eye when the skin is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the skin is unnatural, hard and rough and painful in the eyes, then the operation on it consists of taking a subtle needle and placing it gently in each of its soft spots, and adjust the extremities of it so that you pinch each one with a subtle gesture.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the needles be as wide as a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then make another subtle needle under this one quickly, and pinch the extremities of that if you want.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head in your position so that it is close to the sun, for your work will be demonstrated, as this is a subtle and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the adjusted edge of the skin where there is a need for skill, and let it penetrate the eyelid smoothly until you remove that from the natural skin.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the skin over and insert it into the incision, and let there be one or two or three threads and no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand into that so that the skin is pulled out to the incision in the eyelid towards the natural skin.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If it is pulled out to the incision and not torn by the skin, pull out to the incision in the parts towards the needle which you have made at that point, so that from there the pulling will be out of the track.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And take that away from the eye view, then you will pull out smoothly and the needle, and cleanse each one and harden the eye, and leave the bandage for two or three days until the skin adheres to its place and grows over it good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the skin is too short, then you adjust a long hair of natural hair, and elevate it towards that, or leave it so that it grows approximately over some space, and then elevate it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the treatment of elevating which happens above the eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When it appears in the eye of elevation, and when it is contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted within them, or on the right or left part, due to bad consolidation of wound or section or cautery, and it is called leporine, this elevation is natural or accidental, and it is made by consolidation of wound or section or cautery, or in imitation of their deformities.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation in this case is that you should cut through that consolidation and separate its layers from it, then place a layer of linen cloth between those areas and bind them together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not cover it with any kind of wound care that would dry out, because if you do this the elevation will return worse than before for there will be no time to heal.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use these causes that soften in this way as with fenugreek, soak it in water at which the linen is submerged for a short time or a daisy balm, which turns liquid with some of the oils, immerse the cloth in that and treat with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your treatment is to perforate through all means until none remains according to the shape that appears at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have mentioned is merely a correction of elevation that does not return the form of the place according to what appears in front.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On treating elevation which occurs on the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This elevation which occurs on the eyelid is called vertebre elevation; and it can be either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Accidental elevation is caused by wounds, cuts, cauterizations or other similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The method of the operation for this is that you should take a needle with two threads and place it in the flesh, then make it pass through the left lacrimal into the right lacrimal, so that the thread reaches to both ends of the tissue.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And extend the flesh on the sides above the needle and place it with the needle, then cut widely in the cavity.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And therefore, if you return the eyelid according to how it covers, that is good; and if not, take the lid and pause it in the cut figure, and on that convert the eyelid, and make the two slits at the end of the eyelid, leave them.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And if the ends of the two slits at the corners of the incision you made inside where they meet, and an angle is formed between them when they come together, forming their own figure.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: the lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And approximately stop the skin there in quantity as much as the tip of your finger from your side, so that it secures the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And approximately adjust the separated parts and sew those with the thread of the wool; and then treat those with what we have said about moisturizing medicines and in the soaks where it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if it's cut through by a slit or stitch or cautery, then when you open that to make a flat slit on the skin of the eyelid according to what has been done.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And approximately separate with the soak between two lips as we said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the discourse on treating an incision when it's above or below, that flows in your operation, according to how it is prepared like an incision, and that one is in shape of various spots.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the artisans always prepare tools in every way that is possible for them to allow him back into his natural form or close enough to it, and this patient according to what suits him from the operation and the instruments in their most convenient positions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this solidification happens in many men, ensure that the eyelid is above against the album of the eye, and forbid its ease of movement and natural actions. Therefore when you insert the tip of your finger into the eyelid, lift it up or extend it towards the corner.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And you will cut the adhesion against a fine surface, which is not at the sharpness of the incisions, having it blunt slightly so that the patient does not worry about the operation, and leave the surface alone to prevent the eye from losing its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision gently remove that adhesion with ease, so that the eyelid returns to its natural shape and the entire adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And you will place in the eye salty water which you wash with; or distil from junia dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And you will separate between the eyelid and the eye with an ointment, and place on the eye wool immersed in egg white, and then for several days use remedies that help to heal it.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On incision of the eyelid and the elevation of flesh in the tear duct region.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Knowing that the eyelid can be done in two ways, one is nervous and resembles a hard fine ciphac; or it is non-nervous, resembling white moisture congealed, which when you touch it, or forces that to take on an inch, it is removed and the inch does not stick in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not begin until the main tear duct gradually covers the view and prohibits light and eye movement.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The method of working in the operation is that the patient holds their head in its usual place, and then you open their eyes, lift the eyelid with your hand, and carefully remove the eyelid at the corner and extend it upwards.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And you take a needle and insert a horsehair or a cowhide or calf leather or something similar, or double the tip of the needle gradually and fix that in the middle of the eyelid, then push it through the needle, and tie that to the thread; extend this upwards, remove from the hair the part at the edge of the needle which secures the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And you follow that through the hair up to the back of your head.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And you will cut the rest in the direction of the tear duct with a fine surface or small cuts, and removes the flesh of the tear duct naturally so that there is no continuous flow of tears through this operation.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the eyelid under the sun in this position or with the hand, as we have said, and then remove it from the surface of which this is its shape:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And remember that when touching the surface do not touch the corneal epithelium and that this happens in it during rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	The operation heals in the eye a little of salted water or distilled from junia made with vinegar, and leaves that for another day; and then treats that with what is done internally so that it heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the eyelid is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, or it does not stick with this amount of the inch, then for this type of eyelid it is treated with medicines, and it heals in this way as I have recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to divide that, then open the eye of the patient and take a fine surface with a sharp tool in this manner:
am subtilitat.	In subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you notice that it is being rarified and confused and concentrated in that part, then blow into the sickle-cut of your left hand or into the cut on your head or into salted water, and pour the fumes inside until the other day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then continue with that operation until all that is yours has been removed, otherwise let the opposite pus come out in the fumes, and then you will see it, and heal from the beginning the pus within so that it may be cured.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And continue with your operation on her until she is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The eruption of the lacrimal flesh, if there is pain in the fumes due to great injury, suspend it until tomorrow; and cut into that part from time to time, and do not finish the incision so as not to cut off any tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then blow on the lacrimal sickle-cut and make cuts until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Regarding the incision of an ulcer and what is born from well-adjusted flesh in the fumes.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some ulcers in the fumes of some have caused pus to be born, and is pressed until it covers the pupil, or pushes up against or strengthens near the eyelids and stiffens the eyelids onto the parts that stick out further, and is assembled like a parapet's edge.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation for her is that the patient rests their head in the place where it belongs; and then open the ulcers of that area and collect all that flesh with convenient instruments, and hold them with forceps or a spoon; and then cut the flesh from the beginning until it's all finished with the scissors, and be careful not to let any pus come out during this operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be with the one you cut those with or with an iron we recommended for use in the operation of nails, or with small saws according to which comes the form towards this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Then once your incision is complete and all that flesh has been removed, then fill the wound with salted water, or blow into it powdered sulfur and resembles powder of corrosive medicines, and place over the wound in a corner some white paste from goose grease until any pus comes out.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there are any causes of ulcers that cause nausea from pus, and you fear pus coming out, then examine the wound and treat that pus with water that softens that pus, and continue with this operation until it is healed, similarly do in the well-adjusted flesh that happens in this type of wound.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must allow for complete healing of the wound through natural or accidental means, operate with iron, and do not put your hand into any of these operations while that member is undergoing this operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Regarding the collection of pus in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Sanguinaria are those veins of sulfur which are stubborn on the wound and prohibit it from performing its operation, and allow the wound to heal over a period of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	So it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the wound in which there is pus is strong and in it there is no other ailment than pus, then you collect that pus.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you command the patient to rest their head in its natural place, and suspend those veins with one ounce or two depending on your judgment; that one ounce of fine duplication according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or gradually two ounces into a single object according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then collect those veins with fine forceps, with subtlety, and remove the pus little by little, as you see those veins being removed from the wound and turned over.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And remember not to let the wound reach the extremities of the iron; and if your operation is in the middle of the day facing the sun, and if you are firm in your operation that you only cut those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed it, then blow on the wound with a sickle-cut or sulfur to increase its acuity in what has been removed from the pus.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If it is not possible for you to collect all at that time, then cover the whole area with what softens your pain, and let her rest for a few days until her pain subsides and any pus comes out.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And continue to work on her according to the natural process until she is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is how the saws look:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Regarding reducing swellings in the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat swellings with a cautery or with an incendiary medicine as previously described and it is not healed, then there is no need for you to do so but rather make cuts on the pus that represents its maturity, and drain all the moisture which is in her, and let air when the opening reveals the nose.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And once the nose is revealed and you notice corruption or blackness in her, then treat her with a stimulant as such:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called a rough hat, and it is made of iron, and the cap should be red as if to resemble aloe which can be made punctured by the tip of a file or finely ground (as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the rotting part of the bone, then gently rotate it with your fingers, and press your hand little by little in until you know that that corrosion is smooth.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And make some incisions there, then restore the affected area from causes of drying and constrictive.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So if the place is consolidated and it's in your good flesh and it removes the body from sickness and pain for forty days, and it doesn't renew itself and it doesn't cause you accidents, then you will know that it's healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then it's in your belly and you reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, according to this method: and that is for you to uncover from either bone or with acute medicine, once discovered the bone, then you take it in accordance with this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The extremity of the iron is triangular, and the shaft of the tool should be extended into this extremity as it will fit like that.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And place that over the bone, and have it near the lacrimal; extend your hand a little further than your nose, then gently rotate your hand towards the groove so that the entire bone can penetrate, and feel the patient's back as you find air when touching their chest.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	So then restore the affected area with medicines that dry up like this, according to what you have heard.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	So when the flesh and the place have endured it, then that matter which flowed to the far parts returns to the nose, therefore that is pus slightly on the back.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Regarding the reduction of the prominence of the nose.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the nose protrudes to its entirety and does not cause discomfort or decrease, then uncovering the back, follow it closely, and make incisions on the neck's scarification and cleanse with good drainage; then place a liniment over the nose made from acacia and aloe, sesame and sarcocolla, and strengthen the plaster placed around the nose in powder form.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method of powders is that you take cloths made from lion's hair, each cloth divided into four parts; and make them from those hairs.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And place those one over the other according to the amount of which the nose needs.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And strengthen them above those with a firm bandage; and apply the vacuums to that incision area; then leave the vacuums and smooth the nose strengthened day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	May it be so while the ligament is softened, then uncover that it's strongly smoothed out.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And keep the ligament during the day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the nose has already been reduced, then good, and if not, then continue applying the plaster with powders and bandage as well as vacuums until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Regarding the excision of the prominence of the uveal membrane.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption within the uveal membrane and it becomes prominent like half of an onion peel, its form resembling a human, and one wants to excise this, then this operation on you will be as follows according to what we have recommended. You will insert the hook into the groove of the uvea from the remaining part in the upper part, then place the hook elsewhere with double length on the side of the lacrimal portion, let that penetrate and smooth out the first hook according to its position; then excise that double line area and lift the corresponding part of the uveal membrane around the hook, and strengthen that area.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the hook and place over the nose wool infused with hen's egg white, smoothing it so that the thread falls onto the eyeball.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then care for the nose as to ensure that it accommodates that once the wound has healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And some incisions are made around the entire circumference of fabric within the nose to adjust the prominence greatly, then puncture it with a thin spout that reaches into the base of the nose, and carry moisture in a cloudy way, and descend the nose and enter very soon.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And strengthen until it heals.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	Regarding the treatment of conjunctivitis.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness that is called conjunctivitis is nothing other than an infection that settles in the nose resembling running water and it is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method for acting in this situation is to have the back of your hand on top of the prepared saddle and straighten it out. Then take your two hands near where you see the infection reaching the remaining parts, and dry it without letting it drop down, keep looking at the nose as you would when examining anything else.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it doesn't descend into the nostril, know that it's water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	And if the movement of the infection isn't prepared to descend into water as we said, then have your back of the hand between your palms and take a thin needle and insert it over the skin piercing just below the continuation of the conjunctiva at the cornea (into the desired area), so that the infection is expelled.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once it's expelled, then you will distil water down the nose in which you have mixed honey or water with which you already prepared fennel and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then it's treated for other causes that lead to health restoration.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of bile descending from the gallbladder.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already discussed the types of bile in division and which one should be pierced when explaining it, now that according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Now cover the patient's back between their hands on a mat and hold the bile there, apply strong pressure.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And place your right hand near the edge of the bile's surface. If the bile is where the water is, it's the left bile; or with your right hand if the bile is on the right side.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And with your left hand hold the other one, if the bile is on the right side; or with your right hand if the bile is on the left.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And place the tip of the tool near the crown due to pregnancy in the tear gland's area on the eye's surface, and then remove the tool with force and rotate your hand towards there.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And penetrate into the tear gland and feel that the tool has reached because of vision obstruction.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And cover so that the length of the tool's path to the punctum is the size of the space from the pupil to the end of the shadow, which is the tip of the tear duct; there you will see through the pupil with vision through the transparency of the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And place the tool inside the spot where there is water, and push it down slightly a few times, then if the water descends immediately, then see the patient's face right away in their vision area, and keep the tool in its duct.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And rest for a little while; if the water has descended, then lift that again before the tool gets wet.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is stuck and does not descend, then remove the tool gently, rotate your hand slowly towards there, and dissolve a little clear salt from gemma in water; then wash inside the duct with that water; then pause outside the duct like a stop or cotton dipped in rubbed oil and album of milk, and let it cool near the duct.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	May not those who are of our time place anything like a small piece of wax on that with milk albumin.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the tool does not fit inside the tear duct due to its hardness - which is true for some men whose tear duct is hard in nature - then cover that you take the spatula, which is called almond and this is its shape:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then puncture that conjunctive tissue, do not let your hand end at the root of the hair, and do not force it if you make a path towards the small area under the tool.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then insert the tool as we have explained.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And complete your work by having the patient's back comfortably laid down on their bed in a dark room where they can sleep, and forbid all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And let the patient rest in their natural state for their nature to be clarified, and do not allow them to turn their head towards either side from all directions.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And arrange the pillows according to their usual position within the bed.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then uncover that in this dark room and expose the eye to some causes, and then return the pillows back to day VII.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And cover so that you do this during the time of treatments or soon after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Have it so that you remove this in order for water to flow slightly by great and vigorous observation.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	May it happen that a boil appears during this time, then cover that you uncovers the duct by the seventh day, and correct that with water which causes the boil to heal.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you fully restore the patient's vision and rest on their facial expression which governs their speech for some days, existing in this dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then gradually leave that dark room while conversing with them about the causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that during an operation, it's not excused for the disciple to lose vision at times, and then you should be diligent about the procedure.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have arrived at some of those who are in the Artach region, and some said to perform a fire in Al Ayar using an perforated tool where water is produced.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I have not seen this method perfected in our land where it has a perfect water, nor does this water exist in some of the books of the ancients; and perhaps this water is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the types of tools for when they're on those, that which someone doesn't know those:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they should be made of ivory or metal precisely, and the ends of them are like this triangular subtlety, the sharp end is also like that which one forms.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the treatment of wounds in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are various types of wounds that might cause some reason which is combined with weight movement or with a local illness, and this sickness is called a polyp resembling that landscape represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And if the wound is cancerous, it's covered and of dark color; and regarding this one, its wound is not like that dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	When dealing with such conditions in these bodily tissues that are neither deceptive nor cancerous, ensure the patient is placed between your hands and exposed to sunlight. Wipe away any moisture from their body and clean under your nails, taking care not to damage the skin in those areas.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And take care to remove what is from the other parts far away, and carefully separate whatever you have understood from those sharp thin cuts under one part where you know that all flesh has been affected; if there's a cause for which removal is possible due to some condition of the patient, then with one of the finer tools make an incision so that the pus can escape from it.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If you are dealing with pus or an abscess that needs to be incised, then hold the point of your instrument over it; if it's a malignant boil, then treat by cauterizing inside where the pus has been removed and ensure all cavities have been cleansed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And after that, place your hand near the nose close to the incision, add vinegar or water nearby.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If you've opened the nostril and there's moisture inside the palate from that action, then know that it has been healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If moisture doesn't penetrate as you work, then know that inside the patient there is nothing to worry about; in places where pus has been present, you can remove bone from the nostrils which hasn't been affected by incision.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	So when you have to dig into the patient's body where there is any lump, use your fingers to examine it and handle the wetness carefully. Pause between each finger movement with an appropriate amount of force, and guide the operation by feeling for the edges of the lesion or by other means that are possible in this situation.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And once this has been done, let the smell of it extend into the patient's nostril canals so that it permeates their nose, and place your hand over the opening. Many children who have undergone similar procedures at school are seen engaging in these activities too, and there is a minor reason for those who wish to perform them.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then hold the two ends of the thread, one end that hangs over the nose and the other that extends into it, and prepare to suture the flesh where the threads are in the string (thread), do this carefully ensuring that the flesh is indeed around the threads at these points.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the string (thread), pause at the extraction of pus in the nose with a small knife, and do this for three days or longer until everything that has loosened from the flesh completely detaches.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And finally at the end of the procedure, place a lead catheter in the nose for several days after it has been healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you are administering treatment that dries out (pus or wound), use this method.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the device used for nose flushers that distil oils and medicines in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And create this from silver or bone, which should resemble a small open lamp, as small as a little cup, and make it similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed catheter like a cane, and the canal of this tool for nose flushers should be flat, open. There should be a handle at its rear end where you hold it when you're using oil or whatever you want from liquids and susceptible causes in it.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these nose flushes are priced: mix castor bark, white poplar bark, ginger root, herring of parsley, long pepper, fennel seed, and anise. You mix with flour and cabbage water, then make pill-like (medication) portions. Boil one portion in strong tea, and administer this into the patient's nose pointing downwards.
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol .xxv.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Dealing with ailments at the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Notable symptoms are noticed at the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and treated over a few days during which observation of the patient begins.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for that, when you have entered it at the beginning of the appearance of symptoms, remove all of that.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then place over the spot or the site where the cautery or burning medicine is located.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If the incision is delayed until it magnifies, then consider if it's calcified, hard, of dark color and with little feeling; do not touch this part with iron as it might be a cancerous boil. The notable symptoms towards that which you are incising this boil for its large malevolence toward that, where it was located.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the boil feels soft rather than hard and is not of dark color, then if incision is possible throughout that area, then evacuate the patient and make a careful incision. Treat the spot with what dries out and wait until it has healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Capitol .xxvi.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Treating the nose, lips and earlobe when continuity is lost due to disease or deformity.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when continuity fails in one of these cartilages, it is not suitable for surgery unless certain individuals are involved.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When dealing with any cause of these issues, consider if the disease is fresh at its pus, then adjust both the patient's lips to surgery, and proceed to treat it carefully until it has healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips affected by loss of continuity are already separated and any one is made healthy, then when you have removed all parts from its apparent connection where pus might be present.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips with stitches and strengthen those; over them pulverize dragon's bark powder and apply a paste; place a small amount of diafinicon plaster or another consolidating plaster on the powder, let that dressing dry for two days or three days, and then remove it and replace that plaster letting in between the staples so they can be removed by themselves, and afterwards treat with ointment until the healing is complete.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The way of the suture involves adding the continuity solution or with needles as we have recommended in abdominal suture, or adds the continuity solution with thread as you have and to know.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the internal parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Causes seen that resemble hard wax dots like seeds within their lips in men, some are smaller and others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore cut the lips and cavities of each of those hard lumps in every part, then fill the site with a paste inside where the wax is thickened, and then wash it with warm water and treat the area with that which is anti-inflammatory, until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On the incision of the adjusted flesh in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Large number of seen signs over the adjusted gum which the ancients called albus, therefore cut that with a thread or whatever you have under tension and incise it according to its thickness, let the healing come out or let the wax run.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then place over the site a paste or other收敛 agents or excitatory powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then cut it again, and cauterize it, for once the cauterization will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the reason of teeth with iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When in the surface of the teeth both internal and external parts, as well as between the gums, there are sharp protrusions, lumps, and some signs are blackish, they are formed citrines or verices that go through the gum causing a corruption to occur and the teeth become lumps.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And then cut between the patient's thighs and place their head in that position, and pull out the teeth where those protrusions and similar signs appear inside so no further cause comes from them, and do this with respect to blackness, citrinitas, and other changes inside as they become modified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	And if that is the case with those of the beginning reason, good; and otherwise, then you repeat the reason on those to the other day and the second and third until it arrives at the last statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	Know that the teeth require different forms of restorative treatment and figures of signs according to how your operation is prepared.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And to know which razors are used for the tooth's adjustment of the internal part is different from those used for the tooth between the teeth according to other forms, and these razor forms must be prepared by you which you will see shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On eradication of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	And when you cure the tooth of its pain throughout the entire operation and in the total eradication of it, there is no cause that justifies the swelling after it has been removed, which is a substance during which the healing occurs in the removal of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	So when the patient has been convinced that the tooth needs to be removed, you must firmly certify which tooth is painful, for symptoms of pain disappear with the removal of the tooth and fall into a healthy tooth, so you remove that tooth and immediately the pain does not cease until the maladjusted and painful tooth has been removed, which we have seen this way in the operation of the barbies.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	So how do you certify which tooth is painful and that you know well, then you must incise in the circuit of the tooth at its root where there may be some swelling, so that it dissolves from the tooth with the gum tissue on all sides, and then pull it out gradually towards your thumbs or through fine blades at their small ends as it begins to fall away.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then scrape with strong force or blow out forcefully, and place the head of the patient between your knees so that you do not harm them, and pull out the tooth according to rectitude in manner as not to tear it, nor give more pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not properly removed, then take one of those instruments, and hold that under all parts with ease and exert the removal as it was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If the tooth is broken or corroded, then you must complete with cloth that wound and strengthen it at its fine end so as not to be torn during your compression on it with your hands.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And when you make the incision precisely in the circuit of all parts of the gum tissue and preserve your strength so as not to tear it or damage that part of it, return to the patient through the skill which is greater than the first pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And remember not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their haste and audacity during tooth extraction, as they do not follow the things we have recommended; for many seen symptoms cause great maladies among men which are more difficult than being torn off, and all or some of their nerves get stretched out, or you pull that tooth from certain bones in their jaws as we have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And after the eradication of the patient, they wash their mouth with vinegar or add salt to it.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is an internal bleeding in the stomach, like hemorrhages caused by ulcers, then apply a certain amount of saffron and sprinkle it over the wound. If that saffron does not work, then use cauterization.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and the subtle tongs used in dentistry during the beginning phase is long at the extremity, short and thick with a handle, so that they don't bend when you use them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And it should be like that with thick handles inside where they shouldn't bend when you first use them, being short at the extremities.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	They should be made of Indian iron rods with straight extremities, and the extremities of those should have teeth from which one enters inside the other through constriction from top to bottom. Some of their extremities are shaped like the bill of a stork, which is called ciconia, this tool is used for gripping, and they have strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Title XXXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Regarding the removal of teeth and extraction of bones from fractured jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract a tooth that is deeply embedded for some reason, then press with both hands on the area until the spot becomes soft; and then insert a tool or use tongs from which the extremities resemble the bill of a stork called ciconia or glove, the shape of forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of these are made similarly inside like a chisel or wedge.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not follow your judgment with these forceps or tongs, then press on the root and remove all the flesh, and insert this tool which is called an awl, it has the form of this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And it should have a short thick extremity that is small at the end, and not be too large so as not to get stuck.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if the root is extracted through that hole, it's good; and otherwise, use this tool among others whose forms are these: the form of the first instrument is triangular at the extremity in which there is some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a more subtle extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And indeed, using this tool which has two ramps, like the following form:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And there are other instruments as I will describe for the shaving of teeth; this young man uses this tool that resembles a large cat's paw, and here is its shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	Of a triangular twisted or short extremity that has some thickness and is not too large to avoid getting stuck.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And know that the tools for treating teeth are similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	Let the craftsman be wise and skilled in his art, finding for himself according to what it means to him in operations and various diseases; there are diseases of which the ancients neither described nor used proper instruments because of their varied forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	Should the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth be fractured, or should you place pressure, then it is essential to weigh yourself in relation to that spot at its suitable location for your tools and forceps as mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots. Also use this tool whose form is thus:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And it should have a subtle thickness gradually reduced, and held within the mouth so that it does not slip or escape until all the bone is extracted through drilling; then restore the site with suitable medicines.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Should there be a small pus pocket in the bone, then extract that with its contents and address its discoloration, treating it internally to achieve healing.
Capitol .xxxii.	Title XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Regarding the treatment of prominent teeth compared to others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominently located not according to their natural position, especially so in the case of women, particularly elderly ones; thus you should consider: if there is no difference between one tooth and another, and it's impossible to drill or apply a remedy on them, then that tooth needs extraction; unless it isn't connected with other teeth, then you need to use this tool whose form resembles the cut in meat, made of Indian iron at the end which is extremely sharp:
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And if your tooth is sensitive to which you would drill it over many days due to the hardness of the teeth, and not become swollen like another of the teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is a tooth that has been extensively worn by grinding, then grind that with an Indian iron file of which this is the shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	It is all of Indian iron and the groove is made; it's cut with points as with a file that makes small holes, with which the tooth is ground piece by piece in moist days for ease, so that no other tooth becomes swollen and falls out.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then draw it out at the end, and cut there with some razor blades.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth where part is broken and you push the tongue over it, then hollow out that place in which the roughness of that portion is stopped and leveled, and fill it up so that the tongue does not slip nor does the word become muddled.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On restoring swollen teeth with a gold or silver instrument.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When it happens to the teeth before collapse and removal by impact or collision, and the patient cannot lift themselves for what they eat, and you have treated that with stomatic medicines, but your treatment has not been effective, then when it does not fall into those that are swollen with an instrument made of gold and not silver, which causes silver to turn green and allows days of rest, gold remains unchanged no matter how long.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the tool have such subtlety and roughness according to how much it can enter between the teeth; as for the shape of the insertion, take the tool and place twice its length between two healthy teeth, and adjust so that the two bends of the tool grow within each tooth from one swollen tooth or from two, ensuring that the mesh reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat this operation in the part from which you started, and strengthen your hand with ease so that it does not become swollen.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And when you apply pressure with the tool for which you are gripping the metal, do not let it slip from the teeth.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then, using forceps or cut them off, you grind these excess metal ends and add them wherever needed. You conceal these along with the healthy tooth between the swollen tooth, to avoid harming the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then pull it out like this would be done by a Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is dislodged or broken, hold that one or those with another tool in such a way throughout its entire process.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the shape of the teeth and the procedure for treating two healthy teeth and two swollen ones, as you would perform these actions in this manner:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when you return one tooth or two in their respective places, and they grow back as we have described, and swell again.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And do not let this be any other than good craftsmen and wise ones.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And some diseases are attributed to certain causes of cattle bones, and it is done in this way like the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth fails, and strengthened in this manner as we have said, and remains and serves there for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the operation of the tongue that appears in the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This tendon that appears to you in the tongue sometimes or is natural as one is born with, or accidentally occurs due to injury which has already become fixed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient, its head existing there; and lift up their tongue, then cut this tendon nerve according to the width within which the tongue has returned from its recent position.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any hardness or knot in that area, and this has been caused by the consolidation of an injury, then you heat it and cut through it longitudinally where you have cut the tendon, so that the knot disappears.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And make sure that there is not a crack formed in the edge of the flesh, and cut here in such a way that pus flows out.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then, wash the remnants of the incision with warm water or with vinegar or with soap lather; and place your patient's tongue in a wet state; thus it will be that when you leave the tongue to the patient each night without allowing any consolidation of another disease.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If pus flows out, place on the affected area a glass tube; but if blood comes out, then cauterize that spot with a continuous flame until you direct it to water.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then let this cure using the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the extraction of a ranula on your tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some diseases may occur on your tongue that resemble small pus pockets, preventing the tongue from performing its natural function; and if they swell up, they fill the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation for this is that you open the patient's mouth facing the sun and inspect the pus pocket.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you find it a dark color or black, hard, which the patient does not feel any sensation upon touching, then do not touch that one which is soft.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it turns to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then you put the dog in them, and incise that under a subtle surface, and incise it from every side; and if it smells of wind during your operation time, then you pause over zinc trissat, it's glass, within which the smell remains restricted.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work as soon as you have treated it with respect for them, and wash it with wine and salt; and treat that with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter xxxvi.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of pus from both ears and that which is nothing in the ear canal, as well as other pustules.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When it affects the ear canal, these are glands which are grouped like cotton wool; they occur outside and are named as two ears. When you treat them with what we have said in the division, if they do not heal, then consider whether the pustule is hard, of a dark color, with little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of reddish color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for fear of a bloody discharge; wait until it smooths out as it matures, then either you remove that, or it will burst on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color and clear, then that one should be incised because of the root of its condition.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And during your operation on it, you should consider whether before your operation the pustule has rested after its cautery for complete repose or if it has diminished with some diminution; then let the patient stand in front of the sun, and his head towards you, open their mouth, and place the servant between their hands taking their tongue out using an instrument noble in form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	It should be made of silver or gold, and it should be fine as a reed.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you press that tongue and the pustule is shown to you, and place your hand over it, then take hold of the dog and put it in the ear canal, and pull it out as far as possible from the openings.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another thing that you remove is some cause of the membranes, and then you should incise that with an instrument which has this form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	It is similar to forceps, however, the ends of it are curved, so that each one's opening faces inwards from the other, very sharp, and made of iron, heated up.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	May if this instrument is not in your possession at the moment, then you should incise that on the surface of which its shape resembles yours: it should be sharp from one side, not sharp from the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And once you have incised one side, then incise the other according to this method of incision, and as soon as you have made an incision on the patient, they are protected from rubbing with water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If if there is a discharge of pus, protect them from water by decoction of elderflower or mistletoe leaves and resemble that with the causes of stopping bleeding where the discharge of pus is restricted, then treat it until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes other pustules appear in the ear canal besides those two ears, and you should incise those as I have described for the incision of two wounds equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman with pus which was native to her ear canal, that pustule tended towards a dark color, of little sensation, which had already clogged her ear canal, and the woman breathed through her mouth wide open, and she had been forbidden from eating and drinking water, and she was already near death if it were not for an additional day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the pus had spread so much that it was filled with two lengths of garlic between which it would pass through in two places.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	And I surgically cut it out using forceps and placed one of them in an iron instrument, then pulled that out, and got rid of a large portion of him, then I incised the other end of the tool where I understood the passage, then made the patient open his mouth and held their tongue, then I placed the iron instrument into that pustule.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I removed a large part of it, and there was only a little pus coming from him instead.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	And absolutely the ear canal of that woman returned, she started drinking water immediately, and shortly began eating food. Therefore I did not stop incising for a long time with that pus, and new pus appeared in place of it, which would also be incised as that process continued.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	And I had that done and cauterized her ear canal, then it seemed like an addition. And then I wandered around not knowing what God did to that close to me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter xxxvii.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the incision of a node when it is pustular.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When there is catarr in the uvula and it's pustular and long, then it's named as a perpendicular. And if it is at the junction of thickened and round parts, then it's called a lump.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	And when it is healed with what we have said in the division and does not confirm your cure, and if there are multiple times that pus cauterization has already stopped from him and it's delicate, then you should determine to incise that which is added round; and if it extends towards that length, and it bleeds, of dark or black color or is not under his perception, then you should hesitate on the incision of it, because there is a fear for the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you turn that according to the way I've told you of its whiteness and length, make sure to examine the patient and press on their tongue with an instrument whose shape matches his condition, then adjust the scalpel in the new position and pull that outwards and cut it with one of two tools, which are mentioned in the cutting technique for two wounds.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And be sure not to cut that part beyond its natural addition; if you cut more from him, you will damage his speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And at the cutting point, use that which we recommended for the cutting technique of two knives; take care to cut only until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient is frightened by your cutting his thigh, be sure to use a tool in his cauterization that calms him down, and the way of cauterization involves only water, which you place on top of the thigh where it should be. Then press the tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, take some of the water from the head of the cauterization process, hold it alive, don't make it too thick or too thin, and fill the cavity of the tool whose shape is:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the treated part be placed in a cavity where medicine is applied as if it were in the cavity of a gall bladder, and place the tool with the medicine on his lips. Have the patient lie on his left side so that he can spit out or perform gargling in the mouth due to the intrinsic medicine, so as not to cause any harm from that amount on him and save him.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And place your hand on the medicine, and press it over the uvula for half an hour while you observe that she becomes degraded and subdued by the chewing of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take hold of and wrap it around the end of the ray, immerse the sponge in medicine, insert the ray into the sponge through a tube placed above it so that the sponge adheres to that tube. Do this as many times as necessary for obtaining what you want from the cauterization of the uvula. Then let it dry until it falls off about three or four days later.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you feel the need to apply the medicine again, do it, and for the cauterization process, cleanse through the circuit of the uvula with a sponge moistened in water, adjust according to that which is in the water circuit of his medicine, wash it with clean water, dress it afterwards with ointment, and apply remedies inside until it heals.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of treatment is beneficial, avoiding cutting and removing fear over time.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some uvula inflammations are treated with this subtle cauterization and cutting method, which is cured through subfumigation in this manner: collect comfrey, ivy, yarrow, rue, Arabic gum, chamomile, butter, and similar herbs and mix them with water from those sources. Adjust all these ingredients or some of them into one mixture, immerse it in warm water, let it boil; the mixture should be strained through a sieve on top of the cauldron where you prepare it. It should be brewed to taste correctly. In the middle of the cauldron place a rod, on which is placed an incising tool made of bronze according to this manner. Make sure it's either made of silver or bronze.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And immerse the end in the mouth of the patient so that the steam rises to the uvula over the orifice, while the uvula becomes somewhat opaque.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And continue to apply this treatment for those inflamed spots until they dry up. Remember not to perform this cure immediately after the appearance of abscesses; it might worsen in the abscess area. Do not do what I've mentioned, but declare that you're treating an abscess by cauterizing him instead.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you don't have this tool, then take a stick and make a hole in his thigh, so that the mouth of the patient can be closed. This prevents steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Chapter XXXVIII: On the removal of thorns and whatever adheres in the mouth, as well as other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Inflamed spots stick to the tongue or thorns from plants or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	And be sure to remove what is obvious from those, upon which you cast your gaze. By pressing the tongue with an instrument in front of yourself, it's evident to you what's inside the mouth.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what doesn't show and is hidden in the mouth, be sure to make the patient vomit before food is digested in the stomach; this forcefully allows the cause near the mouth to come out through vomiting. Or if the patient swallows a piece of bread or grated lettuce or a bite of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, tie it tightly with thread, and have the patient swallow that; then when it reaches the place where the thorns are, it will get stuck.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And if you take a wriggler fish and drink it with the tied thread, then lay it inside your mouth and gently pull it out; or take a spoon and gently place it and carefully bring it inside.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if they don't get stuck with those causes as we've said, then use an iron tool according to this manner:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	If there's thick pus that's not small, and if there's a constriction at the extremity of which you should enter into their throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And lift his head upwards, and be careful about the touch of his throat bone, because it affects his body and at that point where you push in the bone or spine, or what that surgeon feels with his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But let the patient that person enter with honey, by their knowledge of the location of the attached cause and push it down, then pull his hand towards the tool in front of him, all according to the quantity that is prepared inside so that a surgical incision is made.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of blood-sucking parasites attached to the belly.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When treated by blood-sucking parasites as we have discussed in the section on treatment with medicines and without agreement, consider this: within the belly of the patient facing the sun, for you to understand the tongue of him through the tool which we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	So if you manipulate the blood-sucking parasite, extract it from that which is small or from subtle positions in a decent manner.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it's not possible for you to extract from there, then take a concave catheter and insert that into the patient's belly, and place in the concavity of the catheter a heated iron, and do this several times (until the blood-sucking parasite is dead and removed from the belly) and keep the patient away from water for the whole day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And take one cup full of water, and make the patient open their mouth into that, and wash their mouth with that; and don't touch any cause from that for an hour around them, letting the water a second time by their hand whenever they feel the water come.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it's not an incision made as we have recommended, then immerse the patient in water or in turpentine with the tool that we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, and let it remain until it dissolves.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	Another method of operation in fumigation like this is to take a torch with burning coals and the torch covered by a cloth in the middle of which there's a hook; place the end of the tool into that hook; then elevate it above the fumigation; have the patient hold their mouth at the end of the catheter, and close their mouth so that the fumigation doesn't go inside until you know that the fumigation has reached the blood-sucking parasite; as soon as the blood-sucking parasite dissolves.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it doesn't come out, then you should repeat the fumigation several times, and keep the patient from drinking, eat salty and bland foods instead, and don't drink water, and necessarily this regimen must be carried out.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the tool with which blood-sucking parasites in the belly are dealt when seen; and it's similar to forceps like this, except when it's within them in some curvature:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	It's laid out on the belly, and the end of it is similar to the beak of a stork, which is curved, with what feels like a file, because when you grasp any object, that thing won't slip.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the full discourse regarding pustules and in sections about them.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Pustules are special spots, according to their various manners, as recalled from memory, in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they vary in piercing and section of them by two methods. Of which the first is through the specificity of pustules themselves, when we take from the moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is due to the locations where they occur in the body, for when a pustule happens in the head it's different from one that happens in the anus; and the pustule in the meaty location is different from the pustule happening at a joint. And each one has its own way of being treated operationally.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And pustules are some that cover, which do not allow to be pierced except near the maturation of health in those or completion of them.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other pustules are those that cover which rupture when they cross over and are not maturing according to their completion, such as pustules near joints. When a pustule approaches the joint, the being of them is prolonged until you insert what's inside them in their circulation, and strengthens their corruption of the muscles or nerves of that joint, causing a constriction effect on that member; or it's a pustule close to the main body part, and if you delay piercing it until its maturation has failed for the main body part; or it's near the anus, therefore pierce the un-maturing one; and does not cover when you pierce across due to incomplete digestion, but the one that is near the anus, so that you do not release them and they become elongated within the parts inside the anus, forming a fistula, or made in the end of it that's not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	And you should cover until you know the time for piercing the pustule, which is when it's matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you should know that it's matured when the pain and fever subside, as well as a decrease in swelling and pulse rate, and sharpness of the head of the pustule, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And when you know that the pus hole has been found in the affected area, leave it to drain pus from the abscess and pus coming from the healing of the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the hole should be made through the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the areas of the muscles or feet, and on spots of lumps, on threads of nerves, on arteries; and, similarly, throughout all equal places where reflection does not occur. In those that do reflect, use a hole according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in a meaty area, then it's best to make an incision within which confirmation of its digestion according to harmony follows; as we have said. If you pierce it before that point, it will prolongate the flow of pus and indigestion, and hardens the muscles and deepens the depth of the wound.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Such abscesses should be pierced according to the size of the flesh or body, or according to where it is on the member that needs treatment.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And when you administer a small incision, and for large abscesses, a big and wide or indurated hole according to the variety of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And others are of the abscesses in which it is necessary for the opening to be squeezed and then heated when made; such that one does so like bread being baked and done until it sticks, as what happens with many dubels and bubos.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are pierced in a section with three angles; and of those it's done like the shape of a snail shell when being pierced, as with the abscesses of the gouty.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And among them is where a circular section and a crescent-shaped section are administered, resembling those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	As for the one that is not capable of doing so, such as superficial lion abscesses, it's necessary to pierce it with a superficial incision, or flatly just.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is thick and has already collected healthy pus, pierce it but don't worry about draining all the pus at once; take out some part of it, then let the abscess settle for another day, then extract a larger part, then do this until you get a hole that's well open.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Especially if the patient is old and strong, or a young girl, or an infant, or an elderly person in decline, where the animal spirit's unhealthy pus is resolved with the release of healthy matter, making them much better, and you operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care of this chapter, and when you make your incision in which to extract these abscesses, it's necessary that you cleanse the wounds and consider where if the abscess is small, or a flat section, then administer the remedies accordingly; and if the abscess is large, and the openings from the incision are indurated, then it's necessary that you use leeches in each vein until they reach their time.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess a part of the channel is excised or it's concaved within the circuit, then it's necessary that you complete it with leather strips or filaments made of cloth; as when you knead dough or mix ingredients, considering humidity; and strengthen it on the third day; and proceed with that and treat whatever comes from the ointments until it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	And if you experience bleeding from the blood during your operation, it's necessary that you administer water baths and vinegar together in which to soak a cloth, and place it over the area of the bleeding.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	And if the blood continues to flow, it's necessary that you administer medicine and treatment along with the powders I've recommended in specific locations of this our book and its divisions.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	And if it's during winter, and the location of the abscess is in a spot of nerves, then it's necessary that you coat powders with vinegar and oil, and place those over the areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it's in summer, and the areas are fatty, then it's necessary that you coat powdered things with water and oil, or vinegar and oil, and do this all until the third day, as we've said, and then it's necessary that you discharge the abscess and cleanse that area, administering what suits him during his recovery until he heals.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what's necessary for the knowledge of treating abscesses universally, but according to the path of distinction already mentioned, about all abscesses in which manner they are treated through recovery by chapters specifically.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter .xl.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Regarding the section of abscesses which occur in the channel of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the channel of the head small abscesses, and they are special nodes which contain tunics that are part of their nature; and the special aspects of these nodules.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from them are pinches, and those which contain moisture akin to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those that contain moisture like dust, and resemble them; and those which are waxy, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, like you should not oppose blood vessels when extracting those.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those is that you expose them with an instrument whose shape resembles this somewhat, which is called a probe, knowing that it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If it concerns that which contains moisture, then divide that in sections according to length along the superficial section as shown in this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And starts at the section of line .B. within line .G. Thus as moisture is evacuated, then you scrape that skin which contains that moisture, and let no cause remain from it, so if any cause is found it returns again, if there remains any cause from that.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse the affected area in Egyptian ointment if it's present, or otherwise in water and salt; fill that with the ointment and leave it immersed for another day. And as this dissolves everything that is corroded by that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply the Egyptian ointment over that affected area again and once more if you need to, within which assume there is no remaining cause of that skin; then treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if pus contains fatty nodes, then you should incise there according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	You create a section in the shape of an X, and make cuts between the two edges of the section and cut there from all sides, and exert your strength in the extraction of the tissue which contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If you feel discomfort during surgery, then do what I told you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Similarly do for the purulent area and healing according to what we have told you; and for the purulent area is light, because it has few symptoms and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some of these pus sores are in the head in some people where there is no moisture; this cause is why I incise over a sore on the head of an old woman and open up the sore like a hard, white lump, which could not be squeezed, and if it was applied to one, that wound would occur.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	And in other occurrences in the head apart from this head, like the sores that come on the cheeks of children and you know the reasons for the earlobes, but the area of these all is superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the puncturing of those from the lower part of their body, so that it brings comfort to the body in the parts with pus.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then treat those with what is suitable for their healing process.
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol .xlii.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section concerning scrophula which occurs in the throat.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These pus sores are found in the throat and under the jawbones, as well as in the lymph nodes; some occurrences happen in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Those occur in the throat; they are masses that develop among themselves. All scrophula of those is within their own tissue, just like in the lymph nodes and pus in the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The types of these scrophula are lumps; some contain moisture from those, others contain moisture themselves, and the malignant ones do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	And in that one which you must have good disposition in the Tocament, of which the color which is evident corresponds to the color of the codena, and it extends everywhere, not adhering to the nerves of the throat, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and it's not swollen so when you incise that on a superficial section above the codena to the part below of the body between the line of .G. and the line of .B., you burn that from all sides, spread the edges of the codena with anointing oil or with onion paste if necessary, as we have said for the sores in the head, and remove that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more caution to avoid incising the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And if the cut is not too deep that it adjusts to your hand during incision, or if it calms the patient, then do not incise what's unnecessary; and if you incised a vein or artery and are prohibited from your operation, then pause in the inflamed sore with powders that stop bleeding, strengthen the wound, and leave it so that the heat of the sore is reduced and the wound becomes softened, and begin to heal.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the pus has been drained.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	And return to your operation when you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then ask according to what I told you about whether there is any cause of the other small scrophula, then incise those and cleanse them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it's in the area of the large vein, then when you should not incise that scrophula from its area.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before this, when you are working with it on a thick thread and let that fall naturally by itself.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already immersed in Egyptian ointment, and then treat that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise that whole scrophula, then when you adjust the two edges of the wound and let a little pus come out so that there is no excess fluid remaining.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	And if you notice that there is excess fluid due to the size of the scrophula, then when you understand to incise its area, remove that and administer suture as what was said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	The treatment for those suffering from the scrophula disease that contains moisture, you should pierce there at the surface where it appears in your patient's location of maturation, and make a piercing on what is the base of their body's pus, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer a piercing, you must apply grease and resemble those, in order that it corrodes what is rotten from the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you turn the ulcer to be cleaned, then you treat that with grease of flesh-generating substance until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the section of the boil in relation to an incident inside the glandular area.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	They did this section on the boil, and I haven't seen anyone in our land who has done such a thing.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the record of the sermon of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	In men they have a corner, a place that should be avoided when removing the boil, as thus it might not be done properly since all veins and the major ones in the thigh are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have boils on the mouth or in the glandular area or both ears, when the malaise is not in the nose, one should avoid the section of the boil to prevent the loss due to perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	So when we want this, that we incise the boil leaving three circles of the circles of the boil, or four on a smaller section by latitude in that which is between two circles according to quantity, so that the section is in ciphac, not on the cartilage. This place is suitable for section as it lacks flesh and its blood vessels are hardened.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is cautious, then immediately extend the gland's duct at its base and then open the duct until it reaches the channel, but avoid blood vessels if any of them seem to cause pain.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then incise it according to what we have described; this is indicated on the section of the channel by the inflammation which is from that excrement in that which has burst and through the elimination of pus.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the time is ripe for the feared incision, add two layers of the duct of the boil, and if that alone is the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that encourage new flesh to grow until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And it is recorded that Albucasis that the summa of the sermon which we have described, exposition shows that some of those boils have already removed the gland of the thigh, and the thigh has gone into death, and his body was septic, and some would incise the epiglottis so that the thigh breathes over the site of the boil for one respiration, and thus saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this reason we command to leave the boil open until its malignancy is consumed; and it's the malignancy of him over three days; and then we command thusly the boil, and treat it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen through my experience is that a servant felt a cold in her gland and incised on one part of the lung canal, and I was called to treat him, and they acted just as if it were crying from the dead, and opened the boil and removed the pus which was excreted from the boil little by little.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	So I would confess that she did not incise a vein or artery, and the wind came from the boil, and treated it until she was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And nothing happens to the servant unless even in the pus, and some days return to treat her conditions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And I also say that near the section of the boil there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On the section about the boil that occurs outside the gland, which is called the hernia of the gland.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This boil named hernia of the gland is a large boil according to the color of the body, and it moves in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it follows two ways, whether it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case there is no need to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental follows two ways of which one is similar to fatty lumps, and the other way is like a boil that forms due to the occlusion of an artery, and in that case there's fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not presume about it as if it were iron, but only for the one that is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should press that and investigate it as described, and if you find something resembling fatty lumps, and is not hanging from any of the veins, then you should incise it like a lump, and extract what it contains from the skin and pus; and otherwise, then thoroughly examine its entire structure, and treat the area with whatever promotes healing until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the section of types of lumps.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the lumps there are various kinds, and I have already described all their types in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And you should understand this difference between a lump and an ulcer as to avoid confusion.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	And I say that in ulcers there is warmth, fever, and violent pains within that quench the boiling of excess; and the process of decomposition occurs when later the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	May it not be heat or fever nor pain, and consider that lion's heart which is in his own stomach.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And according to the color of the blood, and the patient's appetite is like a fever and is done similarly with urine, whether it's more or less, and this depends on two species: whether they are fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are spots, as I explained in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	So when you reach the treatment of nodes, remove that and inquire about that at the time of eating which is called an introduction, according to what comes with its form in the forehead which is close to this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method of questioning for abscesses and all nodes, and you take this instrument and introduce it into the pus-infested area that you find in the abscess, and you will work your fingers inside little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the wall.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then finish your hand according to the size of the abscess, and then extract the introduction and consider what is left in its wake.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the moisture is external and of any color, then you incise on the superficial section as I said in other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there's no moisture left from the introduction, then you know it is fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry off over it as if to form a cross according to this shape:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	And do as you have been taught, hang it on hooks, and scrape the wall from all sides with ease, and if possible keep the skin or sack over that, then extract that cure towards the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	May if it breaks during the operation, it's not possible to extract that cure, and spots will be visible under this, and then you will extract it piece by piece without causing any damage.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	And if there's some reason for its return with it, the node returns according to what's possible.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you notice that there's a small part of it with some cause, then fill the wound with some corrosive and sharp powders, strengthen the wound, place over that which is the pus spot, cure it from another treatment until it's healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it's a large node, then cut both of the patient's lips and cure that which is inside it.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	May if it's pulsating against or not, then cover and heat the place of where the blood flows that is the vein, smooth that stretch for two days or three until the wound heals and stops bubbling from the blood; and then return to incise that which has broken inside the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter forty-six.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Regarding the necessary forms of the instruments in sections and punctures.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Among those are the forms of the introductions, and there are three species, from which one is large, and of them, one is intermediate, and of them, one is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large introduction is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the intermediate introduction is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small introduction is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They should be made of iron, alum, or pointed ends that descend properly, so that they warm the internal parts in the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experienced ones, and they are named long, and one of them is called red.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	They are in three species, which include large, intermediate, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large experienced one, it's this shape:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the intermediate experienced one, its this shape:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small experienced one, its this shape:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	Let it be known that they should be for those abscesses, exits, and fistulas, through which between them are of bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are round rods, large, like thick needles with the wounds sewn on them, and made of copper, or from copper or iron, or silver; and the best ones are those made of copper.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are introductions of black feathers that it's known should allow the passage of fistulas in the cavity of which there are reflections, which are reflected towards their levity to those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	They are in three species, among which some are long, and of others intermediate, and the others short, according to the amount of width of the fistula and its constriction.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The form of the large experienced one made of lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The form of the intermediate experienced one made of lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The form of the small experienced one made of lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the forceps are of particular shapes, among which some are simple ones, which have only a curvature, and they are in three species: large, small, and intermediate.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And their tongs are from iron, and they are in three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among these tongs have two curves, and they are in three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And their ends have three curves, and they are in three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	All of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a large simple hook, its shape:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of a simple intermediate hook:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a simple small hook, its shape:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of an ironed large hook:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of a half-moon, shape of him:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a half-glove, shape of him:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a large spoon with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape of a half-spoon with two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a glove with two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a large spoon with three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a half-spoon with three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a glove with three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels on which cuts and incisions are made to the nodes and abscesses, and they come in three types; one of those is large, half-sized, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Shape of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Shape of the half-scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Shape of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The ends of those [scalpels] on which cuts are made are sharp, while the other ends are not, and they are not held in such a way but rather so that during the operation on nodes there is a fear of cutting into a vein or nerve. For those it heals the patient and finds tranquility somewhat due to the adjustment which you find in the excision, for from this adjustment you obtain the excision of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of amadou sticks, and they come in three types: large, half-sized, and small, just like that.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of a large mallet:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of a half-mallet:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of a small mallet:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made from reed and resemble a pipe in which alcohol is placed.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And at the tip there's a punctured area and an inner sponge hidden in it, within and without, as you wish, just as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers, allow you to pierce the abscesses without feeling the pain of the patients, and they come in three types: large, half-sized, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of suction cups from which the discharge of pus is removed, and they come in three types: large, half-sized, and small; these are their forms:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made from the wood of the citron fruit, round with some length, and they are delicate.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And know that these kinds of suction cups are in large, half-sized and small ones, so that with them you can remove the pus discharge at speed when it's necessary, and otherwise when your first remedy is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use those to remove pus anywhere in the body, but use them only on fatty areas, just like on the swellings and thighs, and on the swellings of the arms, breasts, nipples, belly, and groin, resembling the fatty swellings that are moist.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some cases involve the use of those instruments or small cuts resembling the wounds made in this way; with which pus is removed when done through bloodletting, or when you need to cut a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some cases involve making circular incisions according to this way:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of male breasts which are assembled by females.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some cases involve the breasts of certain men becoming swollen as they begin to resemble skin, and similarly these breasts become swollen, resembling female breasts and being far apart.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for those who experience this, know that you should cut these at a lunar section according to this way, from the line of .B. into the line of .G., and thoroughly scrape the roughness, and fill the wound with an ointment, and adjust the two edges of the wound for suturing, and treat it internally until it heals.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the breast declines towards the parts below and is softened by its size just like in women, then it should be cut into two halves releasing pus, at two sections resembling a lunar figure, where each is contained within the other of you, with the major line containing the minor according to this way of the line of .B. and the line of .G. Then thoroughly scrape the seam which is between the two edges of the wound, remove the swelling, and administer what has been said about suturing and powders as necessary in its treatment until it heals.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the cut of this that should be made due to the anxiety of the patient and pus flow, then know that you should cover the wound with a piece of cloth submerged in corrosive ointment and treat it internally until this corrodes which is from fatness, and similarly heal it until it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the operation of puncturing abscesses that occur in the breasts.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that occur in the breasts are from the species of scrophula, tumors, which contain a layer that is sack-like.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those that contain moisture; and of those containing moisture you should puncture at a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of .G. to the line of .B. And when all is evacuated which is inside the abscess, then cover it with a piece of cloth and treat internally on the other day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then keep massaging it with a suitable ointment for water, until it heals.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the glandular nodes or the catarrh is present, then you cut over that space as we said in the section on catarrh, equally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the wound extends into an area that causes pus production, then apply the cautery according to what we have explained previously.
Capitol .xlix.	Title: Forty-nine
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Section on abscesses that occur due to archery or through veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When archery breaks and the vein becomes consolidated which is over that area, then pus-filled lumps occur as abscesses. And the signs by which one can recognize whether inflammation or an abscess is due to an artery or a vein: when an abscess due to archery is long extended in the body; and when you press on these described places, you feel a whistling sound in them.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to a vein appears rounder as it manifests within the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	This section discusses this abscess, particularly focusing on those with distinct symptoms, as well as necks, the throat, and specific bodily lumps; it's a large one, so its treatment requires careful consideration, especially when located at the extremities or at the head where precautions must be taken.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Regarding the one due to the inflammation of the archery outlet, divide it in the vein section longitudinally. Then cut open the section with scissors and expose the archery, freeing it from the tunics that are uncovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then treat that needle and allow it to penetrate into the other side, strengthening the archery at two spots - this causes your skillful extraction of two archeries which are within the knights.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then cut open that spot which is between two ligaments within the space where the disease and pus are present, so that it may dissolve the abscess.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then apply treatment in the area where liquid is being produced within, which falls between the ligaments; and treat that with ointments suitable for water until it heals.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess due to the section of veins, then you must have your hand this way that you take control over the location where there is the possibility of pus from the abscess within the body; and introduce the needle into the spot which you have already held with your hand, allowing it to penetrate. And be in such a situation where you extract that part from the other side, and then bind up the abscess using two ligaments as I instructed you according to the ligament of an apple when you have two parts on either end of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that you might pull out the thread, then insert a needle into that spot with your first needle throughout the entire abscess; strengthen your needles in four spots.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Dry out the abscess in the middle of it until when you touch what is inside, then you cut away the excess membrane, leaving behind whatever is attached to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place over the powder which you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and apply treatment with cloths and ointments until it heals.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Section one of the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	This is similar to how abscesses occur in archery and veins, as well as when they occur due to percussion of nerves or excessive handling, and similarly.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And the method for this is done in the places of the assistants or at the wrist, or anywhere where there are swollen joints.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a heavy abscess, similar in color to the other body parts, within large portions of its disposition, and when stretched due to suddenness, you feel in the thighs what seems like fainting.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess that extends throughout the body, and by itself controls the veins, spreading everywhere and not going forward or backward from its location.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, for those that are within the joints, it should not be confined to iron, which will indeed promote healing.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	This section discusses how to treat abscesses in the head or forehead by puncturing the veins through a space.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it is a small abscess, then you should take care of that at the root and cut off that part from its roots.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then you should suspend it with a string, scratch that area, and hold it there; adjust the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Title: Fifty
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Section on the section of abscess that occurs from a boil, which affects the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Consider the following symptoms observed in the abdomens of those individuals and in other parts of their bodies that these are referred to as 'fungus' due to their similarity with fungi. The roots of this issue are subtle but the head is large; they also describe the mouths of those affected, which vary from being small to becoming extremely magnified.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have already seen one case where in that person's abdomen there were two parts resembling fungi, and there was no distinction between those white ones with small roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already the mouths of those affected would be inverted and split, moisture would flow continuously from them.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, I inserted and removed those in one on each side up to about eighteen inches in depth. And the other holds up one.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And in the operation at their beginning you consider whether the patient is wet, and if the color of the sweat is white, wet, with a slight rash; then you cut through their skin laterally, and in your presence apply a cautery to the fire, which boils off any contaminated area; and if you find dirt, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see that the patient is nervous and fearful, avoid cutting with iron; rather take lead which has been freshly made, and strengthen that wound, in this way as we have described. And leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And adjust around the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not stop strengthening large amounts of lead in this area until it is removed and falls out by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	And if the area is covered by a thick rash, then in cutting it there might be some cause for fear and alarm, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It's possible that you will cut out the rash, then apply a cautery to prevent it from returning.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And take care of that area until the wound has healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And watch that you do not assume to cut out anything that is of a dark color, with little feeling, under careful consideration; for that will be an abscess.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I shall come back with reminders nearby.
Capitol .lii.	Headmark 52.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Regarding the treatment of the navel's prominence.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Navel prominence is caused by various factors; it can be due to fissures in the belly that is above the abdomen, and it results from the patient's skin or intestine as happens in other ruptures. Or it can be due to dirt which flows from veins or arteries as was explained earlier, or it could be due to constricted wind in them.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it's due to the belly's fissure and from skin inflammation, then the color of the pus is similar to that of the body; and there's severe pain, and it appears in various locations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it's due to the protrusion of the intestine, then that location corresponds to what we've recounted, with greater intensity, and as you press it on your fingers, it disappears, and then returns; and it feels tender at its location so you should introduce water and vigorous work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	And if it's due to dampness, then there is pain and it doesn't disappear when you press with your hand, nor does it get constricted or swollen.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it's due to dirt, then these signs appear in the pus turning blackish.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it's due to nothing but flesh, then the pus is heavy, large, and hard, and its color depends on an amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	And if it's due to wind, then palpating him feels painful.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And in the operation for him you consider whether the navel prominence is due to dirt from arteries or veins, or wind; here lies the prohibition of treating him, as fear and alarm occur there just as we have taught about pus caused by arteries and veins in the chapter.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the navel prominence is due to the intestine or skin, then order the patient to hold his breath and stay lying down. Then test in the area of the entire navel, and then tell him to lie facing towards your hands on his back. Then encircle with a lateral incision around the circumference of the navel at the point you have tested. And extend the size of the pus well above the line with large cuts; and surround that area with strong lead or wax in this way of covering decently.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then cut open the middle of the pus that extends over the muscle and insert your finger into that area to remove the intestine; and if you find it or detect it by the muscle, then pull out the affected area immediately and push the intestine back into the abdominal cavity.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you find the skin, then take that with a cut; and remove any excess in it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	And if it's against your artery or vein, then encircle that spot and return to your operation. Take two needles and place them in these two strong leads, inserting the needles into the circuit around the pus area in a way of crossing, making them penetrate. And strengthen the pus in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, hold the needles and leave that spot so that the flesh will stretch and fall by itself; or cut that when it becomes thinner and is placed in this way, then proceed to treat that with what is prescribed inside until it heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the navel prominence is due to no flesh or dampness in it, then you should remove the pus as we have said and eliminate the dirt or dampness, which you find there, and then treat that with what is prescribed and strengthen that area.
Capitol .liii.	Headmark 53.
De curacio de cranc.	Regarding the treatment of wounds.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already discussed in the division of different types of wounds and how they are treated with medicine, and it is squamous when the treatment with iron does not result in ulceration; we also spoke about wounds produced by the negligence and carelessness during their treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And it was said by the ancients that some wounds heal in places where there is the possibility of eradicating them completely, such as on the head which is found in the breasts or on the thighs and in areas corresponding to extracting everything from them, especially when they are small at the beginning.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When it is ancient and very painful, don't bother touching them, because I cannot heal from one to another like this, nor have I seen anything else, nor has it been cured in this way.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And during the operation on you is as we have said, you lead and allow the patient and purge of black bile in some stages, then you apply that, if it's blocked filled with obvious symptoms.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for the preparation in which the operation is located, and prepare to cut the veins leading to that; and then hollow out from all sides with a good excision inside so as not to damage any cause of your illness.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and don't stop it slightly at that place, and squeeze the spots, and cleanse your blood thoroughly either with your hand or with an instrument of which is within your capability among the tools.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you find an obstruction of large blood or in the vein or artery, then apply heat to that inside where the flow of blood has ceased, and then treat it with the other treatment where it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	I believe this line refers to "Caput" which translates to "Head" in Latin from the term "capitol". The phrase may be referring to surgical procedures concerning the head or mentioning a part of anatomy, possibly related to medicine or surgery.
De curacio de ydropici.	About the treatment of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed in the division of the types of dropsy due to water, and the signs for each type. We will use medicines for their treatment.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is merely the type of anemia alone, and it should not be treated close to the types of tympanites or dysentery; for this latter is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have treated this type of dropsy due to tympanites with medicines and your treatment does not respond, then consider the following: if the patient has already become debilitated or if another illness or other type of dropsy exists within them, such as coughing up phlegm or abdominal pain etc., in these cases, you should not treat them with iron, for caution is necessary about this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you find that the patient is suffering from excess of vital force causing illness, and if there is no other illness but dropsy alone within them, neither old nor young, then the way to operate on them is: lift up the patient among your hands, minister to them so as to release their abdomen with your hand, expel water towards the part left of the pubis, take a thorn spatula according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should be of two long parts with sharp ends, like a spatula. However, it must be slightly shorter in your hand, such that during the operation you do not go into the intestine, and you gently apply it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the formation of dropsy is from parts of the intestines. In that case, you need to find the section three finger widths away below the navel along the line extending towards the pubis on both sides.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the cause of dropsy (hydropic) is due to an ailment in the uterus (fetus), then your section should be three fingers to the left of the navel.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the cause of his/her condition is due to the womb (menses), then your section should be on both sides.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And don't let your section be on the side where you want the patient to lie so that the excess fluids do not accumulate in that area.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then puncture the entire length of the tool and enter that section. Lift your hand between the length and the siphon, and scrape that area. If the quantity is as large as a fingernail or roughly so.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then puncture the siphon so that it reaches to the desired location, which is where the water is.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then remove that and insert an instrument of this form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it is similar to a fine silver catheter. It's made of silver or horn or ivory. At the lower part of this device, there is a small point, and on its sides are three points: two from one side and one from the other; the tip of this device is cut like a feather pen, as you would see:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And on the tip of this is an upper part that's like a bracelet. When the device reaches water, it starts moving over the instrument immediately, then evacuates some water in the middle quantity during this time period. If you evacuate more than from here without delay, it may weaken the patient due to resolving their spirit-animal essence, or they might experience suffocation leading towards death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Evacuate from that according to the vitality of the person and according to what your interpretation means about the disposition of the patient regarding the vitality of their pulse and their goodness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then remove the instrument, drain out the water that causes it, as soon as this is held back by the intestines which retain the point above the siphon of which you have recounted to you that you must puncture in accordance with that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And gradually use the instrument on the other day if you see that the patient tolerates this, and extract a small amount of water, and do this for several days with caution, and refrain from any mistake that would not let the water evaporate completely.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear for the patient, and allow a large amount of water to evaporate, then treat that area by burying it in hot sand, with moisture applied in the bath, and waited under the sun for a long time; and treat that area with drying medicines until they are healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And apply the cautery on the stomach, and prepare the paste close to water extraction, according to what I have recounted in what precedes.
Capitol .lv.	The translation for "Capitol .lv." is unclear as it does not provide enough context or seems to contain an error due to its format (.lv). If ".lv" was meant to denote Lithuania (a country code), additional context would be necessary for a proper translation.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	From the cure of children who are born with uncircumcised urinary tract openings.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some of the baby's veins extend from their mother's belly, and the head of their mixture (or umbilical cord) is not punctured (or is stretched or not in its right place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Then cover the baby with the incision as soon as they are born, with a fine spatula according to this method:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And place on the baby's cord a thin lead pin and join it, keep this for three days or for forty days.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when they want to urinate, let them urinate; and return the baby back afterwards.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not pause the lead, it's possible that the urine which goes over the area will not close this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	Take care of that which has the cord stretched with a lead pin, as we have said, for too many days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	Take care of those in whom the cord is not in its right place, which is the cause for these, that one who was born and has the cord at the end of his penis so he cannot urinate inside, until it raises the penis with his hand on the top parts; this does not affect his offspring, according to his own semen cannot reach the mother correctly, and it's a defect marked by this.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The method of the operation for him is that he lies on his back, and you extend his penis head with your left hand with a strong extraction, and cut the tip of his penis head at the opening of the prepuce with a sharp blade, like a feather or without cutting any part, so that his foreskin resembles the head of the penis and that his cord falls into the middle place according to this method.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And remember that in your operation for blood flow, what spots occur here; and wait with him until you have cut the blood vessel, and treat the wound so that it heals.
Capitol .lvi.	The translation for "Capitol .lvi." is unclear as it does not provide enough context or seems to contain an error due to its format (.lvi). If ".lvi" was meant to denote a chapter number, additional context would be necessary for a proper translation.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Regarding the white material that occurs in the prepuce at the tip of the penis and discoloration, blackening, and adhesion of the prepuce at the tip of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Veins appear in this white matter on the skin, indicating a mark or scar tissue.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of that one is malignant and the other is not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malignant, take care to suspend with a fine one and cut that between which you remove everything; then cover over that spot under the Egyptian oil paste; then treat that area with transparent oil until it heals.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the white matter is malignant, notice its color, then take care to apply cautery near the cut and the ratio of him.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	Take care if white matter is in the prepuce at the tip of the penis (uncircumcised), and one part of white matter is inside the prepuce and the other part is outside; then take care to remove white matter which is inside until it consolidates; and later you treat that outward, when you treat that period, there's no guarantee it won't get wet.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And it happens that blackness and corruption occur in the genital organs and in the prepuce; then take care to remove all that has already degraded and is about to corrupt or that has already been corrupted; and mark on that area with honey, which is treated with flour made from poppy seeds and crushed sesame seeds and groundsesame.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And treat that with the other treatment until it heals.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	Take care if you have blood discharge, then apply lunar cautery according to this method:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	And for young cauterization, it is done in two stages at the same time, which are during blood discharge and when the wound is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the tip of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed at that moment, then take care to insert a lead tube into the meat of the prepuce so that the baby can urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	Regarding the adhesion of prepuce at the tip of the penis (this adhesion occurs only in that which has a prepuce, and circumcision is not performed on him; and when adhesion happens due to wound or abscess) take care to excise with blunt blade until it is dissolved and the tip of the penis is free from all parts.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it's difficult to excise those thoroughly, then take care to excise with blunt blade from the tip of the penis and prepuce; thus is that what happens when the prepuce, being thin and slightly heavy, is pierced by its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the prepuce and the tip of the penis with a blade of their size, which has already been moistened in water to prevent sticking to another piece of skin.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then it is treated with a string tie until it becomes solid.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 57.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the formation of children and the treatment of what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continence as with other diseases: rather, it's more about our operation and will, and unlike that one, it's particularly necessary in children, so we must assign the best operation there and cause less loss to health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	So they say that the ancients did not perform circumcision in some of their free tribes, where they do not use their laws, but rather because we have acquired this through experience, I have found out that the majority of artisans and barbers use circumcision and tonsure on testicles and on nipples; and they use foreskin on faith and ingrown toenail on the thumb.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have tried all these ways and found no better tonsure on foreskins, on faith that is on tonsure like ingrown toenail, which cuts off the chain more above, which the chain of prepuce has two tunics, and leaves the soft part underneath, and strength is lost to another ingrown nail and secure pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the tonsure which is done by aphecati, and is digital, of which the carpenters use, does not guarantee the removal of the nail from the end of the male member, for it forces inside the hole of him.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	And in the operation on the thumb, strength loses to rust and spoils your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of the child is short by nature, and veins don't swell in such a manner that it needs tonsure, I have seen that.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	The benefits of tonsure that is done on foreskins and nails on faith, I discovered through experience, because the nails are proportionally removed; so that the sharpness above is as that which remains. And thus when you press your hand it's proportioned to two sharpnesses, and cuts according to a comparison in one time; and there is no error of foreskin from all sides on that, at which none makes mistake entirely.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child stand more if he's one I understand somewhat small, so you should only lie the faith in his penis and leave it for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make that child cheerful in every manner of that way that is possible to you according to what receives his intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make that child stand between your own hands well prepared, and do not let it be too close; hide the nails in your hand or leave them on your thigh, so that the child does not see those nor any other of the tools.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand to the penis of him and blow into the foreskin, and pull that inside until the tip of the penis is released, and prepare the tonsure for what's added in it due to inflammation.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then lie the area marked on faith twice, and then apply some pus base of that onto the second thumb, and prepare to do so with the tip of your finger at a good retention spot of the thumb left, and cut between two thumbs.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the foreskin slightly and extract the tip of the penis; and let the blood drain slowly, which is better; pause powder on it and over the powder lay a cloth in which is spread honey oil mixed with boiled water; let that remain there for another day; and treat that with treatment until it's healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the nails during tonsure, this is the shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let the first ends be uncut and the others be cut, so that it doesn't release the stem of the nail, and let the length of two sharpnesses be as the length of two fingers equally.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in tonsure is that it cuts off the whole intrinsic foreskin or part of it, you should avoid cutting.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	So cover that of your hand to your thumb before the scabbing of the area, and cut that according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it on your thumb, then remove that with a knife and cut that.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	And if it has been three days, and the swelling of that remains on your penis after scabbing, then let that be under that which melts the scab, and scrape that smoothly, and cut that according to what is prepared for you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And beware of the tip of the penis, that should not be on him.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then treat that with what heals the wound from those powders which we have recommended in the chapter on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it's cut into the foreskin to measure, and follows the parts above, that doesn't show to him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 58.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by blockage due to gravel or concentrated blood, or by placing or through a string, similar to what we have described in the chapters on methods of treatment.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if urine is not dissolving, and you find it hard for him to urinate because of the pain already in the neck of the bladder, then advise that the patient should be kept on their sides.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And guide the legs of that person onto their back and stretch out their abdomen from the middle up to their back, and the patient should tighten their stomach as much as is possible for them.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	So then the neck of the bladder is strengthened and forces out the pain to the parts behind, so that urine can be completely released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if what we have said does not dissolve and the cause is forcefully applied to the patient, then advise that you perform an extraction on them using a tool called a syringe, which looks like this: It's made of silver and is finely crafted like a lion's claw. It has the same length as a needle from a sewing thread but is half its size in length, with a subtle taper at the tip.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of draining urine from that person is to take the curved horn and bind it with wool or cloth for good adhesion; then insert the ends of the horn into the area where you left off with the syringe, cut any unnecessary part of the horn if there's any issue with the wool, rather forcefully insert it into the syringe channel. Then vigorously move the syringe back and forth along the line of fluid on the skin.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And guide the patient to lie on their back, and oil the bladder and the groin with a mixture of oil and olive oil and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And guide the syringe into its position so it reaches the area of the groin; then bend the groin above the umbilical fold; then press the syringe inside that spot; then press that spot inwards until it reaches the bladder; and that makes the patient feel relieved at the empty cause, and if it is not done according to this order, but rather as where there's a twist.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And guide the tool little by little with the wool, until urine soaks the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract that and do the cure with urine, use a syringe, don't stop doing this and use the syringe until the bladder and patient experience relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter VI.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	About the quality of bladder irrigation using castor oil and suitable instruments that are in accordance with this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is an ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or there's inflammation within it, or if you need to distill water and medicines in that area, then it should be done with an instrument called castor oil clamp. Here is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	If there is no response at the end of this line, then it is sealed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that area are three prongs: two from one side, like times (implying to insert them at intervals or evenly distributed).
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning is a concave area where this happens and it's inserted. The quantity depends on how you insert them. When some cause is pushed out by that from the humidity, it's pushed back in. And when it's expelled, it gets pushed back out again. When something is expelled far away, according to what happens with the clampcedra tool used in naval battles where naptha is applied.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So if you want to alleviate the humidity in the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the humidity and pull what is being pushed out towards the areas above, where the humidity gets pulled back into the clampcedra's cavity.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And guide the end of the clampcedra into the groin according to what we advised with the syringe; and press the humidity in the same way you press it, as soon as that humidity reaches the bladder, and relieve the patient.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the subtle syringe with which the bladder is irrigated, and this is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or tin, where its tip resembles a small feather, and let there be a hollow inside it.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And guide the bladder to be moved, pause in that place where you want to irrigate with moisture in the bladder, and then bind that area between two pieces of thick leather, and heat that moisture over the flame.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And guide the end of the syringe into the groin.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And guide your hand on the bladder with the moisture until it reaches the patient's abdomen, so that the moisture already reaches the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not have access to the bladder, then take out one from a rabbit and make it into a circle; and pierce that completely through its roundness; guide your strong horn in those prongs as they are turned around; add the circle just like you would with oil and water, so when you place that part where you want from the moisture, you use oil and water.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And guide that into the tool as you did with the bladder, and position your hand inside so that the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter LX.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of the extraction of pus.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed in the division the types of pus and its treatment with medicines, and the difference between pus produced by the kidneys and pus produced in the bladder, and the signs of that.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said about pus where there is an operation with my hand, and section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the pus produced in the bladder is that which gets stuck in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I explain that with clear exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	So I say that pus produced in the larger bladder mainly affects children; and of its signs is that the urine that leaves the bladder resembles water in its fineness, and appears like sand in that; and the patient rubs their penis, with spots that are flushed red, and they are roughly treated; and from there opens the anus through cuts made by those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And for children who have reached fourteen years, this is the final stage of treatment; and it is difficult to treat in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	In young people it may be somewhat like that which is between those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of the one where the pus is more and the treatment is easier; if it's small, it's contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	And to achieve treatment of that, we approach the beginning of that which modifies the patient by crossing their arms which enlarge all the opening which is in their intestines; and that opening prevents the spread of pus due to the inspection of them.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then place the patient on their feet and have them stand up to get some rest, all this so that pus can descend into the bladder's cavity or jump out of any spots.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make that cut between your hands which are prepared, and let the rest of their things lie still as they are for them, so that the whole bladder may be made to descend towards the parts lying down.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then ask for that and all of that preparation.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So if you feel the pus in the space, then immediately cover it with a section over them.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you don't touch it all yourself with your hand, then cover it that you apply oil to your index finger of your left hand, if the patient is a child, or use this method for a full-grown young person, and insert that into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And proceed with the pus until it lies still with your hand inside.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And convert that small piece gradually into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on that with your finger, and expel that towards the outside parts from the location where you have placed the section.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the priest to press the bladder with their hand; and command another minister that with their right hand extends the thighs towards the outside parts above, and with their other hand pulls up the skin which lies over the thighs, in the part of the location where the section is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert the spatula so that this is its shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and divide it inside that which is between the anus and the thighs, not in the middle location, before the left side of the inner thigh; and the section should be on that pus and your finger should be in the anus, and made to be a transverse section, so that the section outside should be wide and inwardly tightened according to the quantity from which I removed the pus should fit it, but not excessively large, as we firmly hold your finger which is in the anus the pus must be allowed to pass after the section and is opened up, taking into account their abilities.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there is some pus which has an angle and margins, so that the passage of it becomes difficult because of this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of that which is like a piece of string, and is round, and causes a slight obstruction in the passage.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	And if it's that one with angles and margins, adjust it in the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it's not like that, then cover it with your own, or strengthen over it moderately, the tip of which is like a file on which you strengthen over the pus and don't go beyond it; or insert this delicate tool with curved tip.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	And if you can't over that, then widen the tool a bit, and if you want blood flow, cut in strength that with etched glass.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	And if the pus is more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand into the opening of the bladder, and then cut towards it; and then push a little bit close to that; and similarly perform this if there are more spots than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if it's large pus, then ignorance is that you cut there with a large section, which happens to the patient in either of two ways: or it gets stuck or turns into its continuous evaporation process, so that the location isn't completely solidified.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	And administer expulsion of it before it gets out, or carve in the fracture with scissors where you extract that in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	And when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with ointments of aloe and dragon's blood extract, and strengthen that.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over it a cloth dipped in oil and vinegar or in ground oil and water mixed, so that the pus does not seep out.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then return the patient onto their back, and do not untie the bandage until the second day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have untied it, immerse the place in water and oil, and then treat it with a clear ointment and an ointment of balsam until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If in the wound an abscess occurs with pus and corrosiveness, treat it accordingly. Imagine that if the disease is like ice in the bladder, where urine is forbidden (and this is known by the release of pus in urine), then intervene with your treatment in the wound and extract that pus. Otherwise, it could cause the bladder to corrode the bladder and its putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with vinegar and water, salt, and against any species, use what is suitable for its healing until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And during all the hours of your treatment, pay attention to both thighs and adjust the medicines that are placed on the wound.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the lump is small and it's in the root of the penis, and there's restricted urine flow, then treat it with what I recommend before reaching a section; and this treatment often results in healing; and I have tried this, and you should use a soldering iron to pierce it, like this:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	Make the tip triangular, sharp, place it on the shaft.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take the tool, and hold onto the penis, let the lump rest there so that it doesn't return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the penis, puncturing it with ease so that the tool reaches the lump.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And turn the tool with your hand in that lump little by little, and you puncture the hole inside as you make another on the other side; so urine is immediately released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on that which is hardened from the lump at the tip of the penis, when that is crushed and drained by urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	And if this treatment is not suitable for any cause that prohibits it, then hold onto the lump, and another tool on top of the lump.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then place the tips over the lump in this penis between two strands.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract that.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then untie the bandage and remove the frozen pus which is formed in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And you do not need the soldering iron around the lump, only to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other bandage on top of that because when it is untied the soldering iron nears the exit of the lump, then the cure returns to its place and heals the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary when you have the soldering iron above, that you raise the cure to those parts above, or that it return with your compliments, and thus heals the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 56.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On removing the lump from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Lumps in women are rare.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	And if you see a lump in any of those, then it's difficult to treat her, and prohibited by various methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that when the woman has weakness below the waist.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you don't find a woman who knows how to identify when she's fertile or not, if she tells the doctor during her period, or if she has menstruation.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you don't find women who know this art, especially hand surgery.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the site of section on a lump in women is far from the location of the lump, so you need to perform a broad excision, and there it's fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	And if necessity requires this of you, then you should take a competent woman who knows how to do it, and is not easily available.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	And if you lack that, then approach a doctor who is subtle, or present a knowledgeable woman in the matters of women, or a woman who has part of this skill.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then make that woman present, and command her to do everything you instruct her, from the inquiry about the lump to its beginning; which is, to check if the woman is fertile, then proceed by having her touch her own anus and feel for the lump.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	And if she finds that, restrain her with what you say, and then command her to prick it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	And if she is not fertile, then command the matron to insert her hand into the patient's vagina and inquire about the lump, because places her left hand on the bladder, and presses that well.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	And if she finds that, then proceed by gradually removing it from the opening of the bladder to those parts, within her knowledge up until reaching the depth of the thighs.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then prick that location near the edge of the opening you should reach to the depth of the thighs from any part for her and center the lump in that thigh area, and let her know not to be pricked by the lump when she does this.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the excision should be small at the beginning; and then insert the tool on that section, and if you feel the lump, then adjust in section according to the amount that she knows can be removed from that.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the stones of the kidney are grains: those of them are few and large, sharp like a lion's tooth, long and round, and have small openings.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	And know how many kinds of stones there are for you in this way that you may signify about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to release the urine flow, adjust on the site of the broken pipe and let it out for an hour until the obstruction is removed by the urine, then continue with your operation when the stone has been taken out.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare for yourself the tools that are said to be used in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may assist with those during your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want to facilitate the urine flow, and you know that the expulsion of urine is through the channel that is incised, then you apply powdered substances on the area and strengthen it with powdery and tightening agents; do not proceed this way; let the stone be and do not remove it, for a weak person would die from this illness.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And once the intensity of the urine flow has stabilized for several days, and the wound is clean, then you can proceed with your operation when the stone has been removed.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter sixty-two.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Regarding hernia correction section.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia watered down is nothing but the addition of moisture in the white muscle which contains the testes and is called the scrotum.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some hernias are in the private parts which nature prepares for each individual within when it is cut that there is already another testicle; and this is the passage of the reproductive organs between the white scrotum which we have mentioned, and it is not like this otherwise.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the reproductive organs, causing this substance to infiltrate them. Some occur due to blows applied to the testicles.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has various colors; the color of it might fade to yellow or become blood-red, reddish-brown, or be dark fatty, or be watery white, and this is what is most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which one can recognize where this accumulation of water is located: if it is in the scrotum that we have mentioned, then the swelling is often long and cylindrical in shape like a testicle, showing the testicles, as moisture surrounds them from all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the private parts themselves, then the swelling will be cylindrical starting from where the testicles are and that's why one assumes there is another testicle.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the passage of the reproductive organs and the white scrotum, then you will feel its circumference.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you want knowledge of the color of the moisture, then you examine the color of the moisture in the swelling through an incision made deep into it; according to what is present in the mark left by the incision, judge as to what is inside.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	And when it comes to treating him, we instruct that you provide the patient with water if this is possible for you and increase his food intake.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And have him lie on his back on some cushion or other thing for a little while, and place clean cloths under him.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And have yourself sit on the left part of him, and instruct the attendant to follow behind him on his right side, who will extend their hand from one of the sides up to the passage of the reproductive organs and to the opening of the abdominal cavity.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And have someone take a lateral incision and divide the passage of the reproductive organs through the middle point longitudinally into the abdomen near the pubic region.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And have the section made according to a straight line equal in distance from the line where you would find the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white scrotum including it.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And cut it out, observe and remember this so that you do not incise further; your cutting should be at the point where what you are cutting hangs down more towards the testicles and carefully examine it according to the amount you can.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then puncture the wet scrotum with an ample hole, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate the two labias from this section with scissors and extend the scrotum to those above; do not touch the passage of the reproductive organs that are included, and cut the scrotum in that manner which is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And cut it out entirely or in pieces, and especially its thinner part on the left side; if you do not examine his incision meticulously, there is no certainty that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	And if the testicles are moving outside of their passage during your operation, then when you have completed the section of the scrotum, return inside it, and properly adjust both labia of the passage of the reproductive organs with suturing; treat that like other wounds until it heals.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find that the testicles are corrupted by another illness, then remove the vessels which are below the scrotum's support, extract the testicle, and treat it accordingly as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	And if the water is accumulated in two parts always, then you know that these are hernias. Therefore, cut this part as you did the other equally; and if it appears to be an operation to you, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you cleanse the wound, and immerse bandages in oil or in rotted oil; place another bandage which was immersed in water and oil, spread that over two kidneys and the wonder of the belly; place above dry sheets and powders, cover those above neatly according to this shape:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then two sheets should be prepared and filled with wet cotton according to this shape; they should have their ends covered by a stitch or in contact with damp wool, and stitched onto the front of your pants. The one end should cover the buttocks inside the other, and the second end should reach down to the knee part of your trouser legs. Two ends on each side under two thighs, and two others on each knee, and all stitching should be done along the seam of your trousers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And when this hernia is treated artificially with the help of a cautery in place of an operation on that section with iron; you should take a thin surgical blade and make an incision there along the line of the genital region, then ignite it according to our instructions as soon as white pus containing water has been discovered. Then perform the cautery following this manner:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it is similar to Greek writing.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce that pus, and ignite until all the moisture has been expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the pus with thread, scrape it with the thread, and scrape with a heated fine cautery. Insert that as much as is possible into your patient so as to remove all of it; and be careful not to let the flame touch him.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and further removes infection than an operation on the wound, and better than sectioning.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If your patient experiences an adverse reaction to pus, whether during the operation or when using a cautery, or from infection, then adjust how you treat this adverse reaction according to the method described, and apply that treatment to them as it is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the patient is weak, and doesn't anticipate a second operation due to its horror, then perform a puncturing according to what I advise; it's when it's certified that you should do so, based on what we've discussed regarding meanings, indicating that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	And when you place the patient on an elevated bed, then puncture the abscess at the lower part of their body near the spine, and perform the puncturing according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the opening be large enough to drain all the water.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then place your hand there and smooth it out, making sure that all remaining water can flow away.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And later treat that area until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	If an adverse reaction occurs during the removal of water at that time, you perform it: this is not done simply because white pus in the wound causes an adverse effect and prevents water excretion. When this happens, adjust so that you insert a tool or instrument into the wound through which water from dropsy can be extracted; its shape follows from this procedure. Or position a small object in the pressure area of the wound instead.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that water returns, and is replenished approximately every two months or so; when it's added, then puncture according to that method described, whereby your patient will pass their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter/Capital LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	About the operation on fatty hernias and their treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	And know that in the operation on this kind of hernia, there is a risk of infection in major areas; for which I see your release and salvation through that better method.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I remember the operation on that and the specifics of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, you describe that abscesses occur in the bodies where the kidneys are located, and this is done due to various causes: or by an acute excessive accumulation, which is poured into the kidneys, or by impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess corresponds to that of the body itself, and is not accompanied by pain, it's a heavy abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And a light pus is a liquefied abscess, the color of which is dark, and there's no sensation in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And in some cases, operations are performed due to blockage of the arteries, and because of that inflation you already recognize its memory, or due to inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	As for when it's due to inflammation of the arteries, you recognize this by spreading the abscess when you press that with your fingers; and don't touch it as you do so.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	As for when it's due to inflammation of the veins, that doesn't spread in any cause, you should press them with your fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it's possible that an operation can be performed on this kind and other muscles; for you should make an incision along the line of the kidneys, and then press your finger to the areas above, extract pus from the white pus, and release the retractor of the veins, tie them, and cut out any pus retractor from all parts of the area where your fingers are.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if your finger is already within those muscles and they're consolidated, then you should extract your finger and make an incision there.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there's adhesion in any cause of the pus or between them, then you should release all that adhesion and make an incision there through a circular cut.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If it is the natural flesh at the site of adhesion which is behind, then you must incise all that belongs to him and remove the pus as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	So once your operation is completed, then fill the wound with oiled and pounded wool and grease; and afterwards take care of that like another treatment until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Regarding the treatment of a hernia caused by wind.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Wit is an abscess enclosed by some sort of covering resembling a bud, and it causes difficulty in movement, exercise, and walking for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in treating this illness there is a remembrance of what comes before it due to fear.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, let us say operation according to what I do first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And say that you should have the patient lie on a raised couch; and place the suspension of the testicles at the parts left to them; and put your hand under the groin with your fingers near the crease that is palpable in the pubis; and let those other ministers assist you, and extend those up to extension forcibly.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then make an incision with a sharp knife across the section through which the veins lie, where their veins are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then remove from all parts as we have said in the extraction of worms which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then put in those one needle with a double knot, and insert that at the first of the sites where the wind occurs, and insert that again on another occasion at the end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then make incisions in the middle place perpendicular to the length of the body according to its width, and extract that which is aggregated from the liquid and putrid humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then treat the wound with the treatment of other wounds where you want health to be produced by itself because they bring down the veins which are under one or two groins, which is not bad for this.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If wind affects all the veins, then you must have the testicles be extracted or that the testicles due to this cause the veins to collapse, for them to lack all nutrition through the incision of the veins, and they will be hardened, or that collapse on their own not become juvenile in those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXV.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Regarding the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia happens through a section that extends over the abdomen from both sides of the navel of the belly, so moving the contents of that rupture to one of them.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either from the navel or from an excision of it, and it happens in these two species due to various causes: impact, or through a jump, or through noise, or through elevation of some heavy cause, or through similar actions.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of this, when it happens through extension of the navel, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and does not happen suddenly, and it is an abscess evenly within the belly, where the navel compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	The sign of this is when it happens through section of the navel, which at the beginning causes sudden intense pain; and it is an abscess different but apparent from under the navel towards its left side, and this is due to displacement of the intestine, and the body of this in front of the navel area.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And some cuts are made on the intestine's skin, and this intestinal hernia is called by that name.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And some cuts are made with suction, and some cuts go into the intestine's cavity, here it is retained, and this causes great harm for the patient, and some cuts lead to bad pain and more intensely when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of these species of this illness there is fear, so you should avoid surgery in that area.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of operating on that is to command the patient to return the intestine with their hand towards its cavity if it returns according to its own movement, and wrap it around their collarbone between your hands, and raise the patient's breasts.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then stretch the string which restrains the testicles to their sides, and make an incision along the entire length of the testicles; and place two blades at either side of the section according to where you need to cut that section open with them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section according to the amount that is possible from that, let all the pus come out of it.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then cleanse that area of the navel leaving the string of the testicles, where white hard belly is exposed from each part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And afterwards you insert your hand where the testicle is cut, where it is between white belly, which leaves the string of pus, and behind white belly, and remove from that adhesion that is behind the intestine.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then hold the string of the testicles on their sides, and also extend the white belly with your left hand at this point, and lift the intestine towards the belly at the section; command the minister to spread the intestine up here and you dissolve that adhesion behind with completed solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And surround your fingers so that there is no cause for the hernia being wrapped in the hard white scab.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find any cause for it with him, then you cut that off on his belly leave them.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle with a thick thread, cut that into seven pieces, insert it from the skin, which is below the scrotum, where it meets the belly; this section is between the testicles. Then penetrate its ends so that they emerge from the middle being four inches long each, and make knots of them in various patterns resembling a cross; then tie that part of the skin with strong thread on both sides where we said leaves the scrotum's opening firmly attached on both sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the threads, tie those firmly inside so that none of the vessels that bleed from those cannot spread any cause so that an abscess does not occur from here due to cautery.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And pause for another firm tie according to the length of the first tie, three inches away from his waist; and make this two ties flat on the skin which leaves behind where it meets the scrotum in an amount like that mentioned, and cut all the rest in accordance with its roundness, and keep it out of him.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then pierce through the remaining part of the scrotum's opening in a section where there is flow and healing as we have recommended according to what we said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool浸在 oil中，pause on the wound; and apply the thread we recommended (and some white scabs are cauterized, which we mentioned nearby to the bleeding point, where several points will occur those) and make that thread flat inside so it falls by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If his discharge is delayed, then let the water of urine be applied, and pause on it inside where it falls as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with another treatment for wounds so that it heals.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter sixty-six.
De hernia ventosa.	About ventral hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, it has not been seen that anyone has been burned during the treatment of it.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first would say that it is done like we recommended in the hernia that comes from above; which is that you bind the vessels near the section towards there and make it easier for him; then dry out around the abscess in this way, so that it works on it where the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the wound according to what we said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter sixty-seven.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	About the disturbance that happens in the joints.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some points should rupture in the joints as we have said, and let it out from the spot.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And don't give any cause to the doctors for hernias in the patients; and if they do, it is few; and return them all at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	And if the time extends with this, a fissure is made in the skin so that the hernia descends into the belly; and it happens like this because of the extension of the skin which is in the joints as we have said, which cause is that the skin is extended, and nearby it is softened and there appears an abscess and lets out.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of him is with cautery as was preceded in the description of him.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some points are cured with iron according to this manner: and that the patient sits on his two cushions under your hands, then dry out the area of the rupture of the abscesses by working at it in width according to the quantity of three inches.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white skin which is below the opening where it becomes exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the rod and pause it on the most protruding part of the skin, and press it against the navel in the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then pierce both protruding spots on the end of the rod in the skin, and adjust one of those to the other with stitches.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then remove the end of the rod, do not cut through the skin completely, nor stretch the skin or any other cause such as I have to know in the treatment of intestinal hernias.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat that with the treatment of wounds, and as you pierced through the ends, remove that and restore the wound so that it is consolidated; where the skin contracts and the protrusion of the rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this place, which is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter sixty-eight.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	About softening of the scrotum's opening.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Some points the scrotum opening in some men becomes soft because the muscles that are within it become soft, and you attend to him.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	It is necessary for the one who is attending to his treatment that he make the patient lie according to his two cushions, and uncover the entire opening which becomes soft over the normal opening; and then have him adjust both folds to the stitches.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, cut off at the beginning the excess of the softened opening with three or four stitches and have a secure stitch.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then pierce between the stitches; and then treat according to the treatment of other wounds until it heals and lets out the ends.
Capitol .lxix.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De castracio.	Of castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is condemned, but due to certain reasons written within me that I must remember this here; and it is not necessary to remember this person only for two methods, of which one is when the doctor is questioned about this matter, they should know the cure for this individual when it happens. And the other method is that we have had many times where the need for castration in other animals for our young ones' development is required, just like with mares, and dogs, and pigs, and similar to those animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And so I say that castration is done in two ways: either through impalement or through a cut to the section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the case that it is done through impalement, the way of the operation is to make the beast urinate in salt water so that the individual's genitals become softened and swollen, hanging down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those away with your hand until they dissolve and do not show any marks on the skin.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In castration done through a cut and sectioning, you must have the animal and press on the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then let the suspensory ligament go, and cut on each side of one spot where two muscles will process themselves.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then cut out those pus that you have scraped off anywhere.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause for the prostate gland, but rather the subtle prostate which is above the bladder.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better which is done through impalement, for impalement with ease leaves no cause for the testicles so that the animal desires copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Capítulo 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is according to two ways: the one is where orifice appears in the space of the testicles' cord, in that which is between two testicles forming a male part with female hair.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some urine discharges from that opening, which is in the cord of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	And for the females it is a special case: that the female part above the pubis behaves as if there are two male testicles of men somewhat too small to the side, like the prepuce in men and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three kinds: for two of the males and for one kind of females.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it means that you must cut those tight tissues until they discharge the secretion of that, and then proceed to treat those as for the other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second type of male where urine is released which is in the cord of the testicles, there is no treatment or operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Capítulo 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of angina and flesh swelling due to female causes.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Strong angina is adjusted on natural causes that are removed and should be observed over time; some cases become magnified in certain women to the extent that they spread like in men and invade intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	And so, you should hold the excess of angina with your hand or with a tool and cut it out.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not finish with cutting only, especially at the base of the penis, so that there is no flow of pus.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then treat that as for other wounds until it heals.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Malignant flesh is flesh that grows in the womb of the mother filling it up, and naturally extends to the parts forward according to the shape of the penis (for which some originally called it "caudal impotence"); so you should cut it out like cutting angina, and treat that until it heals.
Capitol .lxxii.	Capítulo 72.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the treatment of hemorrhoids.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Hemorrhoids occur when the female part is not perforated, or it's just a small tear.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it can be due to nature or by accident.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental occurs due to impotence which has preceded it, and that is caused by either rough or lubricated flesh, or a subtle prostate.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it can happen in the penis of the mother, or around her belly, or under excessive pus, or at the base of excessive pus, and you should prohibit coitus, pregnancy, and childbirth, and strictly prohibit menstruation as well.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The recognition of that is made by observing the midwife, if the protrusion is obvious, you can see it from afar; however, if it's not visible, then you have to touch it with your fingers or with a stick.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If the protrusion is due to a subtle prostate, and it's between the two lips, then you should touch and release that area.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you place your hands on the two lips of the flesh, and then position your index fingers under both sides of each of them.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be lying on her back with her legs spread apart, and you should extend both lips as forcefully until that subtle prostate is broken and the protrusion becomes open.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and dip it in oil and place that over the area, and let him be at home for a day so that the cut area is not solidified.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the gall is thick and viscous, then you must induce vomiting using a spoon or a mint leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the operation is for fish flesh, then hold that with a ladle and incise it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use the medicines that help stop the flow of pus and alleviate pain, such as pepper, pus from the stomach, and gallows, add them to hen's egg whites.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And administer an open lead pipe for it in case the wound does not heal lightly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Hold that there for a few days and administer honey wax afterwards.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And let it heal with the other consolidating treatment until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes it happens during the primary preparation of other meats, and you must follow this method when incising.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If the operation is for a white boil, then it should not be made contrary to iron in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Regarding the treatment of hemorrhoids, tears, and red blisters that occur in women's genitals.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are a condition involving the veins in the area where blood flows continuously from them; and for old hemorrhoids, they occur like this.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already explained in the division of those kinds and their signs, as well as to say which ones receive treatment and which do not.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	So it's said that hemorrhoids and tears when in the early stage of pregnancy and do not show symptoms are given treatment with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those ones which are in the mother's orifices on which you feel a sensation, these are the ones that are treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And you should immerse the woman in hot water and then spread the thighs or put a hard cloth on them, and incise those on the anus.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And after that, dust those with the flow of pus from one of the internal powders for pain relief, such as pepper and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And later scrape her feet for an hour, then place her in cold water afterwards.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the pus continues to flow, then make her drink a decoction of sumac and mare’s milk and walnuts and similar.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And later take honeycomb flour and mix it with honey, oil, and water, then make a poultice from this on the back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is discharged, then eat it; otherwise, attach two suckling devices and to their nipples make incisions.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And later take wool and immerse it in the juice of pressed spinach or in the juice of wormwood or in vinegar water, then attach it to the place; and treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	If the wax that is of hard consideration, then you must incise it in such a way that your appearance from that matches what I said about tear treatment.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Regarding the incision of cysts that occur during pregnancy.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various types of boils that occur during pregnancy, such as white boil, urinary boil, ulcers, erysipelas, scabies, herpes, and other boils.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already mentioned these illnesses and their types and their signs, as well as treatments for them in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And it's true that I've said in this treatise about the boil caut that comes during pregnancy when it's about boils that lead to health issues, and if you want to know how the operation is done with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	So consider if the pain from the boil at its beginning is sharp to percussion and pus, fever, sometimes it reddens and if you feel a sensation on it, then note that an incision is needed, and treat it with what helps in maturation until the sharpness of incidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then you must incise the woman on a board that has two edges; and lie down on her back and place her feet at the lower part of her belly, spread her thighs, keep her elbows on her sides, and tie it nicely with what is convenient.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife should follow the left side and administer the tool through which she will open the mother's mouth, the shape of which will come about from the causes that will happen later.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this tool, fix it at the opening of the mother's mouth in the woman, and what enters from the tool into the mother should not be more than the opening of her mouth and harm the uterus.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the tool is larger than the opening of the mother's mouth, then you must sprinkle powder on the texture of the mother's mouth so that it prevents all tools from entering into the opening of the mother.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And you must sprinkle the fluid that flows through the tool at its end above and have it keep the tool and stir up this fluid until it opens the mouth of the mother.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when it appears, and is touched with the hand and is hot and wet, then you must stop this by putting a spoon inside of it.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the illness has been evacuated, you should place in the wound a cloth submerged in rubbed oil or olive oil containing some medicinal substance; and immerse the foot in that section of the knee.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And cover the knee and over the kneecap a clean wool cloth submerged in water in which pears have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And after about two days apply grease which, when added to this medicine, helps to heal it.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some baths are washed the knee and the wound in water and honey, then return to that water which has been boiled with rosemary or almond oil, and afterwards apply the medicine again.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is inside the inflamed knee, then you must forbid its cure with iron, use instead the remedy we have mentioned in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Capitol seventy-five.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	Teaching midwives in what manner they should treat breech presentations so that it occurs according to the natural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the midwife knows the position of a normal childbirth through signs on her, so when you watch the woman in labor and she wishes to breathe deeply from the air, and this process is accelerated by what happens around her during labor, speeding up the delivery of the breech baby. Then you know that this part is according to natural position, as it breathes above its head, and the second one either hangs suspended or down by the umbilical cord.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	So when you observe those signs, then let the woman's stomach be compressed by herself so that the baby comes down lightly when it presses on its head, make her deliver the second one, and eliminate all excess fluids for good sanitation.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	That which is another for this part is unnatural and impossible, when the baby is breathing on its feet and the body of the person is breathing in front of their head and feet, and the hand of the person is one, or at their foot,. Or when the head of the person is breathing and their hand, or at their belly, then it becomes lighter and more upright on its neck, resembling the unmanageable figures.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	A necessary cause is that the midwife must be knowledgeable and discerning in all these matters, and avoid error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I am showing you every figure of those [conditions], and what instrument is in those based on which it signifies and rests upon that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the condition is resting on its head due to natural exhaustion, and it's strong on the woman causing a difficult parturition, and weakens her virtue, then have that person try, or whatever women can do for themselves, and fumigate their head with fenugreek oil and olive oil moist.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the midwife between her own words small and needle at that location for the second one, or dry it with her own finger where there is moisture in her.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press on the woman's stomach so that it expels the fetus.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If it doesn't expel, then let the woman be treated with colic from butter and fenugreek soup.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command her, along with the breathing exercises, to be compressed and make her sneeze in a confined space; and open her mouth and nose for an hour, so that the fetus can escape promptly.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both parts of the fetus are expelled at the beginning, then you should gradually reduce those exercises towards easier breathing little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If you do not follow the instructions, then let the woman lie on her knees and lift her feet above, and then bring the knee to the ground; and let the woman be held so that she does not fall from the shock.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the parts are not turned inside and the fetus is still within, then insert those and extract the opening of the fetus or tie it to the woman's hand with cloth and extract it equally, so that it can be expelled.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	During the expulsion of the baby through her hips.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is expelling through her hips, then let you urge those inwards, and gradually turn the fetus slightly, and make that equal, and take one of her feet and stretch those inwardly little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	If it is expelled into the thighs, then let you command her to squeeze herself, and make her sneeze in confined space, which can be expelled promptly if God wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not expelled as we have advised, then let you return the fetus little by little until you place it according to its natural figure, so that it can be expelled more lightly.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is forbidden to do all that we have advised, then take colic from ginger and dissolved gum, beat them thoroughly in the mortar for good pounding, and place on the abdomen of the woman, under her lower belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then let that be rubbed with hot water until she achieves her flanks.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when you notice that the parts of herself are hardened, then let her be subjected to fumigation with myrtle and keep her there.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And after an hour of fumigation, let her be placed on her knees, and then make her sneeze and open her mouth, lift her from there, and press the lower part of her abdomen slightly, so that she can expel the fetus promptly.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Evaluation of the condition over their thighs and their chest.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the patient is in this position, then you gradually insert their smaller limbs; and have the woman stand slightly bent over her back, and place their feet on the ground, and those should be straightened above the bed, and fulfill their tasks.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And gradually press on the stomach of the patient little by little, and extract what needs to be done that you remove their feet from the ear area where it is prepared in the lower part, leaving them.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the patient is not restrained, then take their feet and shake them vigorously, and gradually press what needs to be done that is on the lower ribs little by little as the patient moves into the parts above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And gradually insert their larger limbs and adjust the patient little by little, and instruct the woman to squeeze as the patient is restrained.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Evaluation of the patient lying supine on one of their sides.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	It is to be evaluated in the reduction of the hand for the patient, more so if you cannot reduce that, then elevate the woman and let it happen.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if it cannot go on its own, then have her recline on the bed, and compress the thighs of the patient with vigorous compression, and apply medicines which I prescribe and recommend for purges.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the child has emerged, then have her lie on her back, and study about the reduction of the head, and arrange the body naturally, and make her sneeze, and instruct her to squeeze herself as she is restrained.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Evaluation of the fetus on the back with the limbs spread out and the skin of the patient is twice that of her mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Make sure the midwife holds the hand of the fetus and gradually rotate that little one bit by bit, and make it easier.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is as much as this and has been equalized, then pause on the belly with what we have recommended using oil and purges.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And gradually instruct her to get up little by little, and when you have done this, then have the patient lie on one side of the bed and instruct her to be leaning over the right hip, and also instruct her to squeeze herself; and make her sneeze under certain conditions.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The preparation for the birth of the fetus is completed on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When it begins to happen in horror according to this manner from the mother, consider it, and then you immerse the second one into your nail as it is emptied of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is hanging over the face and neck of the one in question, then you should immerse that from the umbilical cord, so that it is not retained and stays alive.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And gradually push the fetus into the parts internally while pausing that according to what is seen, and instruct the woman to squeeze herself several times, and may it be discharged easily with a short time if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The birth of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins have frequent movements, and some have three or four, but this is unusual and quite strange; yet these are natural causes, not supernatural.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Count them, whether they are multiplied, one second, and are separated by chafing, distinguish those among the ligaments in the umbilical cord of each of these. Some movements happen naturally so that it seems like one fetus is discharged with a natural process, and some movements happen artificially as we have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some of them are difficult for you, then proceed with the birth and bring it to the point that we have described of non-natural figures, then treat those in the same way as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and does what makes it easy and subtlety, and at a delay, and adapts herself according to all figures as she has been prepared by her skill leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembering what forms within the womb from embryos and aborts.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some veins are formed in the belly into one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten, at which point you should verify that a woman who aborts has given birth to a child of five, and another with all these features, which is caused by the measurement of the glorious sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all of this must be taken into account according to what is in the science of the midwife that leads her to that faint resemblance of which it is spoken, and thus pauses herself accordingly as she sees fit.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for a dead fetus as we have said in the division of medicine and it is not outside, and you are reluctant to use surgery with your own hand, then consider that if the woman is of good health and not affected by any of the accidents through which her loss is feared.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	And when the woman should be laid on her back on the bed with her head inclined upward and her thighs raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister should have that of both sides or be tied in bed so that the body does not extend beyond the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you moisten the mother's mouth with oils, with purging remedies of high quality and fennel and seeds from her.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the surgeon anoints her hands with those oils and salves, and places his hand in comfort near the liver, and carefully positions his hand at the spot where he leaves the needles in the flesh.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And places them conveniently at this: therefore, you must consider if the body is ready to have the needles inserted onto its head, and then you leave the needles in his arms, or in his neck, or in his mouth, or in his palate, or let him grow a beard, or in his Adam's apple, or near the places between ribs, or let the flanks be done.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the insertion is about his feet, then near the ankle, or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And have the needle in your right hand, and flatten his curvature at that spot which is between his last fingers on his left hand, place your hand comfortably and leave the needle at one of those places we've mentioned, within which it reaches its deepest point.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and keep another needle or the third if necessary, so that there is equal penetration, and not extension according to his straightness simply.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And let your effort be at every part, so that the pain in him is relieved as much as when pulling out teeth during their extraction.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And place him where their extension is mollified; and if any part of him is held back, then have the surgeon apply some of his fingers with oil and insert them thoughtfully and move them in the place that is being held back.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the part of the body is out-of-place, then have the needles inserted at a location where it may be put back more easily; and do this until the entire body is out-of-place.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the hand is bent in front of the other, and it's not possible to reduce that by restraining him, then have a cloth envelop that; and carefully extract that until everything is out-of-place, and cut into it or at the joint of the hand or at the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do this also with the other hand and on both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the body is large, or it gets restricted during pulling out, or if there's water adjusted in his head, then have someone insert between his fingers a sharp needle and cut open the head, or find that with an instrument named "alundat", whose shape will be similar to the other instruments around here.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly do this if the body has naturally large proportions: then have someone incise that with chainsaw or take it out as we've said with an "alundat"; and carefully extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is pulled out and restricted at the Adam's apple, then have it cut so that the moisture in his throat is melted.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	And if it's not complicated or doesn't get pulled out during pulling, then you simply incise the head as long as it feels easy to do so.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the exits of the abdomen are blocked or in his dropsy, then have you perforate that where the moisture runs inside him.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	And if the body is over his feet, then the pull of him is gentle and the direction towards the liver's mouth is gentle.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	And if it's restricted between the abdomen and the feet, then have you extract that with cloth which you will envelop around your hand, and cut the abdomen and feet where the fluid runs in those places.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	And if the other limbs are still in place and you turn the head, then the surgeon will insert his left hand; but if the liver's mouth is open, then insert your hand into its front part, and carefully position it under that, and pull him towards his hands until he reaches the liver's mouth, and then carefully insert one or two needles, and pull him towards those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the liver's mouth is restricted by an abscess that happens to one, then have it not be overly inflated over him; before this, administer the administration of causes of wet and fatty things.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply bandages; and keep monitoring the patient with waters that are soothing and moistening.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the body is on its side, then as much as possible make it to be cut open: and apply what we've said for the living body.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if this is not possible, then have it incised in layers, and be extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And make sure that you do not leave any cause internal from the second one.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we've said about the treatment for abscesses that happen in the liver.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is pus flowing out, then let it be with stiff waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman with a dead body in her abdomen, and then on that spot another pus wound was formed, and the other dead fetus is inside the body.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to him for a long time that an abscess formed in his umbilical area; and inflated such that pus was bursting out, and he began to bleed.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called upon to treat him, and treated him for a long time, but the wound does not consolidate.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I would place on it due to some causes a plaster of intense attraction, and operate on them with an instrument, and after pass a few days, and operate another bone; and I was too amazed, as in the belly there is no bone.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were from the bones of the dead body.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I cleaned the wound and removed the dead flesh from it, found the bones existing in their usual positions, and already observed this manner for a long time, correct up to a little arm of them.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I didn't find it strange at all, but rather that in this is science and help for the one who makes use of doctor's skill in treating illnesses.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	About the shapes of the instruments necessary to remove the body.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Shape of the vertebra in which the majority opens:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the shape of the stretcher on which they are equalized, to which two vertebrae belong at the ends of two fuses.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	But let this vertebra have a more delicate curvature, and make it of wood or from the trunk of a boy.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And let the thickness of any fuse be two fingers and the edge of each both sides be one finger, and the length of each is a palm and half; and in the middle of two fuses are two joints of those metal fuses which are already fixed, of which the length is slightly more than a palm, and the thickness of each is about two fingers, or slightly less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions should be inserted in the mouth of the mother so that they open when you turn the two prescribed vertebrae.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another shape, similar yet more delicate and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Make it of wood or from the trunk of a boy according to the similarity of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But at the extremity of it have two additions as follows, and the length of those additions is about a palm, and the thickness of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And as you want to make the mother open with that, then cut the body above so it lies flat on its back, open what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And close your hand on the instrument as you do with scissors, equally according to the quantity that you want of the opening in the mouth of the mother for the meter to make what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The shape of the vertebra which they said were ancient:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Shape of the pusher on which the body is pushed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Shape of the助手2 on which the large head is held:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it resembles forceps with teeth at the extremity as follows, and some times is made long as forceps according to this shape, as follows, which has teeth like those of a saw on which it is inserted and held.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Shape of助手 a little:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Shape of an ungual having one spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Shape of an ungual having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Shape of forceps on which the teeth are closed at which the head of the fetus is held:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Shape of a spatula having two ends on which the head is separated.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Shape of two spatulas lateral:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when there is an increase in the species of that and they are prepared by the artisans, it becomes lighter for its operation and more suitable to prepare men by their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not use those instruments until you are equipped with them, for the need of those is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	For the extraction of the second one.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second one is retained, you should command the mother to hold her breath, then order that she sneezes with the condition, and strengthen your hand on the mouth of her and on her nostrils, and if thus it comes out, good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a leaf and pierce through the cover with a needle and pause there to breathe into the mother's mouth, as in calamus and roughness and nettle and chamomile and powdered gum Arabic and cinnamon wood and balm.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the leaf, then place that above the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And place a pipette of jute in the mother's mouth, and let that remain inside so that it evaporates into the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And make her sneeze as we have said, and the second one will be expelled quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	May if this treatment is not effective and does not work, then you command the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or in a high-melting point wax, and insert that into her mouth and remove the second one with it. If she has found it, then take it little by little until it reaches the opening of the mother, then insert her hand as we have advised. When she finds the second one, extract it gradually according to its straightness so that the mother does not fall due to violent attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before you proceed, make sure she is comfortable on her right and left sides for ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And adjust it in the amount of attraction, so that she obeys and escapes from adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and with the use of medicinal herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	May it be that without considering all the causes we have recommended, then you must refrain from repeating any abstraction, rather immerse yourself in understanding how what emerges from you reaches the mother's mouth through her thighs, and close off that area with grease and fourfold medicine; so that thing will last for a few days and dissolve and become expellable.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When it is expelled, the malady rises to your head and stomach, and this causes illness; therefore, ensure that inhalations of essential oils and suitable remedies are administered for this.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Such as the古人 already use a fumigation with rosemary and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of the instrument through which the woman is fumigated should help in retaining menstrual periods and the secondary period:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It can be made of iron or wood.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the delicate end is placed against the chimney and the wide end over the fire, and the fumigation should be placed above the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And let that place where this fumigation is consumed, then repeat with another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Regarding the treatment of an unperforated baby's belly.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Newborn babies often have closed bellies that are sensitive and full.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Therefore advise the midwife to pierce with her finger that lump; if not, pierce it with a sharp needle, and make sure it doesn't touch the wound.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then apply heat to that with woolen cloth soaked in vinegar and oil; and then treat it with grease where it is sterile.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	And if you fear it's full, then leave a tube in the mouth for several days, and remove it when the baby wants to drink.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if there is overfullness of the belly due to consolidation of abscess or boil; then ensure that this consolidation dissolves, and treat it with what we've said about treatment and lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Regarding the treatment of fistulas that occur in you.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that occur in the pelvic region from low pus are nodules and swellings, which often appear near the anus or in the space between one of the parts.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or spots.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And as that swelling is old and prone to white or powdery moisture, some of these conditions can occur when some of these fistulas penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	Those that penetrate are known by what emerges and by windiness; some of them cause discomfort to the exhalation, and it is noticeable when those worms exist.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	Some of those fistulas are found in the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the male organ; some of them penetrate between the thighs and into the crotch.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And in the place where a fistula penetrating into the anus and not penetrating is known, you should insert your finger into the anus, and gently insert a needle or wood into the fistula when there is no obstruction.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	And if there is obstruction in that, then insert a soft needle or horse hair into that place where you feel the lump or the hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that anywhere, nor does any cause of expulsion, worm or windiness occur as we have said, then know it is non-penetrating, and then take action for treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the male organ, then its meaning is the expulsion of urine from that and prevention of anything that makes the place susceptible to medicine until it becomes consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	And if it penetrates into the thighs joint or inside the bone causing pain in the circulation, then this is a sign that the needle goes inside here if there is not obstruction inside the bone and pain in the circulation of one's parts; and that it causes constant pus; and this is not valid for that medication, nor does it consolidate with grease.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas, not everything is cured, and the treatment of these involves hard work and the manipulation of medical leaves under which they are formed.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	And in that one that is not penetrating and is not old, iron-based healing is hoped for as I will recommend to you, and what I have already prescribed.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And that the patient lies between your legs with their back raised, causing their hips to be within them, their thighs are inclined towards their abdomen, and insert a soft needle or horse hair into it if there is obstruction in the fistula, knowing where the needle passes.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that sensation is around the mouth, then you should insert your finger into the mouth.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the needle already penetrating through your finger alone, or anything else that is felt between your finger and that lump or flesh, then you know for certain that this one is penetrating; therefore do not work on it, as there is no healing with this, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, some would say that it is cured in certain men of a tart nature.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And concerning the treatment that is hoped for in the patient, it is to ignite a subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as previously described, and introduce that flame into the fistula inside where it reaches around the intestines; and then continue that operation two or three times until you know that all those flesh areas adjusted to the fistula resemble feather quills.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then treat that with heat in the form of fumigations enveloped in cloths where they cook all those flesh areas which are adjusted. And also treat it with medicinal ointments for healing and consolidating the flesh, if it is healed, well done; and otherwise, then it is not healed within a certain time period for other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if it enters inwards and does not penetrate inside the one you named which is in the anus, and between that and the mass that is rapidly dense with flesh or fat, then suture the fistula in the area where it cuts through the surface of the intestines. Then dry the intestine from the start point of the fistula, and see if the mass dries out, and it's inside the fistula where drying occurs until the section reaches the place where the end of the mass is, and the mass is released and heals.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then cleanse those fistula flesh areas which are assembled like the plume of an eagle, without damaging any of them.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	And if there is a discharge of pus that comes between you and your operation when these flesh areas are inside you, then let it be as much as necessary and with the pus use a small instrument to apply heat or apply acute medicine. The heat from the fire that is applied well has two purposes: it is an adjustment for these adjusted flesh areas, and also a cutting off of pus through the evaporation of moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then treat that with heat in the form of fumigations or herbal teas where the affected area gets warm, and then after this, treat the wound with ointments for hard flesh that generate healing and consolidation.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And in the medicines with which they are tightened up and dried out; when after this, it is restored, and already it is healed and you don't fear further treatment.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	And if the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and is extended from the surface of the body, then insert your tool in the anus and ask about it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if the mass is dense or flesh-like and close to penetration, then it's not an operation in him but according to trust and hope rather.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	That is the cause to administer one of three ways for him: or that it be cauterized as we have said; or that the affected area dry out until you achieve the point where it's possible to insert several and the healing is underway; and don't dry the affected area in order not to penetrate the fluid containing the intestines, and do what you wish with the opening of the patient's buttocks according to your intention; then treat that with what we have said which makes him healthy. Or extend that quickly and remove that pus that dries out inside near the anus as we have said, or on the mass or with another sharp instrument, and then cleanse those fistula flesh areas which are in the drying section where you can use probing; and strive to restore the entire wound through drying, and if there is a pus opening above not being consolidated, and damages the opened fistula near the anus, and allows only little pus to flow from the buttocks.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is closed in this way: when you insert the mass into the fistula, and it's around the anus on the surface of the intestines and near the opening of the anus, then take a piercing tip like a needle according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert into that filial layer covered in fur or around it; and then insert the mass into the skin within the fistula until you achieve its healing.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	And if it's penetrating near the edge of the anus inside, then you remove that fur from that area as you introduce your tool into the anus; and extract the end of the fur and adjust both ends simultaneously, and strengthen each one, and leave this for one day or two. And when more penetrates the fur in the flesh, strengthen it inside where those flesh parts are penetrated by the ends of the fur and fit together.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then treat the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the opening of the fistula isn't penetrating, then make it penetrate in any way that you are prepared for, but not through the anus, which is not something for you to do so as not to damage the intestines; and then have it healed within this area.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The method of applying a sharp spout to the one that is divided by the fistula: the curvature of which is quite sharp and the other part is not sharp, so as not to insert it where it's unnecessary, just like sometimes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	The process of缝合hemorrhoids in which pus flows at the opening of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids occur in two ways: some are like charcoal within the anus, while others are like fat from raisins.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And among those big and small ones, it allows the body to heal from those symptoms for that period being one, with spots, and on its surface, and in the extremities of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	And those that are on the surface of the buttocks according to the lesser months of humidity, from which there flows yellow water or a little sickness in the body continuously, and according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for that which is inside the stomach is to command the patient to rest and to squeeze it so that the stomach burns and the boils appear before you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	So you apply this to their ankles or whatever you have on your finger, and then apply this to the patient's limbs.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	And if the fingers are not treated with those due to their moisture and softening of them, then apply these on the drapery fabric or wool cloth, or with flaxen cloth, and extract these on your hands, and then apply this to them, grinding some powder near it for them instead of a cautery; or cauterize them as instructed in the section about cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then cure those with another treatment once they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the buttocks do not allow evacuation, then apply an incision to the patient with a small bite-sized cut, and wash it with that which is in the stomach that allows for slight evacuation when the patient is squeezed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	And if the boils are outside the buttocks, then the cause of them is minor, and you should apply this to your finger or with a stick, insert these, and then treat these with what we have said until they heal.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And when you have made an incision, make sure to provide suture for them according to this manner: take the wound wrapped in a bandage and insert it into the needle, then extract the boils towards the parts above; have that penetrate with the needle along the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread around that part laterally. Strengthen the boil with firm stitching, then cut off the thread and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, leave one open and don't sew it up, so that the excess pus can flow from that.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place a cloth soaked in rubbed oil or in lint over the buttocks; then place this over the stomach and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And leave that open until it closes; and when it is healed, treat those with ointment or with another treatment until they are well.
De curacio de fistulas.	Regarding the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Motas that occur due to the rupture of a wound or due to constriction in nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are old and no longer work in that medicine, then ensure that you puncture them with the tip of a pin or with your finger until they become wet and allow for pus to drain out from them, preventing consolidation; then treat these until they consolidate.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	And you should puncture them with strong pus until the first one drains and they are scraped off; then treat these until they heal.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Regarding the treatment of abscesses, this is the key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Understand that abscess formation is the key, and it should not be done unless it resembles a small round spot according to the color of the skin like a flea bite, and it occurs throughout the body but especially in the limbs and feet, so for those pains you should prescribe rest.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And understand that it should be incised with what is in the artery of the key, and kept with forceps or tweezers, and its root should be removed; then treat that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize it as instructed in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	True warts are small, hard, round pus-filled bumps on the surface of the body, and they occur commonly in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And for treating them, you should stretch or puncture that, or strengthen it with thread or cloth until it heals.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize this as we have said, with fire or with acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And when they are eradicated either vertically or horizontally using the tool I will direct.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	Ants are small bumps that are felt or pus-filled on the surface of the body and tend to occur near joints; whenever you stumble upon such a bump in them resembling a bite from an ant, they are formed around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment for this is to take a copper or vinegar reed and ensure it's strong; place that over the ant so that it covers the circle around it on the body; then rotate your hand with the reed until you puncture what is in the artery of the ant, and place that under its joint, and remove the ant from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with an iron or steel reed in this manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Take the part above the reed leading to subtlety, it's silent (it's not perforated) wrapped in a way that from afar the appearance of this is removed and its rotation becomes apparent.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, cauterize the ant as instructed in the section about cauterization of maggots in the chapter on cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	The forms of the instruments that are used for cauterization.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some cauterizations are done with silver or copper rods or melted and hammered metals; some are made with small and large instruments according to those used, where the size of the instrument matches the part being treated in the care of small children's injuries; and for those whose scabs are stubborn or painful, the cauterizations should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large but few cauterizations:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The tip of the cannula over which the bag is tied should be wide according to this manner; and let there be for the patient's part where the bag is tied, as often happens.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of the patient's pus that enters into the anus should be closed (not open) like a tight seal; and in front of this there is a slight indentation. In one side of the buttock, there are two notches, and on the other side, one notch. The width of the notch should be according to the thickness of the rays and if it's thick then make it slightly smaller.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the bag in which medicinal substances for the bladder of beast or sheep skin are placed be as wide as a hand.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And let it be pierced with narrow slits like those that are made when it's being rolled; and the space between the slits should have the same width as described.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert a strong piece of raw beeswax that is as wide as ten pieces or roughly so into those slits. Adjust the bag to it; when you place the bag on the patient, make sure it's spread out in the tip of the cauterization between two distinguishing points firmly and make the cauterization at each slit: The quality of cauterizing that is best is when you fill the bag with medicine which should be heated according to the tolerance capacity of the patient; take care not to have too much or too little of the application.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then have the patient lay on his back, and lift their legs while placing a person or a blanket under them. Then apply oil or albumin of egg or fenugreek or semmelanz extract to the cauterization area; insert that into the anus with ease. And then let the doctor take the bag and squeeze it twice forcefully until everything in the cauterization is expelled from inside the intestine; remove the cauterization and when done, lift the patient's legs onto the bed.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces it out on its own, use as much as you can tolerate. And if sleeping with that lasts for a whole night, it's better later in youth.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	And if you cauterize that during stomach ailments and the patient sweats due to this, then repeatedly apply the cauterization until they recover.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are abscesses or pustules in the anus, then make the cauterization subtle and tight, like those that are done on children.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Regarding the treatment of infections.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And I have already mentioned in the division of treating infections what was suitable for free treatment, and thus I will also discuss treatment with me, according to the situation, using medicines.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	So let it be known that infections are varied according to where the infection occurs and depending on the location upon which they are found.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the reasons for which many wounds cause infections are as follows: through the penetration of dirt, or tearing of flesh, or impact with a spear, or a club, or an arrow, or any other causes leading to such injuries.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	As for infections that occur in various parts of the body, these are like scalp infection, or neck infection, or foot infection, or abdominal infection, and so on, concerning each of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend treating certain infections by pausing this reasoning and rule for other infections.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I begin with simple scalp infections, the memory of compounded ones will come in at the start of the next chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	So let it be known that when a simple scalp infection occurs and there is no fracture, consider this: if it's due to dirt or any substance, then you've waited long enough for the pus formation even if it's large and you fear potentially developing an abscess in that patient, then you must sweat them out and perform a cephalic leeching right away; do not delay this. Then remove the blood according to the quantity of its virtue if no other contraindication prevents leeching, especially when the blood that comes out from the infection is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And ensure the patient doesn't overheat, drink much water, or consume heavy foods following the bloodletting.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	And if you're advised against any reason after this minor adjustment, then limit food intake and avoid meat or drink.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause on the infection if it causes an abscess; apply heat in olive oil or with wine that has been made sticky for this purpose.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	And if you're sure of an abscess forming, then pause on the infection, especially when it's recent and the air hasn't changed that powder which I recommend applying slightly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed there, then pause on certain ointments until they are healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	And if the infection is large or due to tearing and substances, and the patient's lips are not closed by bandages, then adjust them according to how I will recommend suturing their wounds.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the disease has already been revealed through the bone and skin, and it is not retention but a small suspension, then you should cut that area and proceed to treat the wound with medicines, restoring flesh in place of the cut. And command the patient to eat vegetables which are easy on digestion: beans and peas, cooked until tender, within which they can be eaten.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find decomposition in the wound and it does not stick to the bone, then you should cut out all that putrefaction and remove it, and proceed to treat that area.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these wounds an artery or vein from which blood flow can occur is involved, and it cannot be removed with medicines alone, then you should inquire about the artery. If you find that part of it has not been cut, then you should cut through that section using a sharp tool, or seal it; and if necessary causes this to not work as described, then you should cauterize where the blood flow stops.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then their cause is minor; sprinkle this powder over them, let the wound harden before the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of this powder is as follows: take oil from aloe, part one; dragon's bark oil, part two; and ashes that have not been completely extinguished, parts three. Grind all together finely, fill the wound with it, and press it in tightly with good compression until it sticks over that area and coagulates under the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And after that, cover it with powder and let it rest on the wound, do not remove the dressing while it remains like this until the medicine has been absorbed in such a way that it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes you only perform a cautery for this alone when you do not have aloe and dragon's bark in your current possession.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And perform this surgical operation for large wounds when it is necessary to rest on them and spread out, and those are recent wounds with their blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially in summer, then it is not appropriate to place this powder where we have said, but instead treat those with what we have mentioned earlier. In that case, apply some more easily digested ointments on those areas; or you can sprinkle onto those a mixture of flour from the kitchen and water within which they soften; proceed to treat them with another cure until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If you happen upon a fracture wound in bone and it's small, then you should extract that with gesture.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I direct the treatment of skull fractures in this case of poisoning.
De las plaguas del col.	From the wounds of the chest.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	And if the wound occurs in the chest, there is no difference in treatment compared to a simple skull wound.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	And if the nerves in the chest are cut or an artery, if it's nerves, they're not in their natural place but should avoid treatment with those that cause violent constriction, like onions and garlic which are sharp and resemble them when applied to nerves, causing them to constrict.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not cover the wound with any cause of total obstruction, for the substance of nerves is obstructed and its continuation is in the brain, which is the source of all bodily functions.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if that which is treated with lighter medicines, such as washing with double water, an infusion of boiled or unboiled oil, thyme when washed with double water and the other minor herbs according to this method, ointments are applied.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, then you administer suturing, or tighten the ligaments of the patient, and proceed to treat that with powders until it's healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	And if the wound is deep or occurs at the lower part of the soft tissue, then pierce that in the most depressed location.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	And if the wound has already been cut and blood flow is obtained from it, then you should separate or dry that part, or seal it, or cauterize it if necessity causes that.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you have already cut the muscles of the belly or all parts, and so the veins in the chest are saved, then you adjust the intestines with stitches over the spine of the belly without touching that; first equalize that and return it to its natural shape, then strengthen that with a decent tension, and let it rest for several days; proceed to treat that with ointments which cause constriction and stimulation until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	And if the wound has already penetrated into the bone, then you should puncture that. And if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those you can from them; and what is not visible to you, allow that to rest so that the wound heals internally, and separate it until the pain subsides and its removal is eased.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then apply this recommended powder over it.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	And if the wound has formed a fistula, then treat that with what you will remember later in its main part.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	For the wounds of the chest or resembling those that occur between the shoulders and form in the gap, on the collarbone, under the arm, or resemble them.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it's a thrust by a lance or collarbone, and you take into account the severity of the wound when the patient is breathing heavily; then know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it's not deep in the patient and the wound is recent to his/someone's health, then you should pause in him/her for the first hour with powdered medicine, and don't strain that so as not to allow the health issue to be held within the depth of him/her and return to the body causing harm. Rather, pause on him/her with an attractive ointment, and apply that twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not at your disposal, then you should pause near the wound's opening with a cloth to let it absorb what needs draining from moisture; and make the patient lie over the wound so that it can drain whatever is adjusted within them.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If it's already been three days or more since the wound and no convulsions, cardiac failure, nor constriction have occurred to the patient, and you apply other good treatments for him/her, then know that the wound is saved; and thereafter treat it with rest and within another treatment until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the patient's recovery is justified, and it's already been opened completely, then know that a fistula has already been formed; treat that accordingly by its head.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is due to incision in flesh or muscle, and it's simple on the surface of the foot or leg, then treat that according to what precedes suture, if it's large, or with powder if it's small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	And if it has already opened inside the bone, and you have incised the flesh of it, then press the wound and remove those pieces, if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	And if they're not separate, then wait until the wound opens, making the extraction of them easier.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other wounds that occur in other limbs, their treatment is the same as what we have discussed.
De las plaguas del ventre.	And for wounds of the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The illness which occurs in the abdomen is either large, or small, or intermediate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	For the large ones, some applications make the intestine or nerves of the intestine, so that their introduction and suture are more vigorous and more subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And disruption is made difficult by another method for small ones, and you know that their reduction is more difficult, so without touching their place immediately after they open and swell up because the material of them becomes difficult to work with.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is intermediate, where reducing the intestine isn't difficult, similarly to how it's difficult in the other two mentioned types.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that there are four ways for suturing the abdomen, yet two of these stitches are common and suitable for stitching in other wounds of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And the other two stitches are specific to other injuries, yet they are even more specific to stitching in the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I advise you for every exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So say that when the wound is small and a cause of the intestine gets stuck in it, making its reduction difficult, then this situation falls under one of these two methods: either due to the smallness of the disruption as we've said, or when the intestine becomes swollen from cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when this happens, you should take care to immerse a sponge with wetted linen in hot water or that you gather in cold water, then cyperum and spices, and insert the intestines into that so that the swelling can be resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And some wounds are like this where there is inflammation, and it's better than just hot water in the resolution of swelling.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when the swelling has resolved, then you soak the intestines in water containing aloe vera and myrrh, because through this, the material of them is alleviated with little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	And if the material of them is relieved by this treatment, then you divide the disruption with a small tool that has incisions in it.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better when it's suitable that it isn't dry, and there should not be an occupation to dry in need and lack of nutrition.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the tool, if it has this form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of it is sharp like a knife, while the other part is not sharp, and its tip is delicate, but not as delicate as a needle, in front it should be obtuse for just a little.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the wound is enlarged and pushes out the intestine, then you should know that its reduction should be according to its natural form, in its proper place, if it's possible on this, which is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	And when the disruption is large and in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should have the patient lie on their back, and place their hips higher than their head; and if it's in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should place the head and feet higher than the other parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then you should pause your understanding and consideration at this for which part where the wound is should be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And similarly, you should apply this in large wounds and intermediate wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, pause what is to your preparation, and so that this minister is among your best practitioners, who has the disruption entirely at their hand and adjusts the lips of them, and similarly uncover from one to another that there's no cause for another when suturing.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common method of suturing: when you take the needle, or count the number of needles according to the size of the wound; then smooth out from the end of the break in the ring finger, and strengthen the stitch with one needle, or another where you do not put a thread at both ends of the chain, at both ends of the artery where you leave the chain inside, allowing it to penetrate that part; and you have added both ends of the chain and both ends of the artery, then make four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then strengthen the thread twice in the circuit of the needle, and some stitches at both parts simultaneously, and add both edges and the wound through addition; then smooth out the thickness of the finger and place another needle there, and smooth that area with a double thread as you did with the first needle; do not stop doing this if it is necessary with the needles until you complete all the compression of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And if the needles are between hardness and subtlety, where subtle needles lightly cut through flesh; and thick ones are difficult to use in the thread, so that's why you should have those needles being slightly more subtle in both their subtlety and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And don't let the needle be inserted at both ends of the thread closely, so that flesh is not cut lightly and the wound opens in front of its healing.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not make the stitches too long so that the wound does not prevent itself from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then cut the ends of the needles so they do not penetrate too deep into the patient's thigh; place on top of the suturing powders spread from all parts, which have the ends of the needles; leave them until you know that the wound is already healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And this method of needle suture is particularly suitable for small wounds, where only one or two needles are placed around them during suturing.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second method of suturing is common: and it involves administering during suturing the four ends, from the thread and both ends of the artery, in one go, using a needle with its tip enveloped equally in subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when the needle has penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle from that middle part where it began, so that the tip pulls out of the inner part towards the wound, so that the suture follows the method of fabric suturing in which the fabrics are strengthened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each stitch for the thickness of half the width of the finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with such a suture I healed the wound that had happened to a man in his abdomen which was hit by a stone, and it was the biggest burst of the wound reaching up to half the palm, and it was situated near two palms away from my location and was bursting in the middle of the limb; and then I returned that deposit after the intestine had been allowed to come out for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in about 15 days or so, and I treated it and healed it; and then this vinegar was applied with hot water for several weeks, and he was discharged in his condition.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that it was not healed; and by miracle, for which I did not treat it with oil, where oil could not be found nor any medicine, but I treated the wound like a few dozen times a day, bathing it regularly with honey water until it was cured.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	And I can tell you two kinds of suture according to the narrative of Paulus.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it begins with stitching the thread from the part outside to the inner part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And when the needle penetrates into the artery and enters with correct direction and length throughout the body, let its end be in the part where you have inserted the needle; then make the needle penetrate from the inner part to the outer part at the other end of the artery.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made that penetrate, then you make another insertion in that middle end of the artery from the outer part to the inner part; and let the other end which is at this side hang, and make the needle penetrate into the other end of the inner part to the outer part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make the insertion of your needle penetrate to the artery in the end which is at this side, as you made that penetration into the outer part so that all of it penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And proceed from this diagonal side, push that at the end which is towards the artery in the other side, and remove the needle from the artery which penetrated, then reduce that into that thread and push the end of the artery towards this outer edge of the artery; and remove that from the thread which comes from this part.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once and again, and do this twice or three times in between which you complete all that is outer according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the whole of this suture method is that you sew on fabric through which you stitch the artery, so that you stitch the artery once from the outer part of the thread end and leave that other loop until you complete it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second type of own suture is the Gualia operation, which is to be performed by them and recommended for them. You should apply this second similarity in which some doctors apply it, because they add all parts to their corresponding part according to nature; and they apply the extremity of one of them and the extremity of what they observe to the other extremity of them, and this is done as I have advised you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When you place the needle at your own discretion on the part outside, and make it penetrate inside that single place, let there be two extremities of the thread; then rotate the needle and have it penetrate from outside to inside in two ends of the string.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then rotate those twists, and have each part penetrate inside to the outside in two extremities of the needle other than where it is on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of suture is better than the common lighter suture, and it's the kind of suture that precedes memory.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the Gualia operation.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And let it be said that for the belly, rectification of the suture is done with two needles. So you enter these into each other with a thread, and begin by entering the needle from where you should enter, and have it penetrate into the opposite side according to the sutures those who do equalize their bodies use.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when the disruption is in the middle of the belly, then the suture for it is harder than for the other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The judgment of medical treatment against plague is the judgment of the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	This is why, when you discover the plague near its beginning before the air changes it, and reduce the hernia and fix it properly, then place a piece of meat powder on that.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already changed the plague, then place on that certain ointments which in your presence you find make hard flesh and cure threads, and become consolidated completely; and then treat it as is the treatment of the other plagues where it becomes healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you are not present with the medicines, then place on that temporarily, as it begins to drain pus and fat, and change it twice a day, like this is taught, where it becomes healed; so you would not need another treatment in various situations when the plagues are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	And if you fear that the plague might spread to the main limbs, then cover that wool of lion in oil of a high quality or in heated oil, and place this on the area between the armpits and keep it there.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or decay in his hernias, which usually happens like this, then anoint that with a stinging black oil of vinegar, and especially if the inflammation has spread to the hernia and it causes drainage penetrating inside the cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that the one from the large hernia is a slight healing pus, while the other one is in the finer hernias.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal where the hernia which is called "gungun" does not receive healing from plague that affects it completely; this is because of the large number of veins in it and its size that is in those, and due to the subtlety of the body there, and due to its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	And if what you're dealing with from the plague is the skin, and you get it recently, reduce that according to your judgment for which you reduce the hernias equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	And if it has passed in the space and already turned to red or black, then strengthen that with a thread at the place that is degraded in him, so that fluids of pus come out, because there are veins and arteries in the skin.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then cut into that which is another of the ligament, and hang two ends of the thread from the part left open by the plague hole in him, so that your concern for his healing comes along with the release of your action on the skin and discharge of pus from the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Reminder of plagues when they occur in the hernia.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the hernia and it is small, then it is possible that it can be restored in some individuals. As for this, I saw one who was hit in his belly with a lance, and it was the stomach plague from the right side, and the plague was old and caused fistula, and his strength and flatulence were impaired.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I pursued the healing of him even though it was not reconciled in his healing; rather I sought to find out within what he would heal and where the location is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I saw the location already consolidated, and advised him regarding the misfortune he experienced in his belly; and did not advise him to do anything for that bad accident and abuse of his bodily conditions eating and drinking, and then bathe and exercise according to his daily routine.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And it is advised by those who are experienced that when plague affects the hernia and it's small, then you should bind it according to this manner: You should take fromiguas of large caps; adjust both edges of the plague wound; place one fromigua that has an open mouth on top of both edges of the plague wound; so when it takes over those and strengthens its mouth, cut off its head, which adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And place another needle near the first one, and don't stop to make needles one after another according to the quantity of the whole wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And place that and cover the wound; and cut those excess heads inside the hernia so that the hernia heals properly; and do not harm the patient with injury.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the hernia can be tied with a thin string made from the material of the beast's hernia, because it is more durable; and you take the end of these threads of hernia, and if they are not too thin, then place the end of them on this thread, wrapping it, and then insert this thread into needles and other materials in that part of the hernia, reduce that to the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this way of suturing with needles is simply according to trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	And if the wound is large and wide, especially if it's in a subtle hernia, then there is nothing else but to strengthen it slightly, and not heal it completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Regarding the cure of such wounds and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that every wound and abscess when they fester and harden, and become a ulcer, and do not heal but bleed for all time, and are not excised, then, wherever it is, universally it's called a fistula, and we call that one "azukem" (which seems to be a local term).
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula according to truth is a tough and white nodulation, which does not hurt at all, it is as sensitive as when one is in pain from old injuries; because of this, that particular ulcer was called "rizatz", that is, pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it's in moist ulcers which bleed; and a slight increase in moisture gets absorbed in some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture turns into pus, it's small, it's thick, and it's subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already mentioned in the division, as I said about wounds, that every ulcer which does not heal nor is exposed to natural skin, it's only due to one of these causes: among which, one is due to lack of health throughout the body; or due to illness within them; or where between them and their lips is hard flesh preventing the growth of flesh; or it's due to pus that has been left over; or because that ulcer itself contains bad quality matter intertwined with what is within them; or because medicine proves inconvenient in treating them; or when corruption sets in in a region, which is pestilence; or due to properties of regions thus for example Saragossa where difficulty arises in digesting maladies and the natural healing of abscesses is delayed; or when there's bone inside them, or bone fragments.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And I have shown all those causes, their signs and the treatment for them with medicines in this division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And just as I will instruct you about the treatment of a fistula which is performed through surgery by hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body; some of them are those that affect large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spinal cord, or hernia, or bladder, or any of the ribs, or some vertebrae of the back, or any of the joints formed by such composition as hand and chest; and about these they have proximity to the main body parts and are in parallelism.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And so about these fistulas of this kind, they are from the maladies that are difficult to heal and do not receive treatment for their cure, and occupation with such is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if some of these fistulas do not penetrate to the places mentioned earlier and you expect and trust in its healing, and want to know about this, then attempt with iron or needle. And if the fistula proceeds straight forwardly, inquire about it from you.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	And if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a subtle lead, which being lighter than its body's density will alleviate and bend your concern for the twist.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has any terrifying feature, it is not within your ability to indicate this over them with the tool.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	And so cleanse the orifice by your means, for the moisture with which you are cleansing that goes through other orifices and passes from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And so inquire meticulously according to your abilities to know if there is bone or nerve, and whether the size of the fistula is distant or nearby. Or if it's a fistula with many orifices that is situated above all this using your strength, using your questioning method by talking to the patient, feeling pain through pressure on the area with your hand, and understanding the meanings and causes of symptoms related to abscesses.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have established the causes through true deliberation, then proceed with the treatment according to confidence: and it is that you will now consider whether this fistula is apparent nearby or in safe place, far from joints, nerves, artery, vein, or any other location I've told you about.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And now you dry the fistula as it was described in its introduction, and keep that which is filtered through corrupt flesh, and that which has been born in the opening of the flesh, or part and such like, and treat that until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of considerable depth and follows straightness, then dig into that up to the preon as far as it is possible for you, and then reform that by removing all its corrupted tissues; additionally administer sharp wools wrapped in acute medicines, and insert those inside the cavity of the fistula which you have identified through iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this by making several incisions within so that the acute medicine may corrode all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula due to corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore that by applying ointments which generate healthy flesh where it has been healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If this does not heal through this method, then you apply a cautery to that as we have advised.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is bone and must be operated on, then you inquire about it and dry it out as we have advised, if you do not prohibit any cause related to a vein or nerve or main limb such as we said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is under your discovery and there's corruption or blackness in them, then you remove it where all the corruption has been attacked; and afterwards treat that with what makes flesh grow until they are healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed yet like you did before, then know that you have not fully eradicated the corruption; and hence you uncover again over them thoroughly, execute the reason for them and the transformation of them to the final strengthening of your action, and then restore that.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is healed, good that is; and otherwise, know that this corruption is in the depth of far within the body, which could not be achieved, so then in that case there's nothing for you to do but leave it.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the bone is rotten and small, or if it's within your ability to pull that out, then you will pull it with fine forceps which suit this task.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if they are bone masses, then thoroughly execute the extraction of all those, and leave none behind based on your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If it happens that there is any contradiction due to moisture, and in their incision there's neither fear nor mistake, then you cut those ligaments or tissues if they are here, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	And if you're not ready to lay the bones of your time yet, then place over that wound what will make the wound that way, and leave it so that this is around those bones and ligaments, and guard the wound from consolidation, and ensure that the section which you have incised in your operation remains constrained.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Waxing, if you fear it, place over the cut submerged in a heated oil, or the cut submerged in Egyptian ointment, or in any of those greases, which when they dry these ligaments and bones are separated by the ablution, and from this extraction is relieved.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	And if it's a large bone such as the bone of hip or thigh or something like that, and what in them is corrupted is only the flesh from them, then remove this only from behind where all the blackness and corruption is found, and afterwards restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	And if what in them is corrupted is a large portion, and the corruption has already reached to the bone marrow of the bone, then this becomes necessary to close that up and thoroughly incise into the location where the corruption has been achieved, and afterwards treat that so that it consolidates.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I advise you to do this that when you uncover in someone's thigh bone, place that as an exemplar and auxiliary for your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Take a young man around thirty years old, who experiences pain in his thigh, and among the divisions within you discover the substance inside the body that has reached to the thigh, and this is pus of large abscesses, but do not attribute it to an extrinsic cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then extend that by the error of doctors until the abscess has opened, and drain away from this fluid matter, and his treatment is carefully done so as to prevent the change into a fistula, and make incisions in this liquid orifices which all exuded pus and body moisture.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the care of many doctors for two years, and I did not understand in those things until they were called upon me.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the change in him and the fluids that flowed from those openings by great distance; and already his body of that man was completely drained and the color of it was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted a needle into one of those openings and conducted the needle to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I soon examined all the openings and found that these are reaching from every part of the body.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I was curious and cut into one of those openings where I discovered a part of the bone, and removed that corrupted thing, it was earthy and corrupted and decayed; and already had been corroded a part of the body that had penetrated to the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I prepared what was discovered by me and exposed from the discovered bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I was sure that it wasn't in the bone but that corruption which had spread and decayed, and I had already removed.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then restored the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, but it did not consolidate.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I would move on to uncovering the second bone after the initial discovery, and continuously examine any ongoing corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And treat whatever appears to me of that corruption, then I would thoroughly perform the treatment and restoration for them, and if it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I would discover another opening and ceaselessly introduce the small bone gradually precisely, performing the restoration for them. If it is not restored within when introducing around one palm's width, and extracted its marrow, then restore that with medicines, and it is slightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And no iteration is needed in the operation and sectioning of them but rather due to the positioning of their nerves and for the lack of tolerance and fear of death that happens to them at all times from excessive evacuation, causing bad fainting.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so, complete healing is through total recovery, and nothing replaces the hard flesh; good positioning of them in their body returns their virtue to them; they are conversed into their positions and do not oppose them during walking or cause any damage for any reason.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If the bone is prominent in the location of the body already drilled, then cover that second one according to this method: you should take hold firmly with your finger where the tip of the prominent bone is, and command someone else to extend it outwards; pause this piece of woolen thread as thick as the first piece; then place this wool on the flesh that was left by the bone. Extend the end of the flesh so that you can pull it towards the parts that were left, and uncover the flesh over the location which you wish to drill in order for the drill not to cut into the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a stand or table at this location correctly, when you do this it is not forbidden to use the drill which does not cut through the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And make sure that the drill is on this corrupted spot little by little; if it is in the cavity of the corrupted bone and does not appear in its appearance when touched, force another opening from its drill.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, before one part continues to the other, and the corruption is in its middle or in part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts completely; then place a stand at this location, and then drill that from the first part where there is corruption, making sure the drilling continues for the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And make the drill according to the location of the corruption a little bit, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is at the joint, drill that corrupted joint and drill the bone where it continues from the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it's not in their natural place but at a junction.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the elbow of the hand or the chest, it's very difficult; however, make sure you inquire about how the corruption appears to you and where to uncover it, and describe it according to each position which is possible for you. And with every instrument, rectify it as much as possible when it doesn't contradict your veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know what the incisors and drills to drill these bones are much according to the location of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their size, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and their rarity; for you should have all kinds of surgical tools suitable for that operation prepared.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that this operation means for you about the kind of instrument you need; when you have great study and long experience in the methods of this art, and evidence from the methods of diseases, which at this point you already possess, to use what is convenient with the tools for each disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I will present to you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you should have, similar to which you will proceed with your prohibition, which you will experience on the others.
Forma de serra:	Shape of the saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Shape of a large other saw:
Forma de ray:	Shape of the drill:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The tip of this drill should be according to the shape of the star key's head, and its points should be according to the shape of the points of an astelophagi.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And you should not allow that when those joints are corrupted they come into contact with the heads of the bones, or it would be like having a large and broad mouth.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape of the larger scissors of others:
Forma de razori menor:	Shape of smaller scissors:
Forma de razori lat:	Shape of curved scissors:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Shape of another type of saw that has been made: it should have a curve slightly more than the curvature of its iron, and the member of its steel blade should be bent downward.
Forma de lu:	Shape of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Shape of scissors in which there is a curvature:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Shape of another subtle pair of scissors:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Shape of another curved-end scissors:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Shape of small scissors resembling a spider's leg:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Shape of the saws which are used to drill bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Shape of another smaller saw:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another sawing tool; this resembles a drill, and the end of it is like a saw, and it is exhibited in various locations according to the size of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The way you should form it depends on the one who is perforated by bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the extremity of them is triangular and has a sharp extremity.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, similarly to chisels that correspond to all the causes we have mentioned about razors and incisions and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	From cutting edges and the jointing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The edges cut or due to an intrinsic cause or extrinsic, or as you have treated that corruption by treating those medicines and the treatment does not relieve it, or sometimes the corruption needs to be excised from the member which was not hit by any cause, then a chisel should be used to cut into that member into this point where the disease is located, so that the patient escapes death or malady which is greater misfortune of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of the one to whom this happens, is that the member becomes black inside where it has been burned or if you place the blackness close to this point within that member which is burning it and absorbs everything in its body; then make a cut here for this.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if it's caused by the impact of some venomous causes such as from a scorpion in the sea or from murex or from earthworm and similar.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or impact is in the end of the finger, then you should cut the finger and do not give space for the corruption to enter my hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if you reach to my hand, then you should cut that of the root of the forearm, and do not give space for the corruption inside where it could spread in the arm's artery.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you miss that, then cut the arm into the side at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes elsewhere around the side, then in that case it is death for the patient; and to administer another cause there at this time of treatment is a great virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly do for the chest when you miss the spot of the disease in the chest, then you should cut it into one of the ribs.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it spreads in the area below the chest, then you should cut the whole chest.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	If it rises within the thigh, then you should cut the leg into the joint of the thigh.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread over the thigh, then there is no help but relief, and leave the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The method of cutting the member or sawing it is that you hold the ligament in the part where you wish to cut, and leave which one you want to cut on. And stretch another ligament over the area; and extend the assistant with two ligaments at their parts, and extend the assistant with another ligament here; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments inside so that all the flesh is uncovered; then proceed to cut or saw it.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And cover so that a cloth of all parts is placed by itself so that it does not touch the area, and bring to the patient the injury correctly adjusted and the abscess cautery.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	And if bleeding occurs when you are working, then you should cauterize the area moderately, or place on it some powders that strengthen blood; and later return to your treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And later has the limb treated with ligament at his convenience, and treat that so that it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I advise you on what happened to someone in his chest, this is the kind of accident that I and you should be aware of, which occurs to him blackness in his chest as if it was assembled from burning with fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption occurs first in his finger inside, which stretches across the whole chest.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepares himself to put pus because if the treatment does not go well across his body due to its intensity and his suffering from pain and heat of him, he should cut that chest into the joint, and it gets healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time ago this kind of corruption occurred in his hand's finger area.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it reaches me, and so I consider to reflect this excess regarding what has been applied on his hand with the medicines, towards the transformation of the body in him; and the excess does not recur but begins spreading into another finger that starts from the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asks me to cut his hand, and I don't want to do this fearing the recurrence of that excess, rather you should fear cutting your hand's death, for the virtue of the patient was about suffocation.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And when he left me, he returned to his land and came back to me that this man prepared himself and cut his whole hand, and it got healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added this story merely for support on what can happen from this illness, and it has significance which is explained and according to which it should be treated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Regarding the care of colons and the quality of enemas with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When gangrene occurs in some fleshly limbs and the space of the gangrene extends until it collects pus, then it bursts and perforates, and pus escapes from him, and leaves the area empty as if it was a vessel, and the cut that is made here is compared to a cloth, and it does not reach deeper corruption, nor it infiltrates into bones or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged inside where corruption begins in some member, then it is called a fistula and does not heal.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The treatment for this is to incise the whole area just as it has turned, especially when it has become subtle and been made like a sheet, making sure not to stick to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the incision will stick and that this corruption has not been achieved through subsequent consequences, and if there is a passageway on the incision, then your treatment for this is with a suppository.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you consider the sinus, and then if it's large, and the arm that you use smells of fermentation, then you suppositories with this Egyptian remedy made from oil and vinegar mixed in equal parts, and they should be adjusted in a container, and placed over the fire until the medicine boils and spreads to a suitable thickness.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And you take from the patient what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; suppositories are made for this to clear out the sinus, strengthen his opening, and let the medicine stay in him for the duration of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And you extract that from the spice; do this for several days until the sinus has been cleared and his pus has been reduced.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is suppositories made from ash water when you don't have this medicine at hand; and you take the ashes of garlic, put them in water; then boil that and make suppositories with it until you are convinced that the sinus has been cleared.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or ash water, then suppositories are made with water and honey where they mix in vinegar that has been strained; suppositories are also made from vinegar and honey mixed together, for the property of honey is to modify and clean, and vinegar makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is excess of coagulating properties and dryness in the vinegar.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this for several days and you are convinced that the sinus has been reduced, then make suppositories with whatever causes meat to be born in him.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you take from a dyafinicon salve and dissolve that in rubbed oil and vinegar; or you make suppositories with various medicines and other ointments which have the properties that I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the sinus is narrow in which no catheter can be inserted for suppositories, then you gradually enlarge it with a small iron instrument, and pause while covering your fingers with Egyptian salve or basilico salve until it's enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly if the opening is wide, then you stitch up his lips with suture and leave him the quantity in which suppositories can be added.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening of what flows from his arm is elevated to the sides, then you dry it in the lower pus spot that's in him so that his arm can flow into it; which when his arm is constricted in the bend of the sinus, the meat will be generated in him.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it's not possible to dry the sinus inside the area around the lower pus spot as you wish, then pierce it and prepare the member for this operation so that his arm flows slightly according to your skills without any cause being kept back in him.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take strengthening medicines that are placed on the sinus conveniently so as to extend those above cloth of it.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such great quantity that it facilitates communication with all parts of the sinus; then you incise with your saws along the right side of the opening in the sinus, making an ample but slight cut so as not to alter the opening of the sinus; and extend over other pieces of cloth from this salve according to the size of the cut, then pause it on that far away from the opening of the sinus so that the movement of his arm is facilitated and does not damage the cloth too much for several days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	And that which is over the opening of the sinus, which you enlarge constantly so as to allow what has grown in him due to his arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know whether what flows from him of his arm is much or little, or if it's digested, or not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And also you consider the place of that sinus, if in him the patient feels pain or not, and if it's within the abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your treatment is prolonged in such manner, you see the substance that is being discharged over the opening of the sinus already adheres, or begins to have adhesion, then you remove it or wait another day, and when you remove the dressing, you change the cloth and renew the salve.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	And if there's a long space near the sinus that contains subtle pus, then don't lose hope in the adhesion of it, for his recovery depends on this; which is common among some individuals who take time to regenerate flesh in their various sores, and among those where the opposite occurs.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if there are several days sitting with undigested arm from the sinus, then you know that the sinus doesn't adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and is the cause of prolonged treatment, then adjust in drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are wet by their substance and by its virtue, they become dry as well, just like dyafinicon salve, when there's excess of addition of zegi.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And behind the one being treated, what you should do is take stramonium ointment and dissolve it in roasting oil, then apply this against him on his substance, and place that near him, use that.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And assume this action when there is no bone, apply stramonium ointment, honey when it's inside the wound let it swell, use this; or take myrrh and aloes and prepare them, mix all and crush over the honey when it's under the fire, then place that near on linen and strengthen that. And place that on the honey where you have put it to swell, and crush that onto linen and strengthen that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes, these remedies are applied using the language and knowledge of aristocratic medicine (and this is heavenly lily) and flour from garlic and centaury, use those simple ingredients or adjust them, mix those and sift them over the honey that I recommended; and use this.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the wound is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the substance of him/her, and it spreads into the bones or other hard parts or ligaments; then you treat with tubercular disease, as was described above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Regarding the treatment of cutaneous and nail injuries, including cutting digits and making cuts.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panniculitis is an abscess that affects the nail bed of a digit on either hand or foot, and it often spreads to other digits. If this condition persists and proper treatment is delayed, the abscess might become infected and need incision. In such cases, you remove the pus with a knife, if it's not treated it might lead to corruption spreading into the bone where its smell is fetid. You then cut off the end of that digit, and the color becomes darkened.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so when you have applied that which we mentioned in the division and if your treatment does not show improvement, then proceed to cut out all excess tissue that has accumulated under the nail. Then cauterize the wound near there; let the heat of this cautery aid in healing.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is healthy and the nail is intact, and the growths under the nail are already enveloping the surrounding tissues inwardly, start to prick them and guide this process. Then proceed as follows: place your sharp instrument at the angle of the nail that you're pricking into the flesh, push it further in, and cut through the flesh with ease, then apply whatever remains of the medicinal burning corrosive ointment until all is completely removed; and treat with the salve when healing has occurred.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If corruption has already spread into the bone, then proceed as follows: you should cut out the bone and remove it, because there is no healing when the bone inside him/her is corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you notice the corrosion and corruption spreading into the digit, then proceed as follows: cut through it at one of the joints according to where its memory is felt, and treat that area with salve when healing occurs.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If there's an impact or rubbing under the nail leading to intense pain, then proceed as follows: begin by making a small incision at the beginning of the affected area on the hand, and then dry out the nail with a sharp blade across the width upwards from that point, be careful not to allow the drying to reach into the remaining flesh beneath the nail; this might cause intense pain in the hand and result in the formation of excess flesh in that spot. Then treat that spot with something that alleviates pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	This refers to an adjustment made by someone familiar with body parts, where in some men, the flesh is hardened everywhere, or it gets thickened in their bones, or even thickens under the nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	Such conditions are native to the joint's anatomy, or they manifest in specific spots of the digits.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	This condition that appears in certain joints is not harmful, whereas this one that appears at the joints tends to be painful.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And for those that are naturally fleshy, the drying is mild; you should cut through their anatomy with a sharp blade.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	For those that are naturally at the joint's anatomy, healing is difficult; therefore, protect it from any excision.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	For those that are naturally at the digit, proceed as follows: when you cut from its beginning, remove the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then use one of those saws convenient for this purpose to cut through it; afterwards, treat that area once healing has occurred.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	This refers to consolidation that occurs between the joints or due to the inherent condition of the body, causing swelling or thickening in some people, or as a result of wound healing or burning from fire, or through similar means. You should proceed by removing this consolidation until the digits return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And place them among the patient's cloths in roasting oil to prevent them from being slightly consolidated, or separate them with a thin sheet of lead underneath if they are consolidated accordingly.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	Similarly, if consolidation occurs in some digits on the palm, then you dry that consolidation according to its preparation and aligns it with the shape of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Regarding cuts or incisions, they are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	These cuts are varicose veins, which are swollen, full of melancholic excesses and veins that appear in the limbs. The most common occurrence is in the joints, especially in those who travel, work or carry loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	When you are to administer bloodletting from the heart for the black plague, perform several instances of vigorous expulsion, and then drain the patient of blood from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The cure of their illness is carried out according to two methods: one is that it involves incision and the evacuation of that black pus, and the other method is that the vein is raised and all of it is extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of their illness is carried out in this manner: when the belly starts with water and is gradually poured into it so that the large pus is resolved, which becomes liquid in the belly, then strengthen the belly of the patient at the waistband under the place where the black pus comes from below the thighs up to the place behind the knee on one bend, and then dry out the vein in a spot or two, or three with a wide section, and raise the black pus with your hand at that place under the belt in front and back, when you have reached the desired amount of pus which is sufficient for treatment, and this tolerates the effectiveness of the illness.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And similarly instruct them, commanding that they refrain from eating any food that may generate black plague.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And continue the cure with bloodletting when the veins are filled and you notice something in the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of their illness is carried out in this manner: you should massage the belly of the patient, if there are movements of pus beneath the skin, then place them in hot water and immerse the belly with hot water until it turns red and the veins become prominent; or it may be exercised by vigorous activity, if hot water is not available, until the body becomes sweaty.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry off the belly in the right direction of the vein by section lengthwise or at the back of him, or in the lower part of the pus you should have his knee, or at the back part of him you should have his foot.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then open the belly with cuts and scrape the vein from all parts until a sensation appears, and you should notice the patient's response to that prayer turning towards blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And when you have lifted out of the belly, you let that white thing be a string.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you place his legs in that row so that they are elevated and lying on the belly, and hang that on a stick or near the lion.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then dry another section close to that section for three fingers, and scrape the belly from the part above the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then raise that and cut it in the last section which is under the foot, and remove that and raise that until you can pass through the second section, and remove that from the section that was above that.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	Do this until you have removed that from the section which is very high or any other of all sections, when everything has passed; then cut that.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if it does not obey to your extraction and raising, then insert a needle with a thick double thread, tie that and remove it, or insert his leg in water and move your hand all around until it is submerged.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And remember not to cut it deeply; for if it is broken, it will make it difficult for you to raise that thing again and cause harm to the patient because of that injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when you have lifted all of it out completely, then place your hand on the affected area with wool submerged in oil and rubbed oil and non-rubbed oil, and cure that until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted without having twists to which it is wrapped around parts, and does not follow rectitude as we have said, then you should cut on that all part of the twists in him and at the parts where it is wrapped around, and then hang that with threads so that you raise that completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And remember not to cut your section that you do not injure the vein and do not torment that; for it will be difficult for you to raise that; use your caution in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Shape of the incision on which the vein is sealed:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape like a bow:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not as sharp as ordinary needles nor does it have a pointed end so as not to harm the vein; and it has enough flexibility like a lion, for if it were too subtle, it would cut the vein due to its subtlety; moreover, it has the necessary excess in size as we said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Regarding the removal of the leg vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is formed in the thighs on low, sandy grounds like Al-Ategy in the lands of Arabs and in the dry and sparse lands of little capacity where neither grass nor bushes grow.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And elsewhere in the body, it is formed in other parts besides the thighs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the formation of it is of decomposition that you see on the belly as if venom inside the body, serpents and worms and maggots and parasites generating between the belly and flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the possibility of its occurrence is when that vein comes into action in the belly inflammation; and then there is swelling at the site; and then it starts to emerge from the site of that swelling, as if from a root plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when you see the end appearing, then weigh that over it with a piece of lead whose weight is equal to one of a horse's load. Within two horses' loads, and move it around so that the lead hangs freely from the chest.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as it hurts the patient somewhere outside, you encase this with lead and place it there.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the pain is prolonged, then you incise a part of your body and cover the rest; do not incise there until it is free from the pain, for if you incise where the pain is concentrated, it contracts and enters into the flesh, causing pus and inflammation in that area and a bad ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So it should be treated gently and extracted little by little, until it is free from behind the patient's body, without causing any damage to the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, it gets stuck in some people that is along their length of twenty palms and more than ten, already I have experienced treating one that was about twenty-two palms long.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is treated when it is being medicated, then insert the needle into the patient's artery and puncture that long artery in their body, until all what is inside the matter is evacuated. Then administer putrefaction to that area for several days with medicines; afterwards treat that according to the treatment of pus formations.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein has many times raised ridges, especially when it appears at the junction of the chest or on the chest, and causes the patient's openings to rise, and it gets stuck from any opening branch.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And so treat that in this way as we have said in the division and with what was mentioned earlier.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From the section on worms generated under the skin, it is called Bovine Sickness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This sickness is named in some lands as Bovine Sickness because at times it affects the backs of cows and there are worms few, one being native between the spine and flesh, which travels throughout the body upwards and downwards, and its feeling is shown through its animal movement from member to member until it breaks the spine and spreads out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the generation of it is through the putrefaction of certain fluids like what happens with worms, serpents, earthworms and roundworms in the stomach.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is met by the mischief of it, when it goes through the body and rises to the head, then irritates in him and enters into him, destroying the gallbladder, and there are many ridges happening.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you want to treat that and extract it, then don't do so unless you understand its movement and appearance in the feeling, and thus find what is above him and what remains with him symmetrically and tightness, and afterwards dry yourself and remove it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is embedded in the flesh and you don't feel it, then place a cautery with fire on that spot while it's inside, and the main concern to be feared is corruption of it which damages the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if it penetrates to the head close to the gallbladder, then press with strong tension on the eyebrow area, and afterwards dry yourself off, and remove it; note that when a patient uses the transformation of their body through medicines that expel bad putrid fluids, and beware not to eat foods causing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From the section on Nafir Sickness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This sickness is called Nafir in our land, and it's pain that occurs in some limbs, and then spreads from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I've seen this second one too, which I will recount to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to treat a sick woman in a village, and I found her arm and saw a small swelling on the funis vein of the arm. After about an hour, I noticed that this swelling moved like a worm climbing up to this point, but much more subtly than before, as if it were living silver moving from one place to another.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then you feel the pain at that location and remain in the muscle, and stays here for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And it moves on the other side through to the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And he told me that it moved through his entire body just as I saw; and I was too amazed by the transformation of him and the speed from member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this before in my own gallbladder according to that manner, but I have seen movements causing pain being transformed from one limb to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I didn't see it like this in the gallbladder as with the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I don't consider it to be this way but rather due to the fact that the woman was pregnant, with her hot body and visible veins, and here appears that flowing sensation of movement.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this backward flow not appear in those who are hot and have moist bodies with swollen veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you wish to treat him/her, and the patient feels pain, then it doesn't seem like your usual treatment as we have said, so press on that area lightly and dry yourself off there while that sensation of movement settles in, then cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	And if you don't find it in your own gallbladder, then treat that by eliminating from the body and with what expels wind, and prescribe those with stinking pills and herbal pills and similar remedies.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diversified according to species and the parts of the body in which they lodge. Their diversity lies in some having large points, small ones, concave ones, and dull ones; all are solid. There are also those that have three angles and those that resemble tongues or beaks.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And those that lodge in the limbs and joints are according to two ways: they make concave ones like the head, heart, liver, lungs, ribs, intestines, bladder, and resemble them. So when they enter one of these limbs and you notice signs of death appearing, I advise you to proceed cautiously with removing that arrow from those where death has struck in their most critical positions. And when you do not see such alarming symptoms and the arrow is not hidden deep within the limb, then you remove it and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And concerning the symptoms of poisoning: when it affects the person and penetrates through bones, and appears above the skull which gets swollen due to excessive heat leading to loss of vision, dizziness, and chest pains, swelling, and irritation in the tongue, as well as abdominal cramps, vomiting from anger, and a faint feeling; if words are removed or speech is lost. It can also appear at the site of injury with a white, powdery appearance resembling moisture, and appears somewhat moist like the skin's texture.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if you notice these symptoms, then refrain from treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it has already done so.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	The symptoms of the arrow when it is in the heart are that it is close to the left nipple, feels like being pierced by a hard object, not by sight. And if the movement of the arrow resembles the movement of dust and its course is blackened; it causes coldness at the extremities and perspiration, fainting; and you should know that death descends upon one completely.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	The symptoms when the arrow has lodged in the lungs are a frothy blood spill at the wound, and the vessels near the throat become swollen. The patient's skin changes color, breathes out a large amount of air, and gasps for air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And when the arrow is lodged in the diaphragm, which is located at the feet, pain is felt near the small ribs, it causes a great intense pain and sighing, and it affects neither the strength nor the movement of all the muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow is lodged in the stomach, it causes some indigestion leading to discomfort in the area of the wound.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow is lodged in the abdomen, and it penetrates the wound area, or the fabric, or the organ that gets ruptured; there's no hope for treating its removal from the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow hits the bladder and causes urine to be expelled outside, it brings about various effects leading to symptoms appearing externally. And if there's pain in the area around the wound, then you should know that this is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	And the other limbs such as the face, neck, chest, shoulders, and those that resemble them of the body are to be saved according to their most critical positions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not poisonous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I advise you that which I have seen about these arrows, so that you may understand the significance of this for your treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	This is why: if someone gets an arrow in the eyelid of their nose and I extract it from the other side, leaving the ear's wax intact, they recover and no harm occurs to their nose.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And extract another arrow for a Jew which got pierced in them in the wax of their nose, leaving the eyelid intact and it was already concealed, so one could not obtain from that anything but a small tip attached to its shaft; it was a large arrow among arrows sharp like those of the Turks, made of iron without ears.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And if it's for a Jew, and no harm occurs to their nose in an unfortunate incident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And extract another arrow for a Christian who got it in the chest, which was an Arab arrow, and that's one with ears. Then I incised into that between two guides, already submerged in his chest; then I sharpened that, and proceeded to remove that arrow, and the Christian recovered.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And extract another arrow from a person who got it in his abdomen, thinking that he would die because of that; and therefore, after thirty days had passed without any change to his condition, I incised on the arrow and probed around it, and then he recovered, and no harm occurred to him due to this incident.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I have seen a person in whom an arrow was lodged in their back, and the wound has solidified over them, and after approximately seven years, it penetrated the surface of the skin.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I have seen a woman in whom an arrow was lodged in her abdomen, and the wound is hardened inside her, it doesn't change in its position, and the woman doesn't suffer harm during any of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And there is another man to whom I shot an arrow on his face and the wound was healed, the arrow was removed without causing any further pain or similar sensations.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I removed the arrow from the king's prince's man who was shot in the middle of his nose and he had already lost a small part on the right side; the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called upon to treat him near the exit wound within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I healed the wound from the arrow exit; and then I probed that place under the subtle test, but did not feel it; rather he felt it sharply on his right ear. And then I hoped that that point was at the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied the substance in the place that is attractive and digestive, confirming to me that this location is where we should apply ourselves, so that I can see the place of the arrow, and thus proceed upon it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And no incident occurred in the significant location where you achieved that place; and I continued applying the substance on him for several days without any incident. And while healing took place, and then the patient felt the arrow inside his nose after this period of several days, he recounted this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I placed acute corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it healed, and upon that spot, I examined it, and removed the subtle tip of the arrow which adhered to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I adjusted the wound's opening with that acute medicine until it became visibly apparent to me the tip of the arrow, and passed this way for the period of time within four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And as the wound became enlarged, it was possible for me to insert my scissors into him, and refine this, without causing any disturbance. Then I did not cease to minutely examine and engineer upon that manner of instrument, within which began one day on those manners of tools hanging him with forceps being made, according to how their shape developed at the end of the handle, in which I extracted it; and then he restored this wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors thought that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored this along with the wound, it is consolidated, and he recovered his health entirely, and there was no problem in him for any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you may understand and appreciate this rule and meaning about what I have not mentioned, where the divisions of this art and the definitions of that cannot be understood in narration or are not comprehensible.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the craftsmen compare much about motion; and on what is present versus what is absent; and finds a new operation and a novel tool that you should use in understanding the effects of foreign causes in the art when they happen.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And so I say that arrows are not thrown outside the members where they are stuck, but according to two manners: or by direction at the location where it enters; or opposite of the other side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is thrown from a location gives entry, or it's an arrow coming from a fleshly place and it is thrown and thrown outside.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not avoid the disturbance at the time when he eats, then consider that you should leave it for a few days until the flesh around it recovers, and he is relieved of his intake and discharge.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it's stuck in bones and you don't avoid disturbing him, then leave that for a few days and continue this with intake and movement every day, and it will be thrown outside.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not avoid disturbance for a few days, then consider that you should puncture in the circuit of the arrow along any bone through subtle travel where the location becomes enlarged by the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bones of the head and has penetrated into one of the brain's chambers, and appears in the nose like those accidents which I mentioned, then abstain from extracting the arrow and leave it until his being equates for about several days; for if the arrow penetrates to the heart, then death will not be prolonged for him.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not stuck only in the body of the bone and does not pass into the heart, and stays in the nose for a few days, and no incident occurs from any cause those accidents, then you engineer towards the removal of the arrow and towards him.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And if it's motioned (indicating the arrow is moved) and you do not avoid its extraction, then you manage travels in the circuit of the arrow as we have recommended, and then care for that area so that he recovers.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is already hidden in the body's location, and hidden from sensation, then you probe that spot with your hand. If you feel it, then pull it with tools suitable for its removal.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot do it on him due to the constriction of the wound and its length of preon (bone), then here is not bone or nerves or vein, then you cut into the wound where it is enlarged and where it's possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it's on his ears at which it is stuck from all sides by whatever you can perform; and engineer upon that, if you cannot remove the flesh in the fracture of the earlobes or in the twisting of them so that it escapes.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the removal of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use your hand's twist and forceps to all parts within which that must obey; and with subtle subtlety that the arrow does not break and that it is made for a difficult extraction of him and that extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot over that of your time, then leave for several days until the parts that are in the circuit of you recover, and then proceed with that which is now relieved.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	If it causes you opposition in the flow of blood, then administer what we have said about treatment in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And keep your skill in the operation of veins or nerves, or cords, and apply medicine in all possible ways to the removal of the arrow; do this with ease, calmness, slowness, and firmness as I have instructed you.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And so when you force the arrow back on its own that the patient lies according to the figure according to which you should place the positioning of the arrow in him, which is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If this is not within your capability, then administer what is within your capability through the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	The arrows that are opposite to the other part or that have already proceeded with some parts from within to the external parts, or stretch the tip of the arrow through a sense of the part above the origin of the downward flow, often making it prominent; then you focus on this; and according to the amount in which they grasp the forceps, and then gently pull that one out.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is retained in the mouth, then you twist the tongue against opposition so that the arrow starts into the mouth, and expand as you insert, and then proceed to extract that one.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave this for several days, and then proceed to operate on it until it burns.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is in that place, then you push that one towards you.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft is stuck and you want to administer impulse, then you insert this one, if it's deaf, press into it so that between the cavity of him and the tail of the arrow, and then push that one towards you.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	And if the arrow is concave, then you push this one forcefully by entering it in that place, which relieves the arrow because of this.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is embedded deep, then you hollow out all the flesh in which it lies, if this is within your capability, and then treat that with what seems appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow hits the feet, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side, and it's close enough that you can touch this one to the skin, and is within your capability to focus on this, then focus on this and avoid touching veins or nerves, and extract this one, and then cover the wound if necessary, and treat this so that when healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Shape of forceps to which arrows are attached:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let their extremities be like the beak of an eagle that they make as if they were saws when they take hold of the arrow so that they do not leave it.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And from those, special parts are made, large, few and mixed, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow and its weakness or strength, and according to the extent of the wound, and the constriction of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Shape of the concave pushing tool at this curved end like the tip of an eagle's beak so that it alleviates the inside of the arrow in him, and impulse of this deaf one:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Shape of the pusher for a deaf extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Like a ray, so that it alleviates its inside in the concave arrow and is pushed towards that one.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Regarding bloodletting from veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins for bloodletting from which blood is usually let out are .xxx (a placeholder for the specific vein or veins that are typically subjected to bleeding). Of which there are in the head .xvi (sixteen). So there are two pulsating veins which are close to the ears, they're called auricular; two herbs that are in both of the temples apparent; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal regions of both eyes and are called aspiciens; and the vein prepared in the middle location of the forehead, and the vein that's in the end of the nose; and two guidegi which are at the neck; and two veins that are above the lips; and two veins that are below the lips; and - these are the veins that are called algecile; and they're two veins that leave the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	The veins which are subjected to bloodletting in the arms are .v (five). The veins that are bloodletted in the shoulders are .v (five), which of those is a cephalic vein and should be pierced at the wild heart. The common people call it "the vein of the head", and deafly, it's a mixed vein made up of a branch of basilica and another branch of cephalic. They name this one the commoners' "vein of the entire body", and basilica is a vein placed at the domestic heart, which is called "citillecting". They refer to this as the "vein of the belly" for them. The veins in the arms are placed on top of the flexor, and it's that one where bloodletting occurs, which appears above the elbow through obvious appearance; the saving one, and this is the vein between the aforementioned auricular vein and the small one mentioned, it's two ramps.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	In the arm and chest there are three veins; one of those is the one that leaves the curvature of the elbow in the wild lizard's leg; and the second is sophena, its location is on the chest that leaves the heart of the domestic lizard; and the sciatic vein, its location is on the leg that leaves the curvature of the wild lizard; and in the chest are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The youth of the veins that are close to the temples is in ancient cuts and migraines and headaches from the old illnesses on the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of feeling those is according to what I recommend you: it's when your head touches the pillow, and you rub your head on the back of the neck where both veins are in an ample fabric with good friction; it strengthens the body of the patient inside a bend that appears between them which are close to the temples at two lower points under the head; take this with what I've said, and if you feel the pulse of those as I've said, test that.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Close you take the surgical knife, and that is the one that touches it, close you insert those fingers into the vein between which the blood flows to the lung.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And close you lift your hand to the vein and the artery up to their division points, then cut into the vein with an incision that is touching it.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be equivalent to two fingers or slightly more than that; and bleed until you are satisfied.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And close strengthen with powders and leave it so that it will heal.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already in the introduction of this treatise on the incision of those and their cautery treatment has been discussed.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	The two arteries that are in the temples during childhood is old migraine and bad blood illness, as well as frequent conjunctivitis, acute overflows of excesses in the veins throughout the body.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of performing phlebotomy on those is according to what I recommend you: tighten your head's neck muscle where both veins appear due to a clear manifestation, and demonstrate their pulse as I instructed you; and then you test that.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And close you raise the artery above the vein up to the division points as instructed by me, and insert the blood extractor in a touching position with your fingers, then lift the vein at that spot; and cut into it just like you did on the other veins; and let the bleeding run according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And close release the constriction of the head, place your instruction over the vein for an hour, and then place on that spot some powders while strengthening it with firm pressure, and leave it so that it will heal.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And already the recall of them, and their incision, and extraction have been discussed in the beginning of this book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And thus the youth of phlebotomy on the frontal vein is similar to phlebotomy on the cephalic artery in old ailments of the face and migraine, fever, inflammation and fetid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of performing phlebotomy on them is according to what I recommend you: it's that your head tightens with a bend where the vein appears; and then take the instrument called the blood extractor which has this form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the needle tip which is at the top of the blood extractor over that vein and hit it on it with your shoulder or another cause in the way you do, let the blood flow according to the quantity you want; and then release the puncture of the head and strengthen it so that it will heal.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Sometimes cuts are made during phlebotomy on the neck, but do not let the phlebotomy have a sharp tip like others, before it is at an oblique angle, and perform that phlebotomy horizontally, where the bone is close and hard would break in it if it were too delicate.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	The youth of the two veins that are in both eyes through inflammation from tears and pus in the eyes, and for the ailments of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of phlebotomy is that your head tightens its neck with a bend, and then perform phlebotomy on those, and stand over the patient's head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And let phlebotomy be performed horizontally along the length of a few with small phlebotomies, where in that spot there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is delicate, its soft end would break.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the blood flow as much as necessary for you, place your hand on that spot, strengthen it overnight, and then release those.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	The phlebotomy of the nasal vein is associated with acute fever and intense heatiness, as well as facial ailments and migraine that occur in the face, especially if they are old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of phlebotomy on them is that your head tightens its neck and you place your nose with your left hand near your head, take the delicate long phlebotomy and put it in the middle location of the nasal bridge according to correctness, where the vein doesn't manifest here, and as soon as blood begins to flow.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Make sure to finish your hand with the small phlebotomy gradually and let the blood flow according to your need; then release that overnight, for that will be restored quickly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The youth of the bloodletting procedure for both parts leads to contraction and the onset of leprosy, as well as ailments from malnutrition and indigestion, and bad corrosive ulcers, such as those caused by scurvy.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of this bloodletting for those is that the patient supports each in their back with a pillow; and the physicians are above the head of the patient, and the patient is lying on one mattress.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And when performing bloodletting to the long vein, do ample small bloodletting gradually; and remove the amount of blood according to time or according to what is necessary; and make it seem like another vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And when returning the mattress and strengthening both veins through gentle stretching so that the patient is not burned, let it stay within until after the plague is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The youth of bloodletting for the veins in the gums, corresponds to small abscesses and pustules in the mouth and gum decay, as well as bad ulcers and cracks, and bad ulcers that occur in the nose and in the patient's circulation.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of bloodletting for those is that you make the patient face you, and strengthen their neck with a bend, then move the lips around and observe both veins, one being on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and each demonstration is by the darkness of each from both, and this more so when in circulation within those veins there are small dark ones; and then you make an incision for each at a point inclined inwardly.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you have any doubt, or do not know which one among those is, then you discern by making an incision in the largest of those, and from the evident pus of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make it resemble the two veins that are on the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	As custom dictates, always cut in the veins located on the lip you have.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	The two veins that are located in the front of your tongue are for the bloodletting procedure known as cephalic, before the burns found in the throat, for tonsillitis, and for ailments of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of bloodletting for those is to follow the patient between your hands in front of the sun, and raise their tongue from them, observe their tongue, from one side of their vein and the other side of the vein, and the color of each declines into darkness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then make a bloodletting for each; and be careful not to end your hand in bloodletting those ones, because those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are bloodletted in the armpit are in those that usually flow throughout all men, and bloodletting for them is done according to two ways, or place it on the bloodletting with a mirtil or olive in gradation; or cut it with a bloodletting knife, and call this one needle, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this needle is that you adjust to section and among those are special parts and subtle according to the width of the veins and according to their constriction.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Shape of bloodletting with a mirtil (olive):
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	The shape of it is as follows: the part that you are considering, and you adjust to open the veins that are curved, full, and with apparently large ducts, and those which contain large granular blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of bloodletting with an olive (olive-shaped tool):
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this bloodletting is of less width and has a finer tip, it is suitable for bloodletting veins with fine ducts that contain subtle pus.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	The youth of bloodletting for the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: you remove the pus from the throat and neck, and from that which affects the feet and belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And the bloodletter should know when performing that bloodletting to hold it and be above the fear in that area, where your hand has an artery, and if he misses and adjusts in the puncture of the bloodletting tool, it will cut that artery and cause flows of pus, so beware not to perform that with a sharp bloodletting tool before cutting with the needle.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein does not appear through a clear manifestation, then beware that you leave it and try another, or search for one of its branches; or bloodlet it at the end of your arm where it is evident; and cut that with the bloodletting tool just like we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	And if you want the bloodletting of your wrist, then look in front of the constriction of your arm where you know the location of the pulse, and prepare to press on it with strength; and lift your arm and cut the vein at a concave section with the bloodletting tool just like we have said; and be careful that you do not strike the pressure for some space in the area of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you press, with strength on the mattress, a swelling appears in the area that you have pressed with strength, then that swelling is an expansion of the artery, and therefore avoid that one.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if the blood flows in the bloodletting as hot metal from a child, then know that it is the blood of the artery; and when you observe this for a long time with your hand on that spot, then hold your hand in place again, and if the blood stops flowing, where hardened lumps are stopped, then strengthen your arm and leave that one.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And protect the patient from their own sweat, and take care of their over-anxiety and do not allow that for a few days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the disease is not eliminated, then you must provide medicine to that, so when you do this; you cut into the artery if it appears to you; where the end of the thing becomes constricted and the disease is removed. Or you take a pasteurized blood clot, make it, and take one heat and strengthen that on the place of the vein with the strictness descending gradually and dusts within another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And then if the disease is eliminated, it's good; and otherwise, treat that with what was mentioned before in relation to recalling the location of the dusts that contain the disease's flow.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the elimination of the disease in certain positions around the small area of the wound and the possibility of muscle contraction of the arm is difficult.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	If it's the dark vein for phlebotomy, it's youthful to extract the disease from the head's ascending part and the lower part of the body; thus since it consists of branches of the basilic and the cephalic, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And when performing phlebotomy, take care of the one with anxiety in the phlebotomy of the patient; otherwise, that is a nerve; and when you adjust in the puncture of phlebotomy and find the nerves, it will happen to him dizziness, and his healing will be difficult, and he won't be fully cured. And this nerve can be seen by feeling; and if it's hidden from some people and is subtle and not shown, then when you perform phlebotomy at that place where you are performing phlebotomy on the antecubital area, avoid the nerves in your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should cut the vein longitudinally.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The youth of phlebotomy for the cephalic vein is that you drain the disease from the head and restore it to the patient's nostrils.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And in this manner, if you want to make phlebotomy punctures at olive phlebotomy or at mallow phlebotomy; which is the blood saved from all veins, without leaving your artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, you should perform phlebotomy in such a way that you do not puncture the head of the lump only, and seek for the slightest place with pus, without disturbing it, if it's not found upon the first percussion where one or two spots can be seen at phlebotomy.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, sometimes it's difficult to find in some people when phlebotomy isn't done on the first percussion, just don't miss the abscess there.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	And this refers to the quality of phlebotomy from that and its accidents, in which you must consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of which is to understand that phlebotomy should only be administered for the preservation of health and with hope for recovery and caution against potential illnesses. And it must be performed on one of the veins located in the groin: cephalic, dark, and basilic veins; phlebotomy must be done at the beginning of spring, after fasting during springtime and autumn, and near the time of eating when noticeable signs of recovery appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And phlebotomy should be done and then let it be three hours after the first pus has passed during the day.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Phlebotomy that is administered should be done when there's need and convenience or at night or during the day, at any hour and throughout time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And note that infants should not be given phlebotomy until they are 14 years old, pregnant women should undergo it only after the fourth month during the seventh month, and elderly people should not undergo it if they have already passed the age of sixty.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if someone wants to undergo phlebotomy for any reason, be sure that they alter their intestines before the phlebotomy with castor oil, if they have a clogged opening in those areas. This way, the veins will not draw excess fluids during the phlebotomy of the intestines, which are cleaned out and do not affect the main limbs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And do not make phlebotomy for those with severe hunger or drunkenness, neither for the sake of illness nor for excesses that cause suffering to them, nor for diarrhea, and generally avoid phlebotomy around colic pain, vomiting, abdominal discomfort, sexual activity, labor, exercise, fasting, or any reason that dissipates their essence, whether it is bodily or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And when considering phlebotomy, take into account the impact on moods beforehand if the disease is heavy, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it's feasible for you.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And be aware of any cause that might prevent them, or engage in some exercise by which the disease could become subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause phlebotomy for you during your feet, around the time of the third hour, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And ensure that each of those feet is guarded against all animal accidents throughout the day, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, such as labor and unnecessary grief or sexual desire like them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at their will, ensure that they are informed of the causes in the use of which there is a custom among men for aromas and fragrance, and for balsams and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And then let the phlebotomist proceed over a cushion that is as firm as possible, or on a different cushion than the one under which it was to be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then pull out his arm, and have him hold the phlebotomizer against his hand for two or three seconds; and quickly press on the artery with your finger and encircle that area.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if it is a narrow passage, or if the narrowing is not equal, or if it is due to an excess, then prohibit the flow of blood; or if it is due to softening, then prohibit the blood's entry into the body.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And when approaching the narrowing, have that which was to be phlebotomized press their hands between them as soon as the veins are swollen and can be felt.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the phlebotomist applies a small amount of an ancient anti-coagulant on their phlebotomy tool. And then place their left hand's index finger over that vein, leave the location for where you want the phlebotomy, so that the vein begins to fill up slightly and your percussion stops when it is the vein you find that the heart's flow is escaping from; it is this one that is filled with air. When you pause the phlebotomist over that area, it contracts. And then the phlebotomist does not pierce the vein, and if they do, that one is pulled out.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And so, ensure that the phlebotomist is firm and diligent in all of these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then pause the phlebotomy, but if the vein is broken in a single place, then it's done; and otherwise, repeat this at another location over them, or with haste on their chest, if that spot isn't covered.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the spot isn't covered or if the patient sweats profusely, then you let it be for a day or two, and don't press on the artery, because forcefully wiping out pus could lead to an abscess, nor should it be soaked in water.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the wound is small and blood flows subtly beneath it, and you fear that not enough blood will flow, then repeat the phlebotomy at that location according to rectitude and adjust in the opening slightly, and do this with haste before the spot becomes an abscess; when a spot becomes swollen in elderly individuals, you make fewer incisions.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	And if you notice it has already become an abscess, then do not repeat on them, for there is no excuse for any of your actions; pause over that part of the opening containing some oil crackle, which pleases the body with blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this location than oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly administer oil cracks in every phlebotomy where you prevent the body's blood flow, and do this by administering a tyropanum extract and calming it when it is paused over that spot, because the blood becomes diluted and churned as it thickens.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the location of the phlebotomy a large abscess is formed, which happens at many spots, especially at that spot where it has not been bled just that single place, or at the site of the vein incision when there are few, then you wipe over it with an oil-soaked cloth dipped in water and salt for a moment, then pause on that location. And then you wash over it with an infused cloth in water slightly scalded, and press that for an hour, until it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And have them do this by activating the blood stream from that vein either through their own body or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there remains any darkness or greenness in the location for a few days, do not notice this; and if you wish, pause over that with an extract of aloes and myrrh, or a substance from mint juice or calamus or similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And if there are many spots at abscesses and prominences you need to perform a phlebotomy on the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then place your hand over that area, and if you find softness you should apply your compression over that. Then that prominence is bad and harmful; then consider pausing with an extract of what we have said, because forcefully blood will flow from the blood vessel artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply plaster in the place that is stuck, so that the area can endure, and then take care of that with the other remedies until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And know that you should remove blood from every human according to the amount of their virtue and according to the prevailing color over the blood as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	And if the blood is black, then you should let it bleed until it turns red. And similarly, if you find that it is thick, then you should let it bleed until it becomes thinner; and similarly, if it is sharp, until its sharpness subsides.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And when considering that someone is full and robust who needs the extraction of blood in one place, you should expand the phlebotomy on the vein and make the phlebotomist large.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for those who are frail, do the opposite of that, and know that you should bleed them in many small parts, and have the cut be straight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best thing to do in phlebotomy of veins is for it to be transverse sectioning, not piercing.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of phlebotomy protects against blood flow and nerve damage, and is more commendable and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And at which it is customary for apoplectic attacks to occur, you should perform phlebotomy, and before you cure that with phlebotomy, use a little of powdered garlic or simple oxymel; and draw blood from the patient in three or four stages.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is caused by excessiveness, before phlebotomy take an infusion of frankincense or scented honey, with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar things, or a scented and fragrant syrup;
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if apoplectic attacks occur, perform phlebotomy, and if the cause is excess blood in his system, before you make him drink water of meat and scented syrup with a subtle fragrance; use aromaticity for her, and limit his feet by that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes we've said in the division in the chapter on apoplectic attacks for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And whoever wants to drain his arm and dissolve his blood in the second attempt, know that for evacuation phlebotomy is by means of bloodletting, and the virtue of which is coldness, it evacuates the blood little by little, according to the quantity of the virtue on consecutive days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	Whoever wants to drain his arm and expel his blood in the second round, and their body is strong, do this about seven or eight hours after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	Whoever wants to draw blood from their body in the opposite direction of the part where it declines, let them have been bled on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	That body in which there is already excess blood and it has intensified and causes fever, let you expel his blood in one go and take a large quantity of his sweat; amplify the sensitivity before it occurs apoplectic attack, because you have kept all the conditions for phlebotomy; and place your hand on his wrist to sense the flow of blood, so that he doesn't die instead of an apoplectic attack. You should do this with three or four stages when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not let it happen when you want to remove the arm and evacuate blood in the second attempt, as soon as you have closed the veins' openings and making the discharge of blood difficult, press under that with vigor and slightly bend it outward; this is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Have the patient lie within that after a second phlebotomy; or remain with it at the intensity of the bleeding caused by the phlebotomist, which is coagulated in the opening of the veins; or place your hand on that with thyme ash, or coriander ash, and press there lightly so that the blood escapes.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is swollen, then let her lie down and don't touch it until the swelling subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if it is necessary to cause him to evacuate the blood again, and there is not an excuse, then you apply her on that spot or on another arm at another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein referred to as "arm thread" is phlebotomized in that place or on the basilica when they are not constricted or hidden, which is made of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of phlebotomy for them is that the patient immerses their hand in hot water until it easily reddens and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And apply strength to that with bandage and mild compression; and perform phlebotomy according to the transverse direction, not longitudinally nor according to the length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And if sensitivity is wide and your phlebotomy is such that you drain it there over the joint of the hand to a small extent.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if blood flow is prohibited, then you immerse your hand in hot water and let the blood run in the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from immersing your hand in hot water, and similarly pause the flow of blood in hot water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And phlebotomy on this vein is safer than on all other veins, because you do not have pulsating veins or nerves left in him.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And phlebotomy of the wrist on the right hand is suitable for illnesses affecting the stomach.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of phlebotomy for them is that you strengthen your hand with bandage or with your own hand, since you have it on hot water, until the vein inflates and its presence is demonstrated palpably; then perform phlebotomy across there; and if you incise that all over, do not let it bleed.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And remember not to finish your hand during phlebotomy, because you could leave his fingers naked of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And apply your hand in hot water and let the blood run through there; if you do not immerse that in hot water, the blood will clot in the opening of the vein, and is prohibited from flowing.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And as the blood is extracted according to the amount of need, then you press on the vein with oil and salt, so that it does not become hardened gradually; similarly let it be done throughout the entire branch straight.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The young age of phlebotomy on that of the left hand is suitable for stomach disorders.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do something similar in the bloodletting for him as you have done for the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the youth of the vein at bloodletting is to the diseases in the lower parts of the body, such as abdominal pains, just like abdominal pains during menstruation, and retention of menstrual fluids, and also to the pains in red and inflamed thighs and old chest pains, and their symptoms are similar to these pains.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of his bloodletting is that he will dip his arm into cold water and perform a friction in which veins become visible; and place a metal rod over the chest joint; and locate the apparent bend of the vein, and from there its branches extend into the wet surface of the chest.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And so perform bloodletting over a larger area or from one side to the other, placing your hand at the bend of the elbow, which is better and leaves less wound.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform bloodletting on the chest surface, then you protect yourself from the nerves that are there over the chest surface, and place your bloodletting where you bleed through it, as if you wanted to incise it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And so perform the bloodletting process.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	If immersion in the basin is forbidden, then you submerge his foot in hot water and let the blood flow within that space where it is drained.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the bloodletting instrument misses in the first attempt, then do it again with bloodletting on his other side, where there is a vein; and don't worry about the patient's pain, but take care to avoid the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly do it for the saphenous veins of the other leg in the same manner.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, as we said earlier, place your hand on the bend of the lower limb's cavity.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the youth of bloodletting for him is when it involves knee pain due to blood.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of his bloodletting is that the patient enters a bath and rushes to strengthen their thigh under the knee above four fingers along a long delicate bend, which does not appear otherwise.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, then you perform bloodletting there according to each one's ability and according to the transverse direction, which is better; or cut that with a cut or drain that by drainage, where the place of him is well.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in red men with swollen veins; and if you find that, but it doesn't appear throughout the sensation, then perform bloodletting on some of its branches, and that's which appears behind the heart and the ring finger of the hand.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And watch out for the nerves, let the amount of blood you want flow.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then relieve the constriction and place your hand on the bloodletting spot to strengthen it, where it is slightly healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Regarding suction and the qualities to use those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Suction tools can be made of horns, or from reeds, or from leather.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Suction is performed in two ways: one of them involves incision and blood extraction, and the other involves suction without incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this suction that follows incision is done in two ways, which either involves fire or avoids the use of fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And among the suction tools that are administered with incision and blood extraction, there are fourteen locations in the body. The first is where a suction cup is placed, which corresponds to the anus and represents the final part of the head; the middle location is on the side of both shoulders, spreading across the chest; suction cups under the chin are left near the jawbone further away from the mouth; suction cups of two spoons are used; suction cups of alohoster are placed on the end of the penis; suction cups of two fire pans which are ten inches apart; suction cups of two basins and they are one foot apart; suction cups under the elbows, and suction cups of both thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And suction does not extract blood but from small superficial veins in the flesh, and thus it lacks the virtue of those (bloodletting), like drainage with bloodletting; nor should suction be performed with fire or without fire on any disease where the entire body is drained.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	And if necessity calls for suction due to disease or continuous conditions, administer it at the beginning of the month and at its end, in the middle of him, and at any other time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	This cause is in those men where blood multiplication occurs inside them when they are unable to extract it through suction, and they find their suffering serious and hot; in those who find congestion and discomfort on their face and head; in those who find swelling on their face and head, and on their chest; in those who feel pain on their face and forehead, and darkness and confusion in their breaths; in those who change the location of their suction cup; in those whose laughter is multiplied; in those who feel blood taste in their mouth, or whose tongue is reddened and spits out blood; in those whose sleep is multiplied; and in those who see blood during sleep, along with dizziness, illnesses, and other similar causes.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And when it happens in any of those causes, especially if it's around the third or middle of the month, then command that suction be done soon after passing the day or three hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	When it comes to the headache caused by the inversion of air in the neck, it is when that displacement occurs towards gravity in the head and towards what settles in the lungs; may this be close to the evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This air flow is at the site of venostasis on the cephalic region.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it's not customary to use that which causes inflammation or is in the state of mucus, which gives great harm to that.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this reason it's not proper to use those old remedies, and in the heads where illnesses appear due to coldness.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	It's for those who continue to apply it over there that forgetting is made; and for this reason it's proper that you instruct the person using the suction tool to lift their hand slightly near the site they are applying it to, fearing the generation of forgetting.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	The suction of alcohol is at the site of venostasis for the dark vein and the basilic: and thus it causes asthma, constriction, and splitting of the lymph nodes, as well as coughing, and filling up.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it's proper for the alcohol suction to be slightly enclosed, if paused this way, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	The suction of allagdahan causes headaches in the head and conjunctivitis, migraine, pre-focal points, and toothaches; it is at the site of venostasis for the basilic vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And it's proper to instruct the person using the suction tool not to press their hand at the point of incision in order that they do not puncture an artery and cause blood flow.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	The suction on the jaw confirms alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gum, as well as symptoms that are similar to illnesses that occur in the mouth, they are at the site of venostasis for allic herbs which are found in both cheeks.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	The suction that is performed on the two plates confirms catarrh, which is caused by filling with heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	The suction of the two inner parts in the lungs confirms youthfulness to the venostasis from the venostasis of three veins, it is of the basilic, dark and cephalic ones; that one draws the blood from all those veins that are close to the flesh, and those small veins of other veins that are larger inside which lead the flow to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And instruct the person using the suction tool not to proceed with incision, where the area is bare of flesh, and leave the patient's nerves and arteries intact.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it's a suction against which is applied on piles, and causes hemorrhoids in the anus and the ulcers that are left.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And it's proper to instruct the person using the suction tool for a large suction, and with reed, where the area requires strong evaporation; and it should apply subtle traumatic suction and be incised in incision.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	The suction of the inner parts through clear manifestation draws blood from the entire body, and confirms old pains in the lungs and the liver, and the bladder; they also induce menstruation and cause coughing and congestion. They are at the site of venostasis for two lymph nodes, and tracheobronchial, and bronchial cavities.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, they weaken the entire body and cause fainting in old men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the suction for trachea, youth is directed to the youthful suction of the two inner parts.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the suction points is that you place the suction at the beginning view and continue with well-seasoned continuation, do not prolong the position of the suction points, rather pause them slightly, and return those gently, and let the fluids go to the area equally for occurrence.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease repeating this until you see the place already reddening and swelling, and that redness indicates blood flow.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you incise and continue with the steam little by little, and closely consider in the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	That person who has thin flesh and few pores, it's proper to incise once and not more, so the area doesn't become inflamed.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And instruct the person using the suction tool to expand the incision a little, and always use steam with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if there is thickening in the blood, it's proper to incise twice, where in the first incision the path for absorption of pus and moisture is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	And in the second one, examine the acquired extraction of thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is moving and viscous, then it's proper to perform incision for the third time in order to obtain the last bit.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And gradually, when we want to extract a little at a time or just a small amount of blood, up to our limit with an incision.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want extraction of moving blood, we make incisions with a strong incision; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it's proper to make incisions through wave-like incision.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term for incision is simply until you reach the depth of the vein.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the vein is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are stretched, it's proper that the points for suction be moistened gently, more openly, decisively; in summer time, as well as with oil of aloes or oil of violet, or oil of almond shells, or oil from a cinnamon tree; and if it's during winter time, then use oil of narcissus, or oil of linden, or oil of chamomile, or blood oil, and similar treatments.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is large, stop it, then use oil of turmeric, or balsam oil, or aloes oil, or nutmeg oil, and apply them.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the suctioner has ample pores and is on meat, then it's prohibited to use oil, and you should cover those places with water or hot water from aloe vera, or water from cucumber, or water from mint, and similarly apply them to those areas.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for the one where their dampness is from wet heat, wash his suction areas with vinegar, or water of myrtle and sumac, and similarly apply them to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for the one where their excesses are large, wash his suction areas with vinegar old, or water of lemon balm, which is marjoram, or from decoction of nutmeg, or of chamomile, and similarly apply them.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And cover the suction so that it is protected from bathing; also cover that it should be given close to the warmth of the bath for an hour or two, and cover that he/she should sleep near the suction.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that needs to be done in order to regulate the bloodletting before suction?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Consider the meal you are about to eat: if the suctioner or one who is due for bloodletting has a hot temperament with intense redness and inflammation, then take cooling remedies, such as vinegar salads and milk drinks, and quinces, and juleps, and similarly.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And for their meals, such as roasted meats, fowl, and seasoned meats with herbs, and similarly for them.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for the one whose complexion is pale, take to drink almond oil baths or almond oil of quinces and spices, as well as vinegar mixed with rose water; and it should be recommended that they consume small quantities of drinking and eating, and avoid foods from fowl, pork, fish, rabbit and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And for the day of suction and bloodletting, let their drinking exceed their food intake.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And for some hours before certain individuals undergo treatment with tyrian alizarin or musk medicines, such as powdered musk or alum, prior to suction or bloodletting or shortly after, so that their major limbs are comforted and their condition is alleviated; do not have them take that sweat.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	Let the suction areas that are from scratching be suctioned on the abdomen, and over gout, and on the umbilicus, in the locations of joints, and the flank, as these limbs do not undergo scratching on themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	Do not treat those with itching rather than the pain from body ailments, such as suction on the breasts in cases of excess fluid from the body's milk; and use that to dissolve the gaseous constipation within limbs, such as suction on the abdomen and umbilicus; for that hardens the limb and helps to disperse the pain caused by gaseous constipation.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And when they occur during pregnancy or in the case of worms, through the force of suction, a person's pregnancy is disrupted and expels the worm from its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	Similarly, when it happens during suction on the abdomen and backside, expelling gaseous constipation in those confined areas.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These suction treatments are performed using urine as the only substance; some treatments are given with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some treatments are filled with hot water in cases of abdominal ailments.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	This is done so that the suction is full and there is a large amount of pus, either hot water alone or water in which herbs suitable for this purpose are boiled.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	The method of administering suction by fire: make the width of the opening as wide as two fingers, according to how we have formed it; the volume of the prong is as much as a palm; and place it in the middle of him/her, at the point where it is located on the circuit, as much as he/she is, let the handle be small according to the amount that enters him/her with one needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Make cuts from elderberry or citrus, with large margins, lion's thorn, and smooth ones, all so that they do not cut the limb to its proper position on him/her.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And in the middle of his/her back is where a crosscut from elderberry or iron is made, which is placed where the candle is lit over the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And already this large suction is greater than that one we recommended; and the amount of leaching from it according to abdominal ailments and the condition of the person using it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And suction cups for children and those who are exhausted are different from those used by young people and with large cuts.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of administering this suction over a limb is to extend the heat of firewood in front of a small candle made of wax, and place that over the middle of the transverse cut at the middle part of the suction cup, so that the fire may be lit around her/him without burning the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And it should be placed over the patient's limb, and the point is on the handle that we said, within which when we have the suction cups and do not observe the point and cause the vapor to rise above that handle, then the suction cup will soon dissolve.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And properly ignite the lamp according to their manner, and repeatedly do this until you no longer need it.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	In the case of wind that is given in pleurisy, it uses water, which has no cross or thrust flow, and it is not administered except when fully filled with water, and it is placed only over a limb.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the shape of it: And this windscreen, the larger it is, the better it is, so that it can receive a large quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodlettings are not administered on moist members but only in those that do not allow the position of suction cups due to their smallness, like the palate and gum tissues which resemble them; or on naked flesh members, like the nose and areas resembling it.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found, which are in waters of boiled and pure water.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And let these rest day and night in boiled water until they cool down, making sure no cause of heat comes into their abdomen; and let the body be evacuated at meal times with phlebotomy and suction cups; and let these be rubbed on the thighs so that you turn red; and let them be placed over the patient.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full, and if necessary.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to use the suction cup on this spot with wind, then do so preferably in youth.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the area with hot water and add cold water; and let it be rubbed and squeezed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the body of the person remains under the influence of the fever close to the area where the bloodlettings are placed, and this results in residue, then immerse a cloth in hot water and wring it out, and place that on top so that the discharge is absorbed.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the fever is multiplied, then sprinkle sulfuric acid or similar agents on it from the causes of stypics, so that the fever will be dried; or place the ashed beans over the area and let them rest so that the beans adhere to the area, until the fever dries.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, repeat the bloodlettings, whenever it is possible to change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if bloodlettings are not allowed to be suspended, then rub the area with recent fever or place a needle in those spots so that the fever starts to come out; and let them be placed, such that when there is any fever it stops immediately.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to come out, sprinkle a little of ground aloes, or salt, or ashes over those, and let it happen immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	So begins the section on the restoration treatment: for recovery.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is about necessary interventions in the art of medicine; it's about restoring fractures and accidental displacements in bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, child, know that doctors and laymen and those who in time will neglect the works of the ancients or won't read even a letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this method of the scientists on earth is kept private; and I haven't forgotten about this even after all these years; and I didn't include what I have mentioned merely by reading the works of the ancients or studying their understanding, but rather through a long process of study from those sources where I extracted the science.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And direct towards experimenting and studying throughout my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have described in this chapter all of my science and the things that I have experimented with; because I will briefly present this to you others and relieve myself from the occupation of lengthening; and shorten this at the end of shortening; then show this at the end of declaration; and form it into various forms of disturbances that are administered in that, as shown by declaration, as I did in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from existing fractures in bones, of which a prior mention is necessary before we begin recalling the fracturing limbs and various ones for each.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Let us therefore say what the summaries of this chapter are about in the preamble, and the chapters that guide the minds of those who start off with their crafts and stand on the truth of these; it is you and those who are eager to know or learn this noble art from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And let us say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain occurs, then you should immediately take to phlebotomy at the beginning or remove it, or at any time, if no contraindication exists, such as excess of vitality, or where it occurs, or even in decrepitude, or it is the time of strong heat, or strong rubbing.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And let them be satisfied with food made from herbs in hot water and meat of rabbits and crab meat; and avoid large meats and fill up only with vegetables and all foods that fill the veins of fever, ensuring you are safe from the formation of pus, and if you do not fear the discharge of material into the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the thigh to its original position at which there is usually a custom for it.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And when the broken bone begins to be restored, let the thigh be fed with nutritious food that is hot, large and heavy in which viscosity exists, such as foods made from cooked wheat in water, rice, carrots, fish, beef stomachs, onions, fresh meat, large and similar to those, and under this regimen, a slight coagulation of pus from the fracture takes place more smoothly.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that when bones are broken in men during the first year and in the old, they cannot be continuously healed according to their nature through the drying of their body parts.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are healed and consolidated according to their nature always through the drying of those limbs, and they continue and become solid as those that are born in the end of youth, just like the bones of young infants.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature adjusts and binds over the broken bone of every part in a manner similar to glue where it thickens and adheres, strengthening within that which is consolidated and bound at times when strength and firmness end, like fire at the beginning, during which any cause does not prevent him from doing his work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to place the limbs of the patient, foods in which gravity, viscosity, and thickness exist, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Varying degrees of fracture according to the variety of limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the species of fracture are various according to the diversity of limbs, a fracture of the bone in the chest is different from the fracture of the bone in the head; and the fracture of the foot bone is different from the fracture of the bone in the thigh; similarly all other limbs are different among each other.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I will recount a memory of every species of fracture, detailed in its chapter separately from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Varying degrees of self-fracture within oneself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of bone fracture within them are varied; some occur when it is made in their stars. And sometimes fractures are made according to the length of the bone: these are the fractures of the hand and stars both with and without preparation, as when preparing for writing pain occurs, and there is a fracture by impact and disruption in the head, and there is a small crack fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for every species, there's an appropriate disturbance in the restoration of it according to what comes from the distinct memory of each one in their places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Varying signs of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for this reason, bone fracture is known: it's the distortion of it, and that elevation and continuity of it to touch feeling, and those when you press it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And when there is no apparent distortion or it's not felt under touch when you press the bone with force and the patient does not experience much pain, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It's possible that there could be distortion or a small crack, you should notice when your hand touches it and under compression of the whole body; it's important to have a pause on them with medicines whose memory comes at that moment which suits the location; then strengthen it through subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that when it's arched and doesn't split into two or another as doesn't happen in their stars, then you should realize that starting from your time to correct it until the time when the heat has affected it.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if heat from the cautery has affected it, then smooth that over some days until the heat subsides; and then restore that according to any means of lightness and skill you can use.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration and repair of it is much lighter than when it occurs in their stars.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen it according to what will come from the memory of it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	And if in the bones there are stars (stages), then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from two parts, whether it's a hand or a foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two strings or with one string and a hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And when you place your position at which you pause the member location evenly according to its natural figure, while the parts are extended from the broken limb, then force yourself to return those additions in order and with any skill that can be done in their locations.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And watch that when you do your operation or injury, it doesn't happen upon the patient above them by your force, and make yourself according to your ability to apply one bone against its companion in their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And realize that in that moment you touch it with your hand, and if you notice any different cause here, correct it and adjust it according to the amount of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid excessive extension and compression, as some doctors often allow certain conditions to lead to heat from the cautery during their operation, or cause strain in the limbs as we have seen through their operations of those common conditions.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And connect, adjust equilibrium and proper operation and constraint of that limb, along with rest and tranquility; instruct the patient about this and make them aware not to worsen it during their night watches and sleep, observe its movements and changes, take note of its weakness, account for all its actions in relation to its virtue, wait until you determine that the position of the limb is a position where pain or injury would be secured; which cause is when felt in the arrangement of the limb's position causing pain or damage; then realize that by rearranging it to another arrangement from that one where no pain is felt; and pay attention so that this position of it there should be straight and equal, thus preventing distortion from occurring upon restoration.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the constraint of the broken limb is what I recommend; and you should know that limbs broken are diversified in their size, in their greatness, and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those who are small like the arm and said easy to resemble them, then it is required that the covering be of very thin cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	For those who are large like the thigh or the chest, it is required that in those there be a covering that is both tight and durable, such that the elasticity of that material connects the large member to that area from all sides with tension uniformity, so that nothing enters into them.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And start by conducting your process of evacuation, place a comfortable support under it, about the site of that fracture in three layers or four according to the size of the limb; and strengthen your hand slightly on the membrane.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And proceed to that area above the site of the fracture, and strengthen moderately so that you do not cause your tension at the point where you have strengthened the site of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And proceed to slightly extend the membrane at the site of the fracture, gradually soften the tension little by little, until you take hold of that area from a large part.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And proceed to take another part and envelop that other area over the constricted site, with a membrane; then move towards the membranes up to where they are from the fracture; and in your operation focus on the tension of the membrane and its softening as we discussed for the first membrane above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And proceed to pause between the layers of leather or cloth that is equal in elasticity to the fracture, if there is elasticity in it; and if not, do not cause any delay in it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And proceed to pause on the other part, and properly adjust over these membranes that have been made in a decent manner just now, if there is no inflammation or abscess at this location; then pause where is that abscess and where is the inflammation; leave it for a few days; then strengthen over those stars.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And may the stars be of the same length, and skillfully formed; or they could be made from wood; or from palm leaves; and let each star have its width according to this shape and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, ensure that the star placed over that fracture is a bit larger and slightly thinner than the other stars, with the length of the star according to its size in terms of magnitude and proportion; then strengthen on the stars on another part according to your first tension; then lie properly decently as we have said about tension, so that your tension is more at the site of the fracture, and the longer you extend from the fracture, the more it heals.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And ensure that the threads are medium in size and subtlety, and be of many; if the threads are thick, like I have seen with the operation of some times placing those thread cords of a thickness similar to the tortoiseshell, and this is a great error, when the tension exceeds equality.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And thin threads are not convenient, because you will not achieve the tension that you desire for those as you wish, and do not allow there to be more than one finger's width between each thread.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is treated by placing the extremities of the stars near the tension in the sensitive areas, then pause with those on leather or silk wool so that they do not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures are treated with plastering, and a disruption occurs in the chain, and I will come back to this in memory at the capital according to singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that not all broken limbs are treated with stars on the first day; this is because when the limb is large, you may not be able to pause over it with the stars until about three or seven days or more, according to your confidence in avoiding abscesses.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the way of plastering on which the ancients worked, those who are placed over fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	The method of plastering as briefly described for the restoration of fractures, suitable for complex situations and mainly for women and children, which is what you need on something that does not receive heat or friction: this involves using powder from flour mill residue, it's the floury part that comes out when there's movement in the walls of the flour mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And do it like this, otherwise筛 through it with egg white, and pause the thick or subtle preparation; then use that accordingly.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of treating broken bones, dislocations, and twists: use assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, nutmeg, and myrrh, all finely ground to one thousand granules, each measured in two horses' loads; add half a load of frankincense and aloin; twenty loads of alcohol or the album from an egg if the patient's body is burned out. Then use this plaster, which has good composition and restores broken bones lightly, and strengthens them for strong people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of plastering that restores fractures and twists: prepare by combining myrrh and white vinegar in one horse's load, frankincense and aloin in five horses' loads, acacia in six horses' loads, and Armenian balm in twenty horses' loads.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	Grind the three ingredients in a mortar with rubbing motion, sieve them, and mix them with water or egg white. Then administer it.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	The method for applying plaster to joints and bones apart from their places, and pain happens in those areas as well as cracks and fractures: take woolen thread, immerse it in hot water and oil, and then place it on the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	In this plaster, it is not simply for restoration, but to drain pus and expel pains properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method for a restoring plaster for broken bones: take leaves of wild figs and leaves of wild opium poppy; crush all together to make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A shortened plaster application method for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution of pus remaining: take rhubarb, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, corn flour, and a half-part of each. Grind them all and mix with wine, if the member hasn't been cut.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it has been cut, then use it as water from colandered wet water or as water, using it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of applying pus for faster resolution than this first one, when an abscess occurs needing bone restoration: take rhubarb and seeds of rue, and garlic, sweet clover, basil, chamomile flowers, all in equal parts. Grind them all and mix with water from sauz or double water, or wine, according to the quality of the member and the color of it during rest.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	Ypocras does not dissolve in his free spirit that it is laid over the fractured limb needing restoration, but instead has beeswax and oil made into a paste, rather than any other cause; and I recommend that it should be midway between coarseness and fineness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	Gualia is seen that it should be laid over the broken limb for its restoration and the causes in which dryness from quality is like this such as myrrh, ashes, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A method for applying plaster that relieves injury and pain: take a mixture of honey, ashes, skin of roasted human or dog fur, and rhubarb, salt in equal parts; grind them all, sieve them, mix them, then make the plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The amount according to which you know that the pus is draining and soon becomes less, is that you consider if there has been no pain or swelling, and if the bone is not broken it does not move from its place, then do not disturb it for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is severe pain or swelling or inflammation at the spot, then you should remove it immediately, and keep the plaster on your body.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take linen and sea sponge that is wet, immerse it in strong water, then wash the area with it until the swelling stops and pain subsides; and later let the member rest for an hour; then place your hand on it covered by wool that has been immersed in hot water or oil, or rubbed oil, lay it over you for a night until you are sure of pus being drained, and allow the swelling of the limb to rest, and make sure the pain of it is relieved.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply this thin strip again and make the plaster small so that you don't strain it with your initial tension, and apply it inside until it heals.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you notice that the pus and swelling and pain and inflammation and all accidents have completely subsided, and you no longer need plaster or bandages, then proceed with this just as you did at the beginning equally.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if there is no cause for any of those things we have said to the limb, then do not disturb it but leave it alone for about three, four, five or seven days. And some scaldings of all this is left for twenty days according to how you perceive the ease of the limb as we have said, until the fracture adheres and it comes together with the coagulation of flesh over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust the bandage more than your first bandage totally, and adjust to the swelling of the thigh meat, according to when you have recalled it.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	And if you notice that the place of the fracture has already dried and weakened more than it should, then know that the nutrition is prohibited from reaching there; and bathe this area with hot water for all days as you were doing; do this throughout three days; relieve the bandage a little, and through this operation reach the limb's nutrition, it gets healed slightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	And as those who restore the bone of the limb do another round when it is not restored at the beginning, according to how it heals and is restored according to its curvature, this is an error according to their operation, great fear, and if this was a tailor they would have expanded the old in their writings and treated it accordingly.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I haven't seen any of them do this, so it's more reasonable that this doesn't happen.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	When it comes to a second point: About fractures when they occur in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are blows, and their appearances are diverse, with their causes being different. Some fractures occur due to the impact of force on bone tissue, where the force penetrates all the way into the bone cavity, which leaves the bone intact, similar to how it would in a stick, and this is why this type is named 'ascial'. Or when the force impacts a part of the bone, then it impacts the flesh without passing through its inner layer; and this kind of fracture is named absolute levation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the severity of these two types of fractures is either large or small, and for those that are compressive or traumatic. The cause of which is an impact against stone or hammering onto rock, resembling them in appearance.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating, bringing the bone close to destruction, which leaves the bone intact. Or it occurs within the bone surface, and the severity of these two types of fractures is either large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And this type of fracture expands in the bone, in the delicacy of the hairline, and that is why this kind of fracture is named 'capillary'.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And this fracture is made by hammering or through the impact of stone, resembling it in appearance, causing some layer of bone to enter into its parts internally, and occurs at the concave area such as in the seams on an ear when they are impacted and the entrance part of them goes inside.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And most frequently this is done like that in bodies with moist bones, such as in children's heads.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And for all these types of bone fractures, they are separate like stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will speak about this in detail from all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And we must know all these types of fractures through diagnosis about them and through examination of their tender spots and inspection of the rotten flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary type is known by what is revealed above the bone, it is cleansed and marked on it, where the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, consider the patient's condition and circumstances, if through them you find clear signs about illness, such as vomiting from anger, expansion, loss of understanding, abortion, fainting, acute fever, sneezing, sweating, and other symptoms similar to them in major conditions, indeed it is not healing.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you find non-ordinary events, you hope for health, then you begin treating the patient.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	This cause is that if you have received the injury in the state as it was injured and this happens during the winter days, then you should examine on the bone's surface until day fourteen of any condition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it's during summer days, then you should examine on the bone surface until the seventh day because whatever is destroyed by the heat of the body in the bone will have rotten and for these events we've mentioned to occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already penetrated the bone covering the brain, and it is in small parts that are compressive and traumatic, then you should insert and grind the affected part according to what I will instruct you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And you examine the head of the patient injured, uncovering over the bone according to custom and your ability as per the appearance of the injury, making it lighter on the body.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you that you need detection of the bone, pus or abscess flow, then you oppose towards this as is suitable and according to your ability. And here you must use what suits you, which means soaking the place with infused water and rubbing oil, so that you allow the injury to rest within until the abscess is sedated; and be sure of blood flows; and proceed from around the bone and in its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be according to one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one way is that you insert the bone with an incision straight through, and this is its form: Then administer another incision tool like this, slightly smaller than the first one; and here is how it looks:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And you should administer more of the slightly larger instrument compared to the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And you should know that you need various numbers of incision tools from which some are slightly larger than others; and some among them are shorter than the others, having their tips sharp or made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease when impacting on the incision tools, so that you do not crush the head and hurt it.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then you should penetrate through its circuit before administering the incision tools at the grooves which are named non-deep grooves.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not simply called like that if those do not reach the end of the bone at that point, so that on the groove there is a rounded tip or margin similar to an edge that is left with its sharp head resembling an edge or small circle. You should prevent this from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient for you to take a large number of these grooves each of which will suit the thickness of every bone within which it is present in all parts of the skull, so that its tip will be sharp, and the quantity in length and width should be according to the quantity of thickness of this bone.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the method for three types of bone fractures: when drilling in the break circuit of the bone, you stop the drill on the bone and rotate it within your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the drill to another location, pause where all extraction reaches the thickness of the ray or around there.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And proceed by inserting the scalpel where any tear is in the bone; make that fine pus above it as you lift off, just as we have said, while drilling through the bone or with your hand, or with some other tools with which you will be equipped for this, as you use forceps and fine tweezers.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And know that when using the scalpel, it should not touch any muscle.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And when you have drilled through the bone and separated it from the muscle if it continues on him/her, extract that piece. Know that for this purpose you should use other instruments similar to a scalpel but that are thick and fine, while being cautious with any pus or fine pus compared to other scalpels.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if there is some part of the bones that fits and sticks, then take it with ease from the tools you need for these instruments; then treat this wound with ointments and remedies as we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other method of operation is light, far from pain, as Galien and the surgeons used with great skill; this is how they describe it: it is necessary for you at the beginning to start uncovering the part of the bone in the location where the fracture is most intense and obvious. When you have uncovered that part and placed your hand on its end of this instrument which moves smoothly, here is how you should do it:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the round part is strong and does not damage any muscle, while the acute part is two lengths ahead in depth for you before the length, just as mentioned; so that the round part fits well with the muscle on its sharp edge incident into the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And proceed by tapping on the edge of one part with a slight force until you penetrate all the bone as smoothly as it has been rotated, and be sure about the operation that it does not occur in any way you fear. If the surgeon was like every other person and the most ignorant of them; certainly, if they were asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And when there is some cause attached to the bone of the patient in certain locations on the bone, you will penetrate that part with the tip of this instrument which has a sharp edge, and remove it easily from him/her, so that it is removed of his/her muscles and skin.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the skin, and that which is attached or left of the bone is its skin, it sticks in it unevenly and finely, then know that you should remove that unevenness and drain those fine lumps with thin razors that you have prepared in quantity for various amounts so that you can administer from them in every location whatever is suitable for each one and the right pus according to how you are performing your operation on this broken bone and its figure.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And know that in your ration you should apply the thickness of the bone to its beginning with the pus from those razors, and proceed using near the fine pus of it, and do not stop doing this until you reach administering the thick pus and the fine pus of all.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	And in any other small capillary fractures and subtle fractures, know that you should provide treatment according to how you lost it for correcting it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is the reason why they have not been improved on all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And stand by what we wrote, showing large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the skin is stretched when you remove the bone, know that take linen according to the quantity of the wound, immerse it in boiled oil, and place it on the opening of the wound; then take another folded or tripled linen and immerse it in wine and boiled oil, place it on the first linen, do this gently over the pus without pressing too hard as you might injure the skin. Then apply a thin layer of fat over that, and do not press it further than what is needed for the wound's size only.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave it under this treatment for one or two days until you are sure of the pus being drained; then remove that and proceed to administer medicines that promote healing without excessive drying, such as linseed oil, corn flour, powder of onions and aristolochia, and other similar substances.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you should use these medicines in the form of a powder to be spread over the wound, as when they are dry; universally, administer all remedies whose properties cleanse them and do not irritate.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And keep according to your wisdom so that the wound in your treatment becomes clean; and it should not be in the greasy part of the ointment or any other place; nor let you add toxicity to this; for when applied over the skin of the brain, it corrupts it and poisons that area, leading to an evil malicious effect on the body near this maliciousness.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the skin of the head, similar to how things are distorted in the bone and more so when your treatment is neglected, there appears a darkness on the surface; therefore consider this if you experience any accidents as we have described, know that they are harmful to every part.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if there is no resulting darkness but rather due to the medicine that has been applied upon it, and it results from the effectiveness of that medicine causing that darkness, then you should take a portion of honey and a part of burned oil. and place those lines on a cloth, then apply that onto the chest; and apply it with the spices of cure as needed until recovery occurs.
Capitol .iii.	Third capsule.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that it is not a break in the nose but two parts at once above each other, or one of those occasionally broken, by which there are two bones, and where your part leaves cartilage, not broken, and does not hit it but only friction and distortion without obstruction.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two parts is broken, then you should introduce your little finger into his/her nose, and make that fracture equal inside with your indicated finger, and outwardly on your finger tip, so that it returns the nose according to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this as easily as you can, and watch that your operation does not cause harm to the patient.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and your finger does not reach there, then you should make it equal at the tip of the bone where there is a slight thickening.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should imitate this.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And restore him/her during the first day of the fracture if possible; otherwise, you should wait about seven or one-third of the time for the pus to drain away.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert a piece of cloth in the tip of the nose for him/her, if the fracture is in one part, or two cushions, if it is in two parts, and place that cushion thickness filled with as much as fills the nasal passage.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And follow some of the ancient restorers who recommend that cushions be wrapped in silk, and are worn all day but not seen by me; rather you should have them wrapped in albumen scrambled egg powder with bone flour; then let the cushion lie in between until the bone is set and the cartilage hardens.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes broken bones are inserted into the nose instead of cushions, risking excess pus wrapped in lion's hair cloth; and if you already have a broken nasal bone with excessive pus, so that the patient cannot breathe properly.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this is not necessary for you; if you want to, do it like this, or if you prefer, use cushions.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if any other pus-filled cauterization occurs, dress the nose with cotton or with a cloth soaked in strong vinegar and oil, or with honey.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	And if it does not produce cauterization pus, then you should apply the paste outside with flour of sassafras and powder of coffee leaves soaked in egg albumen; and place a lion's skin on top of him/her, and do not injure the nose by any means.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	And if the bones of the nose are broken in small fractures or are constricted, then you should cut over those parts, and remove them with instruments that fit those; and place the incision open, and cure it with what heals and consolidates, and with bandages that suit.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if there is inflammation inside the nose, then you should cure that with cushions and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Fourth capsule.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jawbone leaves you is broken and the fracture of it is not accompanied by inflammation, observe that if the fracture is only outwardly, and is not split into two parts but bent inside the parts, then its intelligence is slight.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And when the fracture is in the right part, introduce your left hand into the patient's mouth; similarly if the fracture is in the left mandible, then introduce your right hand's index finger; and push that fracture's bulge inwardly with ease to the outward parts of the parts from the bone side; do this appropriately equaling that.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw has already been divided into two parts, then you should administer extension to both parts according to rightness until it is possible to equalize him/her.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is inflammation of teeth leading to disruption, then strengthen those from which you expect them to break at the tip of gold or silver or ivory; and place a cushion under the broken jaw, and place padding under the cloth double, and place padding under the large star-shaped bandage decently made, or a piece as long as the jaw; and apply that above according to how it is familiar to you and that suits application, so that it does not get destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be calm, and place his/her lion's soup on pause in terms of food.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you estimate that it has been altered in some way, then do this and untie that on the third day; and correct whatever has been altered about him/her and dress that with bone flour, egg albumen, or flour of sassafras, as long as you have kept your lion's soup for him/her, and place padding over the dressing cloth.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then, once this is done and the dressing is placed upon it, and the position of the bone is not altered, let it be left alone, until it is healed and strengthens the fracture; for this fracture heals in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another wound occurs with an abscess in the cauterization, then administer what we have said about healed wounds during its treatment until it is healed, and renew that cauterization of the abscess.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is due to plague, then consider whether it's a separation of bone fragments or stuck together, then you should gently move those fragments with what seems appropriate in their removal from those tumors.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the plague holes are straightened, then you should enlarge them according to the quantity of your need with a syringe.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have moved those fragments, and if the plague hole is not enlarged afterwards, then enlarge the plague hole; and if not, place one of the plasters that suits on it and cover it, until it heals.
Capitol .v.	Capitol V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Regarding the restoration in case of a humpback.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Healed wounds involve breaking the furcula at the front part before the muscle, and this fracture is made in three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	If it breaks, separates or separates into two parts other than fragments; and this is easier for its restoration; if on the other hand there are fragments in it, then its restoration is difficult; or if the fracture is due to plague.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And during that operation, when the fracture is due to plague, you must have two ministers present, so one has the assistant and follows the broken furcula, and the other stretches out the throat at that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And when you have moved the fracture with your usual instructions until it takes on the shape of what it was according to its context, and is not in a shallow cavity or indentation.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you require more extension, then make sure to place some padding or wool at the patient's buttock crease, and choose its size according to your needs; extend and elevate the furcula and hold the pad with your hand until you move the fracture in accordance.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the furcula's end outward to its partitions, as it is directed towards the front, then ensure that the patient lies on their back, and place a cushion half the size under their muscles.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister places his hand under the muscle at its divisions until the bone of the furcula is elevated as it would be in front of him, then correct and move that fracture with your usual instructions.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel fragments of the furcula and they are stuck together, then ensure to cut over that area and remove those fragments with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is stuck in the bone, then you devise an incision from him with one of the scalpels that you have equipped for this, since you have placed the furcula on the tumor that serves the cervical; and this is the shape of that tool:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It is similar to a knife in which this forms the indentation; and its width depends on what you need from it according to the size of the bone or the shallowness.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length of it should depend on what is feasible during the operation; there should be two ends like this sometimes, and one end should be broad while the other straightened.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the wound disruption you have incised when extracting a fragment from the bone is wide, and you are sure of an abscess cauterization, then adjust the two edges of the wound for suturing.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear an abscess cauterization, then use the wound with cloths and powders according to the size of the incision in the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess cauterization occurs, then apply a cloth soaked with vinegar and rubbed oil over it, and place it there.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	If the narrowing of the bone when it's due to plague and sectioning is that you place a plaster made from mill flour and egg white over it, place a stop at that, and if need be use vinegar, then take breaths as the Saracens do, which should be long and have a width of about one palm or around that; also apply powdered rice on top of the stop and the plaster; take a thin table knife with its width being three inches in length similarly; wrap this in cloth and then place this wrapped cloth over the table knife on the area above the fracture; breathe as described, turn it over the patient's neck and place their buttock down, and place your hand under that and their buttock above, then return it to all parts. And whenever there is a narrowing of the fracture due to descent, it should not be hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And in conclusion, ensure that the knife does not penetrate beyond the broken bone; and be sure to see your patient every day, because when their swelling has subsided or you notice that the knife is no longer penetrating, then correct this and strengthen the healing.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And when you have the patient's buttocks on their neck, and place your hand under their buttock every night with a small cushion; so that at this point, the assistant of your hand from its elbow is elevated, and thus the fracture of the furcula is elevated to its position in the muscle; or let their arm be extended along the neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not move the ligament unless it happens in the most important or inflammatory place, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you have seen the patient's face at that point, and adjust in the constriction and restore it smoothly until the fracture of the sternum is restored and coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some people perform certain procedures within that time period.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On restoring a fracture of the shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula tarta is broken in the lateral area of the patient, and it is not broken from the patient but only from the margins.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when the place of the patient is broken - and it breaks in the middle of the place of the patient - and it is not known except by touch, then according to its figure, you prepare for the treatment of that and reduce it according to its natural figure in every manner of skill where that is possible.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place on the spot powder of almond meal and stop bleeding; and then place a powdered piece of double cloth; and then place on the patient's forehead the tip of a delicate table according to the quantity of the spatula or even a little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If you leave the tip of the spatula is curved in some parts of its location, then you fill that curve with bleeding stop, and then adjust the tip according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen on top with humid material about the constriction, and adjust the tip within so that it does not swell in its location.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the ligament in every day; and all times when it is softened, apply another treatment and strengthen it and adjust the tip if it swells from its location.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And keep the patient on their side like this.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The spatula is restored within twenty days or in thirty-five days.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligament, and you know safely that from which bones it began not to be feared nor its dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the bone of the rib and place the codex on it, then you cut on him, and stop the bleeding, and do as we have said in a fracture of the sternum with an inflammatory lump, should it happen here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On restoring a fracture of the leg.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The leg sometimes breaks in the middle of its location and it's hard to fix it; but the ends of it must not be crushed or broken.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	Of the injuries when it breaks in its middle, it declines towards the inside parts and happens to him great pain, difficulty in walking, coughs, he feels faint and vomits; it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and cannot be hidden from the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that you place the patient on their back, and place a cushion between his shoulders; and then press the muscles of him, adjust his back with the hands of two ribs, refine in your operation and find an equilibrium according to every manner possible and suitable for him, so that the figure of the bone returns as he cures.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place plaster and stop the bleeding and place on him a thin table cloth of saffron or lime and they are similar in weight, as you wrap that with cloth; and then refine this around it over the broken bone so that it does not swell; and apply lubrication according to roundness on the back for some times, and strengthen that around its constriction; and then consider the swelling at all times, and when it is softened, strengthen that.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity arises to cause that she collapses or pressure, or pain, or inflammatory lump that happens in this place, then you untie and remove that and remove the plaster and correct whatever happened according to the method of treatment; and then reduce the plaster, if you see her face; and adjust to its constriction so that it is cured.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On restoring the ribs when they are crushed.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You should know that a fracture of the ribs only occurs in areas that cover both bones; and at their ends on the front side, it does not cause this friction with them but because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the awareness of it is not hidden from the feeling; you should inquire about him with these words.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be done like this by adjusting the fracture with your hands according to possible manner, so that it is adjusted as he heals; and then plaster him and strengthen the broken bones with a tip if you need that.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs declines towards the inside parts, then it happens to the patient with severe pain and puncture, like punctures that happen in those who have pleurisy, because the bones put up skin; and it happens to him difficulty in breathing, coughs, and vomiting from faintness; and this is difficult to heal.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the Greeks were skilled at that with internal treatments.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And from them they say: it is necessary to consume foods from the body that produce swelling and wind, so that the abdomen becomes inflated and stretched, and the fracture is pushed towards the outside parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if you need to return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands. If we were to do this operation ourselves without proper reason, it would not easily generate a pus-causing cautery wound; but if it does happen, then help with this immediately.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they would say that it should be placed over the wind area and close to where the air is strong; it's similar to reasoning, but rather, it's feared that the wind carries excess away from the body due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And they would say: let that place be covered with wool that has been submerged in oil, and place powders between the ribs where it is filled, so that its stickiness matches when you wrap that according to roundness; and let that area of the patient be treated with the cure for dyspepsia and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if it causes intense constriction in the patient which they cannot bear, and if they puncture their veins with a needle, we fear for the patient. In that case, let them cut over the area, expose the broken rib, then place something under that tool that is used before, and then insert the needle with ease, removing it afterwards.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And they should adjust the two edges of the wound if it is large with stitches, and treat that area with bandages until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if there occurs an internal abscess, then you should cover it and press powders in oil into the affected area, and place your hand over that spot, so that the patient's condition improves with what heals inside the abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And it should be raised on a pillow under which he sleeps, until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Head IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Regarding the restoration of fractures in the second and third vertebrae.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some fractures can occur in the bones of the collarbone, and similarly with their ligaments, as well as the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens with someone and you want to know if they will recover or not, consider that if their hands are already softened, lifeless and dead, and cannot move those hands either upward, downward, or strengthen them; and when you stretch those hands against your words or stick a needle into these areas and do not feel pain in those areas, then you know that they are not healed. And during months of such conditions, it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you move those and feel a constriction in those areas against your words or make a puncture, then you know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see similarities to this in the vertebrae of the collarbone and want to know if they will recover or not, then consider their feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	And if you find that they are already softened, it is akin to what happened with their hands, and when you lay them down on their back, there is a sense of wind and weakness in their will. Some days, the person may be laid over their stomachs and want to urinate but cannot; then you know it's fatal, and thus do not waste time treating them.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If no cause is found for those conditions, the cause is better and more likely to be less severe.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for this is to perform a procedure that helps relieve the inflammation of the oil-based cautery wound you make on the swollen vertebra, or with poultices made from dog fat; apply this area several times a day until the inflammatory reaction of the cautery subsides.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then apply one of the bandages that soothes and persists, place strength on that with liniment; and command the patient to take rest and calmness and not sleep on the side where they find pain until they are healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it occurs that the ligaments of your neck are torn or any cause that has separated from them, then you should allow it to heal over the bone and remove that part of the bone; and adjust the two edges of the wound, with stitches if it's large; and treat that area with some kind of ointment until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	And if it's fractured in the middle of the bone, which is at the top end of your tailbone, then you should insert that tool from your right hand into your buttocks, and align the broken bone with your other hand according to what is possible through the second equation; and then apply this bandage and sandpaper over him, if you need those items, and strengthen that area.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel torn ligaments in him/her, then you should apply this to that area, stay there, and treat the wound with the appropriate treatment until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Head X.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Regarding restoration of the broad one.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the broad ones are broken, and if they break, then the fracture is merely communication at the extremities of those areas, and extends longitudinally within them, declining towards the inside. It happens to the patient pain in that area and puncturing, and the change becomes numb when it's a fracture.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of this involves placing your hand over that area, within which is the figure of the fracture.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only in the extremity of the patient, then you adjust it according to what you are accustomed to doing by equating both parts so that they match their natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	And may it be if the fracture is in the length or already descends to the parts below, then you have the patient lie on their stomach so that you can prepare for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have adjusted that [fracture], pause on it bandaged, and then place your hand over that rib or bone tip, and press with strength on the area where you are not afraid of puncturing a fracture or moving the star.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And adjust the cavity so that it fills this space in which that bone will take its shape according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their elbows or their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	And if it happens that you have a pus-pustule (caut), then stop the extension and restoration of the patient within which the pus-pustule is sedated, and pause over where the patient is lying according to what precedes; and then return to the restoration, and strengthen it as usual.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if it happens that they are fractured or broken in the jawbone, then you treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter xi.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of fracture in the helper.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The helper is that which is between the shoulder blade up to the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of him/her is in one of two ways, of which you take wood flat on the middle hardness according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And if they are located at both extremities two ligaments, and then it should be suspended from the elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And let the patient lie on one pillow; and then stretch out his/her broken arm over the stick until it reaches to the nipple in the middle of which the curvature of the stick is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend over that something heavy, or the cook extend it to the parts below; and then place your hand on the area where the fracture is felt immediately, so that the fracture returns as usual.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the patient be reclined on their neck and have their hand from their collarbone supported by the ligament; and then command two attendants, one of them has what is above the fracture supported by their hands; and the other has the body below. And each should extend to their part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen over the fracture by the ligament and over that by another ligament, and each of the two attendants should extend to their own parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then you should pause half of the ligament over the nipple and the other part of the fracture is taken by the shoulder blade.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly if the fracture is close to the shoulder blade, then you should pause the ligament over that area and over that shoulder blade.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Adjust that easily and completes the task, and then when it is adjusted according to usual practice, then strengthen that if there is no pus-pustule (caut) occurring.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	And if it happens that there is a pus-pustule (caut), then smooth the fracture within the seventh day, and place wool thread sutured in vinegar on it for seven more days until it heals the pus-pustule, and then you should strengthen that.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the method of strengthening that is placing plaster on the fracture, and then placing a wrap of new cloth over the plaster; and adjust the arm to the helper, and place your hand open over their shoulder blade.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth and strengthen on the helper arm for that the arm is in the place of the stars (rib), if not prohibited by any cause from breaking the bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use the stars (ribs).
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And you should place that star (rib) over the fracture which is more ready and stronger than the other stars; and place between each star the width of the hand, and let the length of the stars according to the breakage include three fingers of all parts.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen on the ribs over the fracture which I said at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And you should have your hand over the place of the fracture much stretched out.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the stretching is as far as possible, the fracture will be less (less severe).
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And if you know the position of the stars and the hand as we have said when restoring the limb to its original position, then do this.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear a pus-pustule (caut), then you should smooth the hand and stars within the seventh day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that no pinch or swelling occurs at the place of impact; or prohibit food from reaching the limb due to excess of pressure; and therefore correct all this as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	And if you are confident that there will be no cause from this, then do not loosen the ligature but three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's sleep on their back, and their hands are on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place your hand full of wool on the helper in equal measure, and consider throughout the night or day that the figure of the broken limb should not be distorted nor dissolved, or that the ligament should be soft; therefore correct this entirely according to your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And place the food for the patient according to the order we have in front of us, ensuring that the food is subtle at the beginning so it can strengthen; and then when the food grows for him.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	And according to the custom of strength and the movement of their limbs, it should be strong for 40 days; then when they are released and given baths with medicines that correct those things.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is laid out, then you do not release from that ligament and the stars within to one day or within two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of a forearm fracture.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones which are called the ulna and the radius; among them, one is small, which is called the thumb side, and the other is large and is on the side opposite to the small one.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And when the larger bone or the smaller one is broken only, it is called a simple fracture; and at times it may be broken simultaneously.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller bone is broken on top, then the restoration of that is easier, and the healing of that is much easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the larger bone of his side is broken, the fracture of him is bad, and the healing of him is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And even worse than that is when both bones are broken simultaneously.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	So if the bone that is broken is the smaller one on top, then it is convenient for the doctor to restore his, which allows a small extension in facilitating when that will be equalized.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	And if it's the larger bone that is broken, then it should allow a more vigorous extension when he pauses.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones are broken simultaneously, then you should force the stretching movement much more when you pause.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And when you pause the shape of the hand, restore his and extend his movement over a cushion, with the wrist of the hand above all other positions; and let the ear position be higher than all others, and let the patient's buttocks be on one seat lowered.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion in front of him at his height or alignment, so that the buttocks don't push too hard.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And next, let the attendant extend his arm on the side opposite to his own hand or ligament, and another attendant extends similarly above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And next, let the doctor equalize the bone as it reduces according to the best figure that can be achieved.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there are protruding pieces in the bone fracture, then you must reduce all matter to its place with your strength.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears in him a separate protruding that pierces the ligament and is not within your hope for restoring him, then you should operate on him and stay as with the manner which we have described above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	And if the fracture is in the thigh area, I have already explained this unique chapter for that, and thus you take care of him.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if it happens that there's an abscess during the beginning of your restoration, then you lay out a cloth with a greased cloth and white wax bandage, and make it medium between specificity and subtlety, and strengthen the cloth on that with subtle compression so that the abscess can drain; and then keep the bandage in place and pause plaster made from powdered clay mixed with olive oil, and place stars nearby; and let the star be placed over that fracture closer and more forcefully.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of stars on the arm is found in the major dispositions, or whether the fracture is in one bone or both bones simultaneously.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And next, pause your compression on the place of the fracture more strongly and more forcefully, and when it's more suitable for the extensions above the fracture or the lower parts of him, pause the compression a little wetter according to the recall of him in the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that wrap around the fracture should be wet and soft, not hard or abrasive, and the oil on which it is strengthened should be of its own proper middle between subtle and coarse, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and the ligament for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, such as when something happens to the member itself, then it should be that you submerge the member in warm water until that pain ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the limb not strain as it rests, and then return the compression.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the compression has already softened and the bone has already returned to its original position and seems like that, then correct all of this with your strength.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if the nutrition is prevented from reaching the limb due to excess compression, then it should be that you soften that slightly and let that for several days until the nutrition flows back to that, and then strengthen that.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	And if nothing from those causes that we have said happens to the patient, then it should not be released within about 20 days or so.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And next, let the hand of the patient be suspended by his strength of vigorous movements, and have him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 32 days, or more gently it is restored in 28 days, and all of this depends on the constitution of the body and the disposition of strength.
Capitol .xiii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Restoration of the thumb bone fracture and digits.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that in the case of fractures in the thumb and fingers, it does not happen to them but is caused by bruising due to manual labor.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when it occurs to the hand with a fracture or bruise, then one should have the patient lie down and in front of them place their hands according to equality, and then place your hand on that extended.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And the surgeon should extend the broken bones, and the doctor should adjust those inside so they fit well with good congruence.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then cover so that you place the plaster and the wadding, if it does not cause abscesses, and also place hot stones according to the amount of the area; and you have already enveloped that with a linen bandage.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the rupture is inside the palm parts towards the abdomen, then make an image of a bowl of cloth, and command the patient to hold that against their ruptured palm; have it firmly held by the cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And if the heart's edge is on the cloth on which it lies, so that the heart may be applied to the palm; hold that firmly according to what you determine.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is on the outside parts, then you should cover it with stones and another stone of the same part underneath their palm, so that the hand may be open and straight; and place the constriction, as the hand revolves between the fingers to perfection.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if it happens to fracture one of the joints of the fingers, then when it is the finger tip, adjust it according to what you determine and then have it held against their palm; if you want, place a small stone in front so that the fracture may be elevated and not squeezed.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other fingers, like in the middle section, or on the index, or the ring, or the little finger, then adjust and lift it according to that one; or they are all lifted as a continuous sequence, which is better; or place a small stone above that, as we have said for the tip.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration and nearby, the position of pus from heat and opposition - during your operation - as that is adjusted when any cause of those occurs, according to the repetition of their narrative.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Restoration of the fracture of the bone in the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone of the knee is broken due to bruising, and it is declared upon examination as it converts into the part in front and into the superior pus.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of him is done so that the muscle is strengthened over the fracture and another muscle near the fracture, and the patient lies prostrate on his abdomen and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then have the surgeon extend all the muscle according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If it is close to the bone of the thigh, then have the muscle close to the fold at the knee part, so that the extension can cover them all, and another muscle near the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the break is close to the fold, then have the muscle be applied to the fold and make the extension to the remaining parts.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor adjusts the bone on both sides of his own hands so that it reduces that according to natural likeness and the bone is joined by good congruence; then cover with plaster and bandage, if there does not occur a member abscess.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If it happens that there is pus in him, then you let that pass for some days until the heat from the cautery subsides, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The treatment of his hand should be done like this: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, and fold that twice or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap around the joint until it reaches the bone of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long needle between the thigh and the joint near the fold at the remaining parts, and extend the ends of the needle from the inside joint part to both sides, and then rotate around the joint and thigh so that you remove any excess from the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place stones on the thigh at that fracture location, and place another stone over the bone of the joint.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the spaces between the joint and thigh with thick cloths, so that the bandage may be congealed.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then start with a strong bandage in the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four coverings, and as you move further away from the location of the fracture, your bandage should be smaller and softer.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend both ends of the needle to the remaining parts until it reaches into the chest cavity, and hold both ends of the stones from the other side so that the muscle does not move from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then let the bandage be over that, so that no damage occurs to the member from heat or cautery pus or swelling, and resembling those; and if any cause of these occurs, then you need to relieve him of his anxiety, and correct whatever happens nearby, according to our instruction on bruising.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If it is inside the bone of the skull which you place, then dig in such a way that you equalize that according to what is possible for you; and if not, do on it and keep that, and treat with whatever precedes memory until it is healed within.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	In some cases, this fracture of the foot is strengthened by others that are adjusted to your stars, as we have said in the guide and for the arms.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of this manner for the patient, no limpness occurs to the invalid; and if it is restored alone, another than what is applied to him on his other side, then it is necessary that that one limps from which he has been used.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	Know that the foot is strengthened in about 40 days or a few months, and all of this varies according to the diversity of bodies and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the ankle joint in the leg.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the ankle joint fracture is more common, but it often occurs at various points of the leg.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If it occurs to the fracture, then it is merely a crack or strain in its parts, and this can be either acute or chronic, and everything depends on the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of this is that it should be equal to what is broken in its parts among the said ones, so that it can be added and combined according to what is possible by equilibrium and ease of fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And place the plaster and press over that round star, if you need it from that; strengthen above with a compression to what is suitable.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the dispositions that we have recommended in other fractures, as well as the pus and similar treatments for those ones that oppose every accident to what is suitable within it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the fracture of the ball joint.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the ball there are two bones of which one is thick, and it is named as the ball joint; and the other is fine, and it is called easy.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it occurs to what species of fracture that which occurs to the two bones in the arm, and therefore its restoration is done like the restoration of the arm equally, and its operation is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if there are three bones at once, the ball changes in all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if it is fractured only the finer bone, the ball is changed to the front parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if it is broken the thicker bone, you lose that one, and these are the causes which are not to your advantage.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension, equilibrium, and binding of the limbs according to that equality.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, when the fracture of the ball is well separated and has stationary points, that extension should be gentle and more light, and rejoice with your strength.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the ball there is some reason for operation on the arm, and that is when you equalize the stars and complete your entire operation, then you will take weights of wood from your hand which are placed under these causes which are stopped in tensions, and made symmetrically into palm branches; remove those to which small stiffness exists, and do not use them with your hands, and make their length according to the length of the ball, and within the arm as far as possible towards you.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap around each band in two layers according to the length of it, place one over the ball joint part of one side and the other of the other side, and let them be within the arm at a location near the chest.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then tie the two stars in three places of both extremities and at the middle one; with this structure, the ball is prevented from tilting to either side joint, it stays for good balance.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And already a wood stick has been administered according to the length of the ball; and it is placed in the ball so that it conserves this motion.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And mainly know that you should do this in fractures, and when it is healed properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider every day the ball and study it towards the end of studying, and you protect it from pus or swelling or other similar causes; and if any cause from those happens, then leave yourself with whatever you do until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the heel, the bones in the chest, and the fingers.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Fractures do not occur throughout the heel; but some occur to the bones in the chest; and they rarely occur in the fingers of the hand, and it does not happen to them unless there is an arrangement.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if there are fractures in the bones of the chest and sometimes those bones are elevated above each other, then let the invalid lie on their chest prepared like this so that they can get ready.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then place one foot on that which is elevated from those bones, and press those, and apply pressure, and equalize those among themselves so they turn in the places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then place the plaster and fix it above, and let this be under your chest's belly with a small table underneath which have two cushioned heads.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then strengthen that with the arm descending from the chest, as you have wrapped it in bandages and for other causes which you need.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed for the patient, then you release the ligament, where you will find equal bones, or that are broken or dislocated, and the operation in those is thus conducted as you know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	If any say they are broken, then restore those, and straighten them as I and you have been taught in the restoration of fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And place the broken finger in its original position according to the length of the finger, and place some wax under it; and let the patient lie on this table which is recommended to you, and strengthen that with proper bandage.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If that which is broken in the bones are two or three or more, then place over each finger up to its total quantity enveloped in lion cloth, and strengthen the table at the bottom of the bed, and standing on one of the table's ends let the belly rest on the patient's chest so that speech has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes which we have mentioned in the other fractures of accidents, and apply this advice to every incident with what I said.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	About the fracture of the hip bone and the thigh bone, and the knee joint in men.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the hip bone is broken, then make it lie down on its back, and later incline that slightly towards the part of two, and hold it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And the midwife places the hipbone on its side, and do this in the hip of her like what she expects; and the woman is bent down, and raise both of her child's hands little by little, for all this must be done while it faces the part of the hip like what she expects and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And place powders on her back, and when she wants to urinate, make it easier for her to hold the hip, and let her urine, then return that according to the way you mixed it at the beginning, and later return to her original powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or roughly around those, until that is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take an opossum pelt and strengthen on her thigh with a reed tube; and immerse the whole bladder into her hip, then blow into the tube with vigor while the bladder is inflated inside the hip, so that the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And let it be covered by her hip and stay for some days as we have recommended, until she is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the thigh bone of a man or woman is broken, administer for its restoration and adjustment what we have recommended about the bone of the femur.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is straight does not hide in these nearby fractures that usually happen, mostly for the one who has some study and understands this my free explanation; because that fracture means to you in the major directions through the straightness in its restoration and in adjusting it, so understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	And in the knee of men when it is broken, take a gua sha tool, and place the knee in that; then let her lie covered with a cloth wrap around her, and she is wrapped up, then let her rest for three days or roughly around those, until she is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	About the restoration of bone fractures when they are under bandage.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for the one who happens to have a fracture under bandage, and especially if the bone is large such as the arm bone or the thigh bone, or similar to that, you take care of it and perform phlebotomy on it immediately if your conditions of phlebotomy allow it, just like what we have mentioned above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the bandage discharges pus, then take care to retain it within you that you dust over its swollen area, if there is no other cause presented.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then start restoring the fracture on that day, and do not extend this process if no abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	If an abscess occurs, then let the restoration of her happen within the 9th day, until it has subsided, and do not approach her on the third day or later, for you will cause bad incidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If the broken bone is sticking out above the uncovered groove, then take care to reduce it and straighten it with your hands as much as possible and with little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If extension is not prepared for you and the alignment of her is with your hands, then reduce that with your hands to this tool; and this tool which is made of iron, its length being 7 fingers or 8, and its width according to the size of the swelling; so for this it is necessary for the doctor to have three or four according to what you need in treatment in all kinds of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be rounded, and with little roughness so that it does not bend, you must apply pressure on it during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should have an acute end with a margin at its ends; and the direction of her should be tending towards being thick throughout, and within her parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is her form:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it's named in Greek "labre volenz atelarem", thus it's a small palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	In order for her to lie still, elevate her extremity over the protruding end of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And press him into a hollow where the bone should return, and be equal to any equation.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And thus make an effort to equalize the ends of the fracture between them, and if the broken end is subtle, and does not take that length for good judgment, then when you elevate her extremity into the part of the bone where the instrument has the power of that.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	May it be that if you cannot return the bone of all what we have discussed, then cut him at the point that corresponds to his in the knives which we said; or cut him at one of the saws in any manner that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And thus shorten what sticks out on the bone of roughness and small scars.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and the patient experiences violent pain after it, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and then do what you have promised the patient a youthful vigour.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When you have completed the restoration to the bone which you do, then immerse a cloth in stinging black vinegar, and especially if it's summer, do not apply ointment or any other cause on the wound oil, so as not to cause infection and decay in him.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And after administering stings at the time of your completion of bone restoration, leave the wound uncovered so that you scrape it with a razor and use bandages according to the amount of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And use all caution not to irritate the wound against the fracture, which doctors have often done in the past, and may cause death or illness on their patients from corrosion or severe damage, thus it is safe.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if your constriction is slight, soft, different from the constriction of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear certain bad accidents as we have recounted, and find pain in that place, then do not cover him with those stings, but make that bandage of hard cloths instead of stings and strengthen him against those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when about one or two days later the wound begins to heal in him, then you remove from under the cloth which you had placed over that with vinegar, and apply ointments, oils which according to our custom medicate wounds, as well as ointments tetrafarmacon and similar to that.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is advisable for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound every morning and evening until it has consolidated and closed, and when·the member is prepared in such a way that infection spreads from him to the parts left with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound passes several days and is not consolidated or can be removed from him the bandage, then you know that here are the remnants of small cuts for which you must keep the wound clean with cleaning.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And from those remnants that are separate, remove them and extract them; those that do not separate from each other cause pain in the member when they occur, pierce you to scrape them as possible according to your ability.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if you get pus or excrement on the wound, so it is inflammation, or another type of corruption and decay, then when you see one of those that corresponds to him from the treatment which precedes its narrative in his chapter, you must cover it with oil.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And in the oil where you should have the best speech and you make your presentation: when the bone is broken, elevate the member like the bone of the thigh and the assistant and similar to those of large limbs, and do not expect damage from him, nor the removal of him that discharges pus by this cause death; let it be left in there until it can fall about XX or XXX days. And then cure the wound if you see it, and if not leave that one.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Regarding the treatment of necrosis that occurs in the remnants of a fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Cuts that heal cause this necrosis in the remnants of fracture treatment, especially near joints, and removes his body's figure from him; and strongly prohibits him from his natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the necrosis is recent and administer medicines that have stung like aloes, honey, look at them, suck their throats, and vinegar, similar to those; as you take some or all of it, and dip them in stinging oil, or in white egg yolk, or in vinegar, place that on the necrosis bandage, and tighten those around him for good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And leave the constriction that do not loosen it for several days; then remove this and repeat another until the necrosis is reabsorbed; or strengthen over this lead plate descending, which lead has the property of removing everything that is swollen in limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the necrosis is already converted into pus and removed, and it requires to be started gradually, then cut this from the more superior part of him, and remove the excess and protrusion, or cut this through some incisions until it is reabsorbed; and cure this so that it becomes healthy.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	For the restoration of fractures; when restored and closely follows their original nature in members that are subtle and flexible.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and closely follows their original nature in subtle and flexible members, then such things do not happen unless caused by certain conditions: among which one is an abundance of fluid from the membrane and of disturbance to the action of the operation contrary to its natural course; or through excess tightness of the body's ligaments where nutrition is prohibited from reaching the member; or through excessive greasiness; or through unnecessary movement at inappropriate times; or due to weakness in the patient's body and through debility.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to help the patient lose and allow his body's warmth to spread so that the health multiplies within him; apply baths; and engage in strength training and cheerfulness with him.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And place the patient in such a way that the warmth reaches his limbs, so that the warmth attracts his body's nutrition, or continuous greasiness of his skin with hot water, where nutrition runs and returns to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	For the treatment of broken bones that are bent and the prohibition of the operation as it is suited.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens to a limb already restored regarding the healing of its curvature and elevation in the broken bone and lump, and due to that deformation of the shape of the member, however, the natural operation of the member is not prohibited. Therefore, you should accept the word of him who exists that this member must be of new broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Some may have heard from the surgeons and restorers who have done this in our land, and this operation is reprehensible leading to great fear of its mark which is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If walking and lumpiness are recent, then it is fitting that they be soaked in hot water containing softening herbs such as mint leaves and roots, and clover, and the like; and it should be applied with a plaster made with softening plaster in this way as when dyallaquilon is well prepared; or to take tincture of mint root and let it swell with gall ink or with oil of cinnamon, and then cover it with that; or to take fatty figs and wrap them in waxed cloths, and the like; or to take ameliorants as those named consolidants.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And some times it should be dissolved by constant gentle friction applied with the most moist substances and administered with the full range of body movements at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the curvature has already set firmly and become hard, causing it to need treatment with iron, then you must let pus overlie it and allow the continuity of the bone to be dissolved, and have iron applied that is superfluous in the lumps by means of the metal under fine instruments, and facilitate its administration in this way through diligence and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of speech on dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of some parts of a joint in its place, so that movement is prohibited, and its shape causes harm to limbs, causing great pains and injuries to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	So when it happens to a dislocation, you must immediately attempt to reduce it, and not delay the reduction, for if it is delayed, the body gets fixed in that position and makes it difficult to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for that reason, you should not allow it to be overstrained or stretched during the process of immobilization, which causes various discomforts and sharp pains.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When this happens, you should take the lead in the manual reduction of the body and allow it to rest within that swelling; and let the limb be soaked with hot water and oil and then reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And each member should be treated with what was remembered to bring back its original position.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what follows from fractures; from above towards the top of the body and then downwards.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of treatment for the dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So, if the two lower jaws are not broken; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are partially moved from their places by a little movement, and are slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated and fully so, within which they are softened at the joint part where saliva flows from the body, and neither can have that nor can close their mouth, and the tongue of them is wrapped in its word.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	If the dislocation is slight, then it returns to its major positions by itself due to a minor cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and full, then it should be administered with a gentle reduction, and not be delayed completely.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister should have the head of the body, and let the surgeon place his hand on the same side's palm in the location of one part of the jaw inside the mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or insert both hands at once if the dislocation affects two parts, and the other commands should be outside those as usual; and command the patient to stop moving their jaws and let them move from each side. And the surgeon should adjust the jaw and place the lower jaw back in its original position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if it is difficult to reduce the patient, especially when both jaws are always dislocated, then administer evaporation with warm water and oil, during which a slight reduction should be made of both, without delaying the complete reduction of both as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they return and are equalized, and the mouth of the patient is closed but not soothed, then place over those powders of rue on cerot, and apply with wax and rubbed oil; and let them be left to facilitate the molasses movements.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be between two pillows, so that he does not suffocate at the right or left; do not force him to try any cause; let your food be forbidden to him except for lion's meat, until the pains are soothed and the jaws are broken, then let him drink whatever he wants.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And let this be administered with ease, and do not work on the extraction of the mouth's content, eat, drink, and rest until the jaw is broken and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce two jaws that are dislocated at any time and do not turn into their usual places, then hot baths and frequent soups occur, and you must relieve the patient's stomach, and you must relieve him with a green vomiting.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you do this, then know that it is dangerous; and hot baths lead to death for the person to whom this happens within three days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On reducing the dislocation of the furca and the end of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furca is not dislocated inside the left side due to its continuity with the foot; sometimes it gets dislocated outside at the joint part, and this is declared by feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration involves having the patient lie on their back and extend their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And apply force with your palm at the spot, with strong compression, so that it returns.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And press over that plaster and powder, strengthen that area.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	May the end of what is inside be continuous with that, it is not dislocated in any day; then make sure to reduce and equalize it according to what we have said and according to your equipment.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And press over that plaster, and powder, and compression, and instruct the patient to rest in bed and have peace until they are healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this method of treatment is the end of the muscle reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On reducing the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated in any other way than these three ways, of which one is when it is dislocated at the nipple part and at the front part.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is when it is dislocated at the top of the muscle, and this is done in a twist; and it is not dislocated at the back parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is especially dislocated and outward of the parts in front of the nipple, and especially in those with few muscles, slightly dislocated; more so when there are many muscles, it is out of difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And many people suffer from blows or impact, and the patient's muscle is swollen with a bruise or boil, and it gets twisted because it is already dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then understand that when you try this while you are overburdened with him, then proceed in the treatment of him.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And when you recognize the dislocation of him, which is at the parts in front of the nipple; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal muscle, which you find among those with obvious diversity; and find in the head of the muscle concavity and place the nipple of the muscle like a hen's comb, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to their armpit, nor extend it further for all movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated towards the foot or upwards, then you will find a distinct sensation later, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And of this dislocation, a slight reduction is done when it is cool and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of him involves lifting his hand to the parts above for the minister; then place your fingers slightly below his nipple and lift the joint with strength towards its place, the minister lifts his hand of him and extends that part; then press that part slightly so it returns gently.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	And if it does not return as we have said, and due to the nature of the dislocation, for several days, then understand that the patient should be bathed in warm water and given a mixture that soothes and heals like high-altitude camel milk, fenugreek, and marjoram in water, and it should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be laid down on their back and pause his nipple with wool that is balanced between lightness and compression, and press the doctor's hand on the spot, lift the head of the muscle vertically, pull the patient's hand so it does not get stuck at the parts in front, and another minister holds the patient's head, so that it does not get stuck at the parts in front, until that returns to its place right away.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, return that second one in this manner: and do as follows: make a man present who is longer than the sick person, and stands on his side, and insert his muscle between the sick's belly button and his ribcage, lifting the belly button up to the sides of what hangs above where it is suspended in air from under the sick person. Then another minister pulls the sick person's hand away from the sides of its abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the patient is weak, then suppose that some other cause is hanging down, due to its heaviness, so that it returns immediately as soon as the dislocation happens.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And when it is reduced by this other method: and there should be placed on the ground a long rod with a rounded tip, like a mortar's handle, which should neither be thick nor slender, and so that it may be placed under the sick person; once laid over its head of the rod, cover the sick person with sheets from underneath. And let the sick person stand according to the length of the rod, and extend their hand to the sides on the other part; and let them stretch their body from the other side with strength, so that as soon as the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if reducing is difficult for the patient by all the causes we've said, then use this treatment: and you should take a rod whose length amounts to two arm spans, and its width be four inches, and the thickness of it should be ground down like the tip according to this shape:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And place sheets over the rounded head so that the rod does not push down on the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And place the belly button area under your hand or arm over the rod between the sides, and hold the rod steady on the support and arm, and keep your hand's end fixed.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And place the arm on a ladder according to its width, and the hand is extended to the sides on this side, while the other body parts are hanging from the other side; thus as soon as the joint returns.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the patient's treatment is completed according to any method that is possible for you, and then cover your belly button with wool of equal quantity; and place prepared plaster made from moli powder and egg white over all the muscles, so it can be rolled upon them, and tighten your hand firmly onto the neck, and leave it like this, without hurting your patient's hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And suppose that the food of the patient should be light, within which the member is comforted, which is easier for its recovery.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then the food should be given more frequently than seven or five times, and exercise is done with movements. And if it's closed and not softened, then this means that the patient is already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated due to moisture that affects it or by another cause, then suppose that in that case, a cautery treatment should be given for three weeks, as mentioned in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this has been done and seven days later the ligament is released and the joint is not closed, and the plaster and tightening have reduced on you for some occasions, but it's still not closed and stands up, then know that the nerves of your body which are at the head of the muscle, they are already cut or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is caused by the foot or breast area or behind parts, the reduction is done with pressure and extension to the hands, as soon as it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And another tightening should be administered there, and treat that until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if the recovery is severe in the limb and delayed in its movement, then the patient should bathe for some occasions until that heaviness is alleviated and returns to its natural state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocation of the elbow.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the elbow joint is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; it's dislocated in all directions, but mostly towards the front and back direction. The dislocation isn't hidden from you when you feel its pulsation or touch it according to any figure it is dislocated, and when adjusting the dislocated elbow at the spot, this becomes evident to you clearly, as the joint is concave and unable to bend the arm, nor can it touch with its muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And suppose that the elbows, and quickly reduce the dislocation towards where it reaches to the soft spot of the elbow joint. If it goes to this soft spot, reducing becomes difficult for it, and weak treatment does not heal completely; especially when it's towards the back parts, which is worse than all other types of dislocation, and causes more pain, leading to death for that condition.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of your elbow, when it is possible to reduce that, is for your hand to be extended between two hands, and your arm being stretched out, and the doctor's hands are on the elbow and you. The doctor pushes the joint with the heels of his hands' pulses, or inside the base of his palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	Suppose that the dislocation is towards the front parts, then it returns like this by bending your hand to your own hand, striking the elbow on the base of your palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not respond to reduction, then apply vigorous extension and forceful movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two servants extend the arms, and have those two men hold onto that movement for them not to be released against the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And it should be that both arms are turned around completely, since they are enveloped in a folded long sheet on the patient's hand or wrist.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with their hand, they should apply oil to that for it helps those causes which aid in the lubrication of the joint and facilitate its return, and forcefully move the joint into movement so that it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And it should be that the reduction of the patient is placed on the ground where there is stability and movement on an album mattress, and stretched against the stiffness, and the arm hanging from the neck, and left for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And it should be that the joint is released; and therefore if the joint has formed in its place, then you release the servant of the patient and let that rest.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint is not strengthening, then you repeat the plaster and the servant, and let that rest for several days until it is stretched; and then release that.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	And if it happens that the gravity is near the reduction of the joint, and the position of the patient is in motion, then administer hydration in bath and subtle friction, or compress, until it relaxes; or place on top of the joint a lubricating oil cloth; and then bind it, and let that rest over the bone during the day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And it should be that you hold onto that, and put it in the bath; and when it gets clean, then you rub the joint with a seasoned friction, and then apply it several times on that lubricating oil cloth, one time, and the second, and the third.
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already infiltrated inside the body's cavity during its journey, within its limits.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place on that wet and scraped cow's hole with hot steam and pressure onto it; do this several times, until that area is damp and returns to its position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Regarding the treatment of a dislocation in the upper arm, it is about the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	A few times the hand is displaced, and the reduction of the dislocation in it is easy; the opposite applies to other joints. However, it's important that there be velocity in the reduction when it occurs, before the spot gets stuck or if a blister forms at the spot.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the dislocation in it is that you place the hand joint of the patient on a table and have a servant extend their arm; and the doctor pauses their hand or palm over the verge of the joint, and forcefully move that so that it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it should be considered if the palm has already reached inside the hand; then the patient holds their two hands on a table against extension and reduction; and if the dislocation occurred previously, then the position of the hand is necessarily over the table, so that the doctor's hand falls onto that verge of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns immediately, that's good; and otherwise, then strengthen that with a compress against the blister and let that rest; and don't repeat this process, because otherwise, you won't endure nor can you on reducing it as time passes.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint twists according to its own curvature; and you shouldn't blame the patient for any cause, but rather that the hand is softened and can't sustain any cause; then you should know that the nerves are broken or torn, and this being within them, it's necessary that they be strengthened with a cautery near the cut and reinforce this cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And since the blister has returned, then place onto that reformed compress we have, let it rest and be strengthened for several days; and then release it and let it rest, and exercise the hand of the patient.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	And if the movement of it is still present and encounters any gravity, then soften that with hot water and several rounds of friction until it relaxes.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Several times, you dislocate the fingers in all directions.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one of those fingers is dislocated towards the palm or inside it, then you keep that finger and forcefully move the dislocation from it until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And it should be that you hold onto the tip of the finger, and suspend it from the part where it is dislocated, and let that rest for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And it should be that you suspend that and extend it until its length matches its original state on that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when morning comes, follow that method, and don't stop releasing it throughout the day with exercise, and let it rest at night; and do this for several days until it straightens.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And make it seem like this if it is dislocated inside the hand, and let it rest in that direction and do your first operation on it until it heals.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do this when it's dislocated in other directions.
Capitol .xxx.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the two.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When it happens to any of the vertebrae in the upper or lower back and dislocation occurs completely, and if you replace the vertebrae at those places, then there is no cure, death is feared by the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the patient's digestive process leaves his body against his will, and he cannot hold it; and hot compresses are applied to some parts of his body or on both his legs or his arms, or one of those places. Or a vertebra is replaced at its location, where heated compresses are applied and heated compresses are used for removing those (issues) into four quarters.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	And that has already been removed towards the back, it is called gelsemiosis.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The treatment for this is that you then consider if the gelsemiosis occurred in infancy, where in such cases there is neither cure nor healing of it.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	This may happen due to injury, impact or something similar to those. The ancient methods of treatment were indeed lengthy, the main point being that they return to a more practical approach; I have already shortened the one based on its excessive detail for someone like you, considering my proximity and understanding in explaining it, which is what I have done here, using various tools from that field showing this method and elaborating on that.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it is said that in gelsemiosis which occurs on the front side of the feet, there is neither cure nor healing of it; similarly for one that happens between the two sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And only those are cured which happen in both legs as I recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And the patient should lie on his face stretched out close to the wall, and they should spread the legs wet with water so that the feet do not get dirty.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And another stick straight should be placed, fixed in the ground near the wall around the head of the patient, and another stick should be positioned under the feet at the other end of the bed.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the attendant holds the stick, and should not bury it in a hole; and another attendant holds the other according to that manner.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And cover the head of the patient with a cloth and tie it tightly around; extend the end of the blanket to the stick which should be near the head, then tie that to him; and tie another girdle around the buttocks and hips of the patient, also bending them towards his legs; and adjust all the blankets and tie those on the other stick which is under his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the attendant stretches the blanket to where the stick meets and doesn't replace or tighten both sticks and the girdles at their locations where they are fixed, but rather they should not be tightened as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the vertebra with strength so that it returns, or he puts something like a table there and adjusts to return under the table the feet while they are in this position.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If it does not return in this way, then take a table whose width or length is comparable to three arms, and dig into the wall as we have said that there should be a spot for the patient near the end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And place the end of the table on the vertebra, and the doctor places his feet at the other end, stretching until the vertebra is squeezed and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open the part that is turned around the hand; and it is that you place on the ground the head of the patient at the back end of the wall with two sticks, their length being one arm, and place the head of him at the back end of the wall again with two sticks; and make the distance between each stick a palm's width, and has already been done in every stick to pull it towards itself, and each is firmly placed on the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And add another stick in which is the loop, and it should be turned around the two hooks of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a hook in which the stick is formed, its length being one hand where that rotates; and at the other two sticks are similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And adjust the blankets that you have stretched on the feet of the patient under the pull which should be at his head, and the blankets that you have stretched on his thighs under the loop which should be under his feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And each loop should have an attendant who twists the loop with his hand, and the doctor adjusts the vertebra as we said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is how the loop works:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the vertebra has returned and the location has been set, you apply a powdered ointment until it forms a paste from almond oil, then stop; and place over the paste a table whose width is about three fingers or around that, and the length should be as long as the area affected by gelsemiosis, on top of where the vertebra is.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then you apply it with the blanket as we said, and use almond oil to nourish the patient until he is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any lingering danger in the location at the end of healing, then you should take measures that soften and clean up until the table is administered for a long time after that, which we recommended; and already lead has been applied as a strip in that area.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	Some attacks happen suddenly at the lower end of the spinal column in both cases, and it is caused by that dislocation; it's that bone which has already been examined so that no suspicion arises when you administer this medicine, which will prevent such an accident from happening to you, causing your death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the thigh and the joint of the muscle should not be anything other than dislocation only, and it does not happen to them what happens to the other joints with slight movement and curvature.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the thigh is dislocated in four ways, which are dislocated internally, or externally, or forward, or backward.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And mostly it is dislocated internally, and less so externally or rearward.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation internally for him is that when you fit the healthy thigh to the body, it becomes longer than usual and the thigh is significantly larger than the healthy one. The body cannot bend its foot, instead, it has a tendency to point the toes backward, which is seen as an inflammation caused by a pointed cautery, because the hip space has already been opened here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign for him who experiences dislocation is externally, that his accidents are contrary to this incident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign for him who experiences dislocation forward is that his natural thigh expands according to complement, although it does not bend that pain which is in the front region, and if one tries to proceed then it cannot move forward; and his urine is retained, and he becomes immobilized, so you must allow his movement on the foot.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign for him who experiences dislocation rearward is that he does not expand the front area, nor can he bend that forward which bends when you try to move his hand. The thigh of him is shorter than the other one, and movement becomes easier, the head of the hip is forced in this position.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The method for reducing the types of this dislocation is to consider them, thus, if the dislocation is old and long-standing, that it has already become a habit for you to administer reduction in that manner according to its position, then not entirely; hence no suspicion should arise when administered in such treatment.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	For the one in whom the dislocation is recent and of one of the four types of dislocation, then you should try to do what causes you to rotate the joint and extend it internally and externally, and move it to the right and left, which forcefully returns it and does not require any other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	And if it does not return in this manner, then you should prepare to apply force and extend the patient's thigh from that side or on their chest, or on any part lying above the thigh region; and another applies to extend the hand of the patient towards them so that their feet are placed under his fingers. And you apply strength to the ankle joint for a moment and hold the other to keep the end of the thread.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And whether it's extension of him or internally from the front to bend towards the shoulder part, or rearward from the rear side to the back part of the body.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And whether all these extensions happen in one go that the body is raised onto its earth-bound chest and that it hangs down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so, if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; and otherwise, it is necessary for each type according to its own treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of his own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is internally, then you should have the thigh bent over its side there; place the threads on the ankle joint at that spot where between the head of the hip and the spot where the toes point inward. Then extend the thread from the part of bending towards the more distant part of the shoulder blade.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another applies force to take hold of his arms, tightens the large spot of the hip and extends towards the rearward sides through strong extension, which returns it to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this type requires a lighter treatment when this member is reduced than the other types.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	And if you justify yourself and do not adhere to this type of treatment for all, then you should have both feet of the body lying at once on a strong thread, lightly, over both feet and both hips.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each according to the quantity of four fingers, and the body's foot is extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And let the body be suspended above the head of the shaft, and it should be upright. And the length of him from the ground is a quantity of two fathoms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a strong youth to bend the head of the hip, and be suspended by another young man, and the other young man bends the joint with strength, which causes the joint to return to its place at speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	And in the reduction of him, when dislocation is at the rearward side, let it be bent over the buttock as we have recommended during the heated discussion; and strengthen the thread above the body's foot precisely and on its feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And place two sticks, one on the foot of the patient, and the other on the head; and prepare two sticks to be adjusted in the middle of the stomach region where wet cloths are draped over it. So that the patient is not dampened by the stick, with the stick being placed between the thighs of the patient, so you must extend your actions without causing harm to the parts left undone.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each minister should extend to their own part, and the doctor holds their hand while adjusting the reduction according to skill.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	So, if you obey the revulsion, it will be very good; and otherwise, pause diligently on that, following what we have said about equilibrium in excess for that adjustment.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	May the patient lie down on their back quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the parts in front, then let the back be slightly extended, and according to this detailed explanation about the stomach; and the doctor places his right palm on the patient's lower back, and adjusts it with the other hand, and pauses during that adjustment while extending the remaining parts towards the part behind.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the parts at the back, then do not let the patient lie on their side, but elevate them onto the ground; instead, have them rest on a hard cause, as one would for evacuation when the width of the patient is dislocated to the outside parts. Just like we discussed about lying on two widths, it should be done with the face and limbs extended, as previously said, without much difference.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And have them administered compression on the table over the area where the joint is located.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	So, when the reduction is completed as it should - and you cannot see the sign of the joint's reduction in them, then extend their backbones, and when you equalize those adjustments and the patient straightens out their back and extends their limbs, this means that the member has been returned according to what was said. Then adjust both hands, apply ointment and stretch in this way so that none of the parts are overstretched; and keep the patient at rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then gently stretch the muscle and ointment, comparing one limb to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if you find those equalizations to be in place, you know that the dislocation has already been set, and then let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you find any sign of inflammation, then you return and plaster that area, stretch it according to your first adjustment, and let it rest for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then gently move that part, have the patient walk on it for some days while they are comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation at the back.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The back is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outward at the parts, inward towards the center of the body, and more toward the back parts than forward. It cannot be dislocated at the front parts.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of back dislocation is when you command the patient to bend their back towards their buttocks; then you know that the back has been dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all its ways is to straighten the back properly, so that if possible they can extend their limbs; attach your two feet under them and hold their hands while lying on their face, placing their foot between your feet. Then gently guide their back towards the back until the back returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of completion is that their back adheres to their buttocks comfortably under light work.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then plaster that area and have them attach their back to their buttocks comfortably. Then keep it in one position for three or four days and gently move it afterwards.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient's back for walking for some days until they are healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	And if the reduction of your back is acceptable to you, then administer strong extension to the muscles as described in the previous narrative about hip treatment.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the shoulder.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The shoulder can sometimes be dislocated due to minor trauma, and in other cases it is dislocated according to the type of movement. The dislocation occurs either inward towards the center or outward from the body.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that you move the arm swollen when going towards the part where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment for shoulder dislocation is slight healing, which involves being able to easily extend and equalize the limbs while it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	And when treating the shoulder dislocated by rotation, have you straighten your back properly, and hold that with a strong and brave minister behind his two feet in the middle of him.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then place your right hand under the back part of his upper foot, and place your left hand on the part at the back of the foot towards the side in the position of the pit.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the arm towards you with your right hand, and apply on both sides through movements, and extend the left side. Then move the foot of the arm to the right so that the limb works.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And make these two punctures as we have discussed.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then press the foot of the chest onto the third puncture site, and you are at the cavity.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if the puncture is done in one or two as this method suggests, and if you press equally on both sides of the foot, that's good; otherwise, then proceed with the operation again, when what returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	May it is forbidden to you the reduction of this in the way we recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a firm pillow under them, and have them squeeze between their thighs, and you already wrap a cloth around the patient so that the hernia does not slip.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And the minister who handles the patient's legs should extend them on their chest or as far as is tied around the back of the chest; and each minister should extend theirs against the extension of their partner, and the pillow stays between the thighs of the patient to hold it in place, so that the body of the patient is not pulled towards the parts left unused due to its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor repositions the joint on their back, and another minister holds the healthy leg in the unused parts where the dislocation returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and is confirmed to you as the patient's health improves with the reduction, then stop applying the plaster and bind it firmly, and place the foot firmly against the knee.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And when you fear or protect yourself from the nerves which are behind above the ankle, because the muscle on that side will not be overly strong and hurt it significantly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And let him rest for two days or three; and if the muscle is softened, bind that area again.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then loosen it on the third day or fourth; and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	May it is forced to go before this space, not done safely that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted, and what does not receive treatment should be avoided.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if it happens that the patient has an abscess cut, then note that you manage in this section of the document where we proceed from our narrative, in another location for treatment and application, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers of the foot.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	And when the one that is dislocated is held at a slight extension of several steps; and what is not difficult, before it is easier.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	May it is if the dislocation occurs in a few toes of both feet, then note that you should have the patient's foot on ground or on a table at a location equal to where they would be walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And you stand on your feet, place your hand on the spot that corresponds to the joints and bend it towards your foot with force until it returns, and see that it is already equalized and does not appear in the place of prominence.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place the belly of your foot on a table that carries all your foot, which has two ends, and bend it with an extended and firm structure for three days; and then loosen it and have a rest from walking for about ten days, until it is strengthened and its capacity is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the types of dislocation that are made by plague or by fracture or at any time.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of those causes happen, and you take care in the treatment of that and restore him/her, several punctures follow death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for this reason, do not presume on the treatment of him/her, but one who is skilled in the art, long practiced, merciful and compassionate, patient, not hasty or presumptuous; who uses only in the beginning of medicines that tend to pus to such an extent, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, rather than at the one you hope for salvation from loss, towards alleviating the suffering of illness, where there appears any hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then make every effort to perform the reduction as soon as possible on him/her in the beginning of the cause, before an abscess cut occurs.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the limb returns as we wish, then administer treatment that allows pus to be cut and treats the plague with what suits you from the dry ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is from a fracture and happens in the separate bones, then you align their shafts, and do as we have said about the plagues of the simple in what comes before them at these places.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And follow according to your skill the advice of this treatise in the ways of fear as it precedes my preaching; for which you should always serve your Creator, more enduring to your glory, and better for your health that you will see those in your own time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	So ends the words of Al-Buwayhi perfectly from which God be well pleased.
Amen.	Amen.
