Oh, sons, since I have now completed this book for you, which is the final part of the science of medicine, and since its completion has reached its end, and through its explanations and declarations, it appears to me that you should understand and possess this treatise, which is a part of my operation, namely surgery.
Therefore, my operation is now laid to waste in our region and in our time, completely private, so that little by little the science of it has been forgotten, and its vestige remains hidden; and there remained no more than some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been corrupted and distorted through errors and obscurity, until the intentions of it are closed up and its force and art are elongated.
And it seems to me that you should revitalize that ancient order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and in order that I may show you the forms of the instruments of cauterization and other tools of the work as they should be used, adding explanation and preparing them, which is a necessary cause.
But the reason why no good craftsman is found who has his own hand in this our time, is because the art of medicine is long, and it requires the one who will act in front to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which Galen knew well, so that he could know the joints of the members and their shapes, and their conjunction and separation; and have knowledge of bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and their arrangement; and of pulsing veins and quiet ones, and the locations of their effluent.
And therefore Hippocrates says that with no name is a movement, but in the work small, and most of all in the art of hand.
But we have already said about this in the introduction to this book; for one who is not knowledgeable in anatomy, as we have told you, will not be exempt from falling into error which will cause men's deaths, just as I have seen many of them, because some are formed in this science and seek to get ahead without true knowledge or experiment.
For I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor who had inflicted an abscess on the throat of a woman, and he had cut some arteries in her throat so that great blood flowed and the woman died between those present.
And I saw another doctor who took out an abscess from a man whose state he had examined, and the abscess was large, and it came to him and removed that abscess with a piece of his bladder, so that that man died on the third day.
And you yourself had predicted that it would be fatal to remove it, and I saw that due to the greatness of the abscess and the patient's condition, he knew it would kill him.
And I saw another doctor who received pay from a duke of our land for surgery, and he undertook to suture the wound on a blacksmith's leg which had been fractured; and the doctor, with his ignorance, removed the fracture, placing it above the wound, with splints and sticks under strong tension, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And then he loosened the stitches according to his own desires, and then he removed the splints, and then he allowed it to be left for some days and commanded that we loosen the bandage; and thus it became so that the leg and foot were apostemated, and it led to perdition.
And you were called to him, and he was prepared to loosen the bandage, and as a result, there was calmness and an end to his pains.
But meanwhile corruption had already been confirmed in the member, so that it could not be restrained and ceased to walk, spreading corruption in the member until the patient perished.
And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous abscess and caused it to ulcerate within a few days, until the malice of it magnified with its lord.
The cause is that the cancerous part is pure of melancholic humor, therefore it does not need to be removed completely, but rather it should be left in the member which suffers and is fully hostile.
And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you that my operation be divided into two parts: one is in the operation associated with health, and the other is in the work where there is danger in the greater dispositions.
And you have already existed in this place throughout this book, where I described the operation in which there is error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you that you guard this and avoid that, so that foolish ones do not find a way to speak and deceive you.
And therefore, take up your own arms with solicitude and protection of God, and your own patients with felicity and firmness.
And use the best way with the grace of God, to preserve health and to obtain blessed success, and abandon terrible diseases that are difficult to heal, and keep your own arms from this which makes you fear, so that your situation remains in your faith and in your name does not escape: because it is more remaining at your glory, and further in the world and in eternity at your sanctity.
Galen already said this in certain of his own writings: "Don't treat a bad disease, lest you become a bad doctor."
And I have divided this book into three chapters.
The division of the book begins, and first, the first part. The first chapter, ordered according to the head and its members, in the forms of instruments and the furnishings of cauterization, and from this it is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on drying and piercing, and on suction cups, and on wounds, and on the extraction of splinters and similar things, entirely chaptered and ordered according to the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of torsion and similar things; a chapter ordered from head to foot, and according to the forms of instruments.
You should know the quality of the joints of that cauterization and the inconveniences of it, and in what condition it is forbidden to cauterize.
Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the joints of cauterization and its inconveniences is a long and prolix discourse, subtle by science, and secret veiled; and many wise men have spoken about it, and they have disagreed among themselves, and for me it is sufficient to draw from their sermons a small part, fearing prolongation.
And therefore I say that cauterization conforms to all conditions universally, which is in material or its matter, except for two conditions, which are conditions contrary to their matter.
In the dry and withered condition of material, it desiccate; for some would say that cauterization is beneficial to that, and others would say the opposite of that, that cauterization is not suitable in a disease which is due to quality and dryness, for nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that a withered and dry disease, with water that is hot and dry, should be healed.
And he says that which is the opposite of that, that through cauterization it is made joint in all withered and dry disease that is found in the bodies of men, for when you compare the human body and its moistures to the condition of fire, you find the human body cold.
And I say through the sermon of that, that experiment is here already revealed to me several times in discovering.
But it is not necessary for me to come back on this again, since it has already been dealt with and exercised in the chapter on cauterization, and I have become acquainted with the diversity of human conditions and the disposition of diseases in their respective forms, and their causes, and the accidents that occur in them, and the span of time for those.
But in other conditions, there is no fear for you, and especially in cold and humid diseases, for all doctors have agreed on these, and are not discordant in the joints about cauterization in those.
And know, sons, that from the secret of healing by cauterization with fire and its goodness, it is more on cauterization with medicine combined, because the fire is simple, whose action does not extend beyond the member being cauterized, nor does it harm another member adjusted to it, only with a small drawback.
But the action of medicine combined extends to those members which are far away from it, and very quickly brings disease with difficult healing and great suffering to that member.
But fire, due to its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do this except that it superfluously causes; and it is already known to us through experiment and long-standing service in studying the art, based on the truth of the causes. And therefore I am excused from the length of my sermon. If it were not for the fact that this secret hidden by fire has not been read in a better book, and the quality of its operation in the body and its expulsion by which it expels diseases, with a philosophical demonstration speech, which would be sharp in your chests.
And know, sons, that they are out of accord with the time in which it is suitable to perform cauterization and pause at the best time of spring.
And I say that cauterization is suitable at any time, for the harm caused by time accidents is submerged in the joint of what is attracted to the cauterization, and especially if the cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, strong and fierce, which do not suffer from tardiness because it is feared of those who come with malice, which is greater than small harm entering through the time.
And thus it is not in your chests, or sons, that this is estimated by only the common people and foolish doctors, for it is true that at that disease which is cured by cauterization, there is no reduction of time, and pause from the consequence.
And the cause is not as they think it is, for cauterization is nothing but a place of medicine that alters the condition and dries out the humors which are the cause of why pains come.
But meanwhile, cauterization is superfluous over medicine by the will of its virtue and the greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that his disease will return at some hour of time, according to the condition of the patient and the location of his disease, and the virtue of what is prepared in the body of what is accumulated in him from the superfluities, and what has been acquired through food and similar causes; but if the disease in which cauterization is administered is a subtle disease in a few superfluities and humors, just like cauterization for toothache and similar pains, it is possible that this pain will not return to him, but rather it will be reduced in small measure.
And it is also said in plain speech that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a dreadful saying, not according to what they understand in it, because I believe that there is no cure that profits by medicine or any other cause that approaches cauterization.
And the cause is contrary to that; and I understand that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine only when one administers the methods of cure for certain diseases, and those medicines do not concur, and in the end of the cause, one administers cauterization, and it profits from that. And I conclude here that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which I understand the common people and many foolish doctors.
And they said the ancients that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
And they said that the place of cauterization does not matter, as if it were absolutely true, for I have already proved and discovered that it does not matter at all, except in certain bodies, and that cauterization with gold is good and better than with iron, just as they said; but however, when you do cauterization with fire on gold, it is not declared to you, for it is hidden according to the quantity that you want by the roughness of the gold, and prepares to receive heat; and if you place over it ignition, the gold melts in the fire, and some plates are formed so that the artisan can see through the occupation of that.
And therefore it is made necessary to perform cauterization with iron in a way that is lighter and more precisely according to the rectitude of operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and I have ordered those from head to foot, so that the demanding person can easily get what they want from here.
The first chapter.
This cauterization conquers the humidity and coldness in the serving of accidents which has two causes, one being the cause of soda and the multitude of rheumatic fluxes, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and flowing with sleepiness, toothaches, and yawning, and universally all disease that comes through coldness, just like paralysis, sodality, apoplexy, and similar diseases in those illnesses.
The form of this cauterization is this: first, I command the patient to be evacuated with lactative medicine, clearing the head, for three or four nights, according to what the disease requires and the age and habit of the patient.
And then I command him to shave his head with a razor, and then make that shape between the hairs on his back, sitting on a well-cushioned bench, and placing his hands on his feet.
And then pause the razor's edge at the tip of your nose, between the eyes, and place it on the skin. But meanwhile, when the time has come from the middle location is accomplished, mark that location with a tent, and then ignite the olive cauterization of which this is the form:
And then pause that on the marked location with the tent, in a way that it descends, and by which my own hand is slightly constricted little by little, and you turn that around.
And then raise your hand slightly and look at the location, and if you see already that some quantity of bone has been uncovered from the skull, like the amount of grain of errors, hours elevate your hand, and if not return your hand with that iron, with another similar to it, if it is chilled, until what I have told you is visible.
And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it over the location and let it be for three days.
And then pause over it with a cloth wrapped in a border and let it be over there until the scar of the fire is destroyed. And then cure the location with a four-fold medicine, until it is healed.
And they said that as long as the wound remains open, so much the better is the cauterization, because it is more effective and beneficial.
And some of them said that the tongue should be cauterized into the bone, and the cauterization should be kept until some part of the specificity of the bone is absorbed.
And then it will be cleared what is adhered to the bone, and then it will be cured.
And others said that with the cauterization it will come to the last, until it presses into the bone with great force, until the bone cracks, and this is the form of little aphicate: And they consider that from that location the vapors of the head will be expelled.
And it should be kept open for a long time, and then it will be cured when it is consolidated.
But to me, these two species of cauterization are not visible at all, except in some men according to the way of fear; and leaving that aside, I consider it better for health when it is; because the head has been revealed by the dissolution of continuity, just as we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head is of a frightful nature.
And the first species of cauterization is more saved and better for me; and from that house and with that work, salvation comes.
The second chapter.
On the Cauterization of the Head.
When in all the head there occurs chronic and long-lasting pain, and it is prolonged in the patient, and they use various remedies such as wars and cochias and capipurges and emplausters and guats and cadels and gualinas and similar things, and especially if already cauterized with one cautery which does not respond and does not benefit at all from any of those causes, then consider that if the patient's head is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not frightful and finds no great fear, then that cauterization should be done with another cautery, leaving a little bit between. And then cauterize that over the horn of one's head with a cautery until the tongue is parted. Cut the tongue and let it be discovered the quantity which we have recounted, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the rear part of the head at the location called "vas", -- and it is that location where the windpipe is paused. And lift your hand in that way, and do not uncover the bone, because the patient through this will experience great pain of a different kind than all other head cauteries.
And you will say this cautery in its place, because it is necessary to cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput with a more subtle cautery than that which is cauterized at the middle location of the head; and this is the form of it.
The third chapter.
On Cauterization for Migraine that is not Ancient.
When the patient in the part of the head feels a dull pain, or it is spread into the eye, let the head be evacuated with medicines that clear the mind, and let another cure be administered, which I have said in the divisions of diseases; and if none of these things help, then cauterization is done in two ways: either with medicine combined with acute remedies, or with iron.
But cauterization with medicine combined is that you take a piece of aloes, and scrape it off and cut off the extremities of both heads. And then incise the location of the pain in the temple with a well-made razor until it forms a spot behind the tongue, so that it is hidden.
And then press on it with a stopper for a constant constriction, and let it be for the space of three hours; and then remove the aloes and treat the wound for two or three days, and then pause over it with a cloth wrapped in a border until the spot becomes dry.
And then cure that with a four-fold medicine until it is healed.
And if you wish, do this with some combined medicines that I have written in the two treatises on combined medicines.
But cauterization with iron, according to this method: ignite with the cautery of which this is the form:
and it is called "claus clavilhs", because the head of it is thus shaped like a clove in which there is some curvature, and in the middle location of it there is a small prominence.
And then pause over the location of the pain, and hold your hand - so that the iron is not too hot to be left there - and slowly turn the iron little by little with velocity.
And if the quantity of it that is absorbed by the specificity of the tongue is like the majority of it, and lift your hand in order that the artery is not absorbed which is left behind, so that a flow of blood does not come.
And then wrap the cloth in water and salt and pause it over the location, and let it be for three days; and then pause with a mulled cloth wrapped in border, and then cure with four-fold medicine until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize at the extremity of the cutlery according to the cautery, and be careful not to incise an artery in this non-ancient migraine properly.
The fourth chapter.
On Cauterization for Ancient Migraine.
When you cure the migraine with that which we have said about the previous cure, and that which we have said in the divisions of diseases, and the cure does not help, and sometimes by the disease it is not enough to do what we have said about the first cauterization with medicine or with fire, then you must ignite the cutlery cautery until it becomes white, so that you mark the location of the pain with a line of length which is the majority of the finger, or where it is; and pause your hand for one moment and press that in to incise the artery and bring it into the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to beware of the continuation of the jawbone, which is disturbed by mastication, and that the ligament is not inflamed and the nerves which are connected to it are not affected, and that there is no spasmodic deviation.
And if it is on the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is cut, because in the cutting of it there is fear, and especially for him who does not know what he is doing and has no experience or skill; and leave the operation to begin.
And you will come with a recollection of the regulation of blood flow accidental to the artery according to your own method in this book.
And if you see that this disease does not respond to this cautery and you see the patient's body is tolerable, then cauterize it in the middle location of the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter on stricture of artery with two cauteries, and it is better and more convergent.
The fifth chapter.
On Cauterization for Earaches.
When in the ear there is pain due to heat and it is cured by lactative causes and by another cure which I have said in the division, and the pain does not subside, then ignite the cautery, and this is called "puncta", of which this is the form:
And then, the puncta is brought to the ignition, and it should be guided around the entire ear like a wheel is revolved, or in the circuit of each sample if the pain is in each one. Lengthen yourself with the cautery of the root of the ear little by little, so that you sense the location with intent.
And if the cautery is applied to all points in the entire ear, and each one, and then cure the locations until they are healed.
The sixth chapter.
On Cauterization for Torture.
Torture which is cured and with cautery is not but of the species which come through flux, according to what we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cauterization of the species that occurs due to dryness or spasmodic contraction of the nerve.
When you cure that species of torture with jellies and capipurgis and guarguarisms, and your cure does not provide relief, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one on the root of the ear, and the second a little below the temple, and the third at the conjunction of two lips.
And pause your cautery on the contrary side of the affected part, because softening only occurs in the part that appears to be healing.
And the form of cautery is that you cauterize with the cautery on the right side of the extremity of the ear, slightly above the horn of the head, and on the temple another one, the length of which is according to the length of the thumb, and then pause your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the majority of the specificity of the tongue has been consumed.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of the cutlary, the form of which is before us. But however, more subtle is that it must be done as you see; and it is necessary to cut off in excess of superfluous gristle a little.
And then cure the location with water that is before us, until it is healed.
The seventh chapter.
On Cauterization for Ancient Apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you cure it with the water that we have said and your medicine does not provide relief, and the patient has no fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: on all the horns of his head; and with one cautery in the middle location of the head, just as we have said; and with one cautery in the cranium. And the method of the cautery is done according to what has been said above.
And already it has been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach, and it is more posterior; and then it should be cured with water that proceeds.
The eighth chapter.
On Cauterization for Oblivion caused by Flux.
It is necessary to give the patient in the beginning large jellies and pills that serve as mind-clearing remedies.
And then remove the head of the patient and pause on the cranium of it an ointment described in the treatise on ointments.
And pause it for several times, because that is the method of cauterization. And do this according to the order of the method which I have already said.
And therefore, if through these he is fully healed; and otherwise, then ignite three cauteries in the rear part of his head, which are descendants of the uppermost part of the head down to the lower part of the neck. And pause between each cautery the length of the thumb, and then cure the cautery with water that has been proceeded.
But if you wish to add more and the patient is tolerating it well, then ignite one cautery in the middle location; and if you wish for even greater addition, then cauterize that over both horns.
And then cure that until it is healed; and be the cautery olive-shaped according to the form previously given.
The ninth chapter.
On Cauterization for Paralysis and Softening of the Entire Body.
It is necessary that you proceed with the softening of the head with jellies and water as we have said; and then remove the head of the patient, and then cauterize it with three cauteries: one in the middle location of the head, one on all the horns of the head, one on the rear part of it, and three on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the disease of softening of the body of many and the patients are tolerating it well, but the disease is strong, then cauterize it with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and finally one cautery into the code of the tongue, and lift up your hand. And then cure that until it is healed, and this is olive-shaped cauterization.
The tenth chapter.
On Cauterization for Epilepsy.
It is not cauterized the epilepsy, but that epilepsy is caused by flux.
And therefore, it is necessary to soften the brain of him at the beginning with jellies and with the other cure which we have said in the division when the patient is great and tolerates the exception of medicines.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer guarguarisms and mastigatories that serve as mind-clearing remedies, before this for several days, with goodification of foods.
And then remove the head of the patient, and then cauterize it with one cautery in the middle location of the head according to the previous method, and another one on the back of the head, and over each horn of the head, it is cauterized. And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize it with cauteries which I say, having paralyzed and softened the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And be olive-shaped according to what has been previously said.
But if the patient is a child, then pause with a subtle cautery according to this method.
The eleventh chapter.
On Cauterization for Melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are humid and corrupted and flux is great, then cauterize it with the cauteries which we have said in having paralyzed.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink water that softens the brain of him according to what has proceeded in the division.
And then remove the head of the patient, and then make a tortoise-shaped figure, done from it over the circle, and then place that in the middle location of the head.
And the patient should be seated comfortably, and held by all parts.
And then pause with a liniment; and it is more worthy of an old sheep's border. And warm him over the fire by tempered heat, to his liking, which he suffered when it was more in him. And then place that in the middle location of his head on the circle, and let it be there until he is warmed up.
And do this with the patient for seven days, once a day, with another regimen of it good until he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that making small points according to what is most in him, so that you hold your hand with a cautery thus ordered: this is a species of cautery which moistens the brain with equality.
And then pause with a cloth wrapped in linen or grey wool.
The twelfth chapter.
On Cauterization for Water that Descends into the Veins.
When you have declared the beginning of water in the veins through the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient water that softens the head of him, and guard that from all humidity.
And make that sweat in a bath for several days.
And then command him to rub his head, and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle location of the head; and then cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if there is the beginning of water in two veins, or of one side if there is the beginning of water in one vein.
Insert with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are below the code; and be the cauteries in that length, in the latitude of the temples.
And be careful of blood flows when it is being cauterized; and if you see blood flows from him, stop them with some medicine that is to your ability.
And you will gain wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries and in the absorption of those and caution against blood flows.
And sometimes it is cauterized in the vertebrae below two bones with two cauteries gradually produced.
The thirteenth chapter.
On Cauterization for Old Tears.
When tears from the eyes are ancient and due to the veins and arteries which are in the manifest location of the head outside and it is verified that this is superfluous and flux-like, then cauterize it with a cautery which we have recounted in the chapter on the beginning of water flowing into the veins, and also with a cautery in the middle location of the head and two cauteries in the vertebrae below two temples, and two cauteries in the vertebrae below two bones. And if you need additional addition, then cauterize it in the entire length of the coccyx of the spine on the extremity of the forehead with a small cautery.
The fourteenth chapter.
On Cauterization for Stench of the Nose.
When you treat him with water as we have said in the division and your treatment does not take effect, then prepare yourself and give to drink to the patient cochial root for three nights; and then remove the head of him, and cauterize it with a middle-shaped cautery and an olive-shaped cautery. And then cauterize it with a holly-shaped cautery, and two cauteries on both foreheads below the hair, a little.
And be careful not to cut into that artery.
And of the holly-shaped cautery, this is the form.
The fifteenth chapter.
On Cauterization for Softening of Eyelids of the Eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery in the shape of a crescent moon; and this is the form of it:
And if you wish, cauterize that on both foreheads a little with two cauteries in all parts, and be extended from the temples. And be the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the forehead.
And do not press too hard with your hand and the cautery, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is hardened.
The sixteenth chapter.
On Cauterization of the Eyelid of the Eye when the hairs are converted to the inner parts and push the eye.
When the hairs of the eye are converted to the inner parts in such a way that they push into the eye, cauterize them by two methods: one method is with fire or another method is with medicine which burns.
If with a cautery of fire, command the patient to look before him at those hairs as if they were being cleaned, until they are prolonged and equalized; and if pushing that hurts him, then you should strengthen the eyes of him with a bandage so that it is not troubled until the hairs are born.
Then when they are born and equalized, pause the head of the patient in your sight, and then sign above the eyelid of the eyes of him with a tenta, with a signal which is according to the figure of a leaf of myrtle, and be the beginning of the signal near the hairs.
And then pause with a cloth wrapped in albumen of egg white or in a poultice of pellitory on the eye.
And then ignite the cautery which this is the form of it.
And then cauterize on the figure which you have signaled, little by little, in many times, until the surface of the code is burned away like a leaf of myrtle, all appearing properly.
And the sign of health for this work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs of him being lifted above the point of the eye.
And then lift up your hand and leave it for three days, and then pause with a cloth wrapped in linen until the scar is healed. And then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
But if some cause returns to the hairs and the eyelid is softened again, then do it again just as you did the first time.
But if the hairs are in the eyelid below, then cauterize that until it is lifted to its natural place and equalized, so that the hairs do not push into the eye.
But the cautery with burning medicine is what you command the patient to look at the hairs until they are prolonged and equalized, and then make a shape of a leaf of myrtle on cloth.
And then take one ounce of known saffron and fresh cause. The end! And so, and then mix those causes well, and make this with a feast to prevent it from being cooled; and then spread the water on the paper which is made in the shape of a leaf of myrtle, and pause that over one eye or both eyes; and pause below the eye cloth wrapped in albumen of egg white, and the head of the patient be in your sight.
And then pause the said thing on the medicine and press that a little bit and not trouble it until the patient feels the pungency of the medicine, for pungency is in him like fire.
And then, as he perceives that the medicine has a pungent effect, pause the medicine and trouble it with your said thing; therefore, when the pungency ceases, then removethe medicine and wash the eye with water; and then consider if the eyelid is already lifted as if it were washed away by fire or incision, for now all is well; and if not, return to that spot where you did not apply the medicine and do not despise until your operation is equalized and the eye is contracted.
And then pause with a cloth wrapped in linen until the scar of adjustment is eradicated, and then cure that with ointment or another substance until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you to keep a diligent vigilance that the medicine does not fall into the eye, and if the eyelid is softened after some days and some cause of the hairs pushes into the eye, then repeat your medicine on that spot where the eyelid is softened, and do it exactly as you did at the beginning, and then send the patient away until he is healed.
And this is the form of a leaf of myrtle.
And know that the eyes of men are diversified according to their magnitude and smallness, and therefore, according to this, is made your contraction.
And may not be hidden the way of rectitude to him who studies in this art.
The seventeenth chapter.
On Cauterization of a Fistula that is in the Lachrymal Duct of the Eye.
When you cure a fistula with the water we have said in the divisions of diseases and it does not correspond to your treatment, then cause yourself to cauterize that according to this method: command the patient to pause his head in your sight, and hold the head of him by some minister between your knees in such a way that it is not troubled or agitated with his own head.
And then pause with a cloth wrapped in albumen of egg white or in a poultice of pellitory on the eye of him.
And then ignite the cautery which this is the form:
which is curved, like a form of cane or a pen nib of vulture, from one extremity to the other, with which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, be penetrating into the other extremity. And if you want, be out like a tent.
But meanwhile that which is curved is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out from it pus and dry up that. And if it is not open, then operate on it and extract the pus from it.
And then pause with the cautery which is well ignited, and take that in your hand a little bit of the cautery from the eye to the nostril, so that you do not err or the patient be troubled, and then pause the cautery on the gray of the eye and corrupt that.
And thus if at the beginning of your cautery you pierce into the bone, it is good; and otherwise, then repeat the cautery one or two times as needed; and leave that so for three days, and then pause with a cloth wrapped in linen and surround it with an ointment to dry until it is healed.
But if it has been passed eleven days and it is not healed, then pause with the medicine acute corrosive until the bone is uncovered and scraped according to what is written in your own chapter.
And there is another method of cautery for a fistula which some first doctors also described: enter the location of the fistula and fill it with that; and then pause in that fissure, as subtle as the form of it: And pour into that the quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and take your hand with a camomile with good retention, and do not trouble the patient so that the melted lead does not reach the eye of him; and cause that you pause on the eye of the patient cloth wrapped in albumen of egg white or water, because lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it through marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed with the water we have said about the cautery and healing, it is good; and otherwise, then it is necessary to administer a cut of the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to what will come in its own proper place.
The eighteenth chapter.
On Cauterization of the Fissure of the Lips.
Many times it happens that fissures occur on the lips, and most especially on the lips of children.
Therefore, as you cure those fissures with the water we have said in the divisions and it does not improve your treatment, then ignite the cautery small knife according to this form that is seen:
And be the curvature of it according to the subtlety of a scalpel.
And then pause with that instrument gently in those fissures until the cautery reaches the depth of the fissures.
And then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
The nineteenth chapter.
On Cauterization of a Fistula in the Mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or on the roots of the teeth an apostema forms and then breaks out, and then becomes old, and a fistula is formed, and you cure that but it does not improve with your treatment, then cause yourself to ignite the cautery according to the quantity received in the fistula, and place that ignited cauteri into the opening of the fistula, and take your hand so that the hot iron reaches the depth of it, and at the end make it so once or twice; and then cure that with the water we have said about healing until it is healed.
And thus if the pus is discharged and healed, it is good; and otherwise, then it is necessary to discover the location and expose the corrupted bone according to what will come in its own chapter.
The twentieth chapter.
On Cauterization of the Teeth and Softening of the Gums.
When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are troubled, and you cure those with medicines but they do not correspond, then pause the head of the patient in your sight, and then ignite the cautery in the form which will come thus, namely that you pause the caustic on the tooth and insert into it the ignited cautery hastily, and take your hand a little bit until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth to be reached.
And then lift up your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
And then the patient should fill his mouth with saltwater and keep it for an hour, and afterwards stop, because the troubled tooth is closed and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupted humidity is dried up.
The twenty-first chapter.
On Cauterization of Toothache.
When toothache is caused by coldness, or in it is cold or warm, or does not correspond with the cure with medicine, then cauterize that according to two methods: either cauterization with the edge of cows, or cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with the edge is that you take the edge of cows and boil it in a cauldron of iron, and then take a cloth and wrap it around the end of the tent, and then immerse that with boiled edge, and pause that over the painful tooth hastily until it is cooled.
And then repeat that several times until the virtue of fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you wish, immerse wool or cloth in the edge mentioned above, and pause that over the painful tooth, and pause on top of that hot iron until the iron reaches the depth of the curvature of the tooth.
But meanwhile the cauterization by fire is that you attend to the heat of iron or copper, and be in its core some roughness and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery in the form which will come, and pause that over the tooth and take your hand until the cautery is cooled; and do this several times because the pain is relieved or on that day or on the next day.
And cause that by the impression of that cautery, the patient should fill his mouth with good bread and keep it for an hour, and then spit it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
And cauterize as much as you wish at the extreme end according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the caustic:
The twenty-second chapter.
On Cauterization of Hernias.
When hernias are caused by fat and cold humors and do not obey digestion by medicines, and you wish to induce digestion of those slightly, then ignite the cautery curved in the form which is this following, having two extremities broad for the smoke of the cautery to escape through one extremity, and pause that ignited over that apostema once, or another time if needed, until it reaches the depth of the apostema.
And if the apostema is small, then pause the cautery according to the quantity of the apostema, and let it be for three days and pause on top of that cloth wrapped in linen until what the fire has burned is relieved.
And then cure that with ointment and tents and cloths until it is healed.
The twenty-third chapter.
On Cauterization of Hoarseness of Voice and Constriction of Ale.
When the humors come out of the throat and most especially when that is caused by coldness of congestion, then it is necessary to evacuate the patient at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that in the root of the gullet in the location affected.
And beware that you do not burn too deeply with the cautery nor consume the cord of it, but only a little.
And then cauterize that with another cautery at the joint of the neck in the last vertebra of it. And the cautery of it shall be like a claw, following the previous manner.
And then cure that with water that is preceded by it until it is healed.
The twenty-fourth chapter.
On Cauterization of Pulmonary Disease and Cough.
When cough and pulmonary disease are caused by cold humors and the patient does not have fever or sweating, but is an old illness, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the furcula in the affected locations, and with another cautery in the middle of the breast between two nipples; and let the cautery be like a claw according to the previous form.
And if you wish, then make your cautery punctate with the points that are called puncture, in the form which precedes in the puncturing of earache.
And make points until they reach those places; and then cure that with water that is preceded by it, until it is healed.
And now the cauteries have three bends where cauterization is done in that way: you can do three cauteries according to this form once.
The twenty-fifth chapter.
On Cauterization of Titillation which is the Head of Assistance.
When the head of assistance is displaced due to cause of lubricous humors and does not return to its usual place, and for a little movement it becomes displaced again as we have testified, then it is necessary to first reduce the displacement, and then let the patient be reversed onto his back or side; and then elevate the cord which is in the parting line above the citillic at the said parts with your left hand, if the juncture is dislocated above.
And then ignite the cautery having two heads; and this is its form:
And then cauterize the cord so that it enters one side and penetrates into the other; and the figure of cauterization will be like this, with four heads of cautery.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count, because there are eight cauteries.
And then pause over the cautery with porous cloth soaked in salt, and then cause the patient to adhere to quietness, and let the member not be troubled for some time until it is comforted.
And if the displacement is above and it becomes confirmed, then cauterize on the muscle with a claw-shaped cautery or with punctate cauteries, because the juncture is confirmed, and the humidity is removed, and the patient is healed.
The twenty-sixth chapter.
On Cauterization of the Stomach.
When cold humors and many fluids come out of the stomach and are expelled from its natural disposition and multiply in it, and if you continue with the methods of cure and do not conform, then it is necessary to let the patient lie on his back, and stretch out his arms and legs, and then cauterize that with three cauteries: one at the breast for the quantity of a finger with a claw-shaped cautery, and two at the sides of the cautery, so that the figure of triangular cautery appears; and elongate between them so that they are not adjusted to cause pressure.
And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of two thirds of the thickness of the cord.
And be the figure of the cautery according to this form without addition, And if you wish, then cauterize with a large cautery in the middle location of the stomach according to this form; and this is one cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form:
And be the stomach punctured by that which is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you sense on the stomach point according to the quantity that you wish with cloth, and then cauterize those points with a cautery; and then cure that with the cure that precedes it until it is healed.
The twenty-seventh chapter.
On Cauterization of Fretful Fetter.
When distress arises in the fetlock due to coldness or humidity or excessive evaporation, and it is expelled from its natural disposition by superfluous egress, and the patient is cured with water as we have said and does not correspond, then it is necessary that the patient lie on his back with his head bent, and sense with cloth three cauteries according to this form and quantity placed on the fetlock left of the hip bones, where the seat of man is.
And be the space which is between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger, and be the cauteries according to the length of a straight cord.
And do not compress your hand with the cautery motion.
And if the quantity of water that is absorbed is equal to the quantity of the maturation of the cord's substance, and it is not adjusted; and if the patient stands on his feet; and if he is not standing, then let him be lying down, which has already stretched out its legs, and elevated its arms.
And if it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a knife-shaped cautery, when it is with your subtlety and prudence in the art.
And beware that you do not proceed too much in the cauterization, and let the substance of all the cord be absorbed so that it is absorbed throughout the body and reaches into the vessels, for the cord here is subtle; and know this.
The twenty-eighth chapter.
On Perforation of Apostema of the Fetlock with a Cautery.
When a swelling or apostema arises in the fetlock and you wish to know if that apostema is in the flesh of the fetlock or in its tendon, then if it is in the flesh of the fetlock, the patient's gravity and pain become more acute.
And if it is in the tendon of the fetlock, with great pain and many times that already fatigues the doctors to cure it.
Therefore, it is necessary that the patient be turned over onto his back; and then sense the location of the apostema with cloth; and then ignite the cautery which is similar to rag, the form of which has preceded on the other page. And then cauterize with that and the cautery until all the cord is consumed, until it reaches the ciphac, until in which you escape with health.
And then cure that with the cure of other apostemas until it is healed.
And it is not necessary to use this form of cauterization except by that doctor who has prolonged his study in the art of medicine and has known many diseases; but this one with experience has sometimes been bold in this operation, yet nonetheless you should follow my counsel, and it will be better.
The twenty-ninth chapter.
On Cauterization of Pleurisy.
They say the ancient cauteries of the roots of aristology are to be used for pleurisy in a cold manner according to this way of making, and it is that which you take from the roots of aristology long dry one root point long which is found, and it is of the thickness of a finger.
And then immerse that in oil and ignite that at the fire, and then cauterize with one cautery at the location which is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; and with two small cauteries on the sides, one slightly declining towards the party that is below the beard, and with two others in that which is declining between the fifth rib and the navel, declining a little behind; and with another one in the middle location of the thigh; and with another one above the stomach, and with three others on the back; and with one cautery at the location which is between the two shoulder blades, and with two others from both sides of the thigh, leaving out the cautery which is between the two shoulder blades.
And it is not necessary to compress your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be in the manifestation of the cord's work.
And already some ancient ones have said that there are some men who use a cautery of iron resembling a ray and ignite it, and put it in the location which is between the ribs, so that it reaches to that apostema and expels bad blood, just as we have said in the apostema of the fetlock.
But in this perforation with a cautery there is no fear, for too much happens soon enough in the location of the fistula to which there is no healing.
The thirtieth chapter.
On Cauterization of the Mole.
When you cure the disease of the mole with water as we have said in the division and do not conform your cure, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are right, of which one is that you make three or four lines according to the length of the mole according to the figure of the cauteries of the fetlock, the figure of which has preceded.
And be the thickness between each cautery that of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery be the manner which we have said in the cautery of the fetlock, equally.
And do not compress your hand with the cautery; and let the patient lie on his back.
And it is another manner of cauterizing, so that you ignite the cautery having two handles, which we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the cord which is at the end of the mole, where the left side of the patient's body will be.
And let your elevation be with which you elevate the cord according to the length of the body, so that the cauteries may be made according to the latitude of the body.
And then enter the two handles, ignite it, into that which with those you will penetrate the cord of the other side.
And then extract the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three handles.
And then cure the cautery more than it has already laid down to get rid of the excess for too many days, because it is more certain that the other causes previously mentioned in the cure.
The thirty-first chapter.
On Cauterization of Hydrocephalus.
Cauteries are not used in hydrocephalus, but only in acute cases properly.
When you cure the hydrocephalus with the methods of cure which we have said in the division and do not conform your cure, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauteries around the waistline and one on the stomach, and another on the thigh, and another on the mole, and two between the vertebrae of the back, and one on the right side of the leg, and another on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery be proportioned to the thickness of the cord.
And then let the cautery remain open for that reason so that it may get rid of excess for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient from cure near the cautery with water as is necessary for two purposes, and let it be hastened to him with the aid of healing.
The form of the cautery with which the stomach is cauterized is claw-shaped according to its previous form, and that with which the back is cauterized is olive-shaped according to its previous form.
The thirty-second chapter.
On Cauterization of Feet and Legs.
When the feet are swollen with dropsy and filled with serous water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet above the ankle in non-irrigated water that is between the auricular and anular, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; and then elevate your hand, and do not return it completely, because the serous water resists.
This is the cautery according to this form: And then make two cauteries on each leg, and in each leg be made a cautery at the extremity of the knife-shaped cautery. And the cauteries be according to the length of the leg: one at the top and the other at the middle location of the leg; and on each leg two cauteries.
And let the wound remain open without cure for a long time because some water may flow from it.
And then cure with those causes which we have said.
The thirty-third chapter.
On Cauterization of the Abdomen.
When the abdomen is cold and humid, causing the digestive and retentive virtues to be debilitated in the stomach and intestines, and it is cured with the methods of cure and does not conform, and sometimes the patient requires a cautery of virtue to exhibit, then cauterize that with a large cautery on his stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the ring-shaped cautery and four subtle cauteries around the waistline, with a claw-shaped subtle cautery; and with a cautery above the navel or two.
And if sometimes the excess of humidity and the patient's tolerance are abundant, then cauterize that on the navel and on the intestines, and firmly adjust two cauteries above the stomach and near the inguinal region, because it is a perfect cure for the juice of which you will not err.
The thirty-fourth chapter.
On Cauterization of Old Hemorrhoids.
When old hemorrhoids or one of the thick humors is in a state of congestion or corruption, and they are cured with water as we have said in the division and do not conform to the natural cure, then cauterize with three cauteries above the small triangular spine and the small triangle-shaped bone, and another above the navel going down by two digits.
And if you find that his stomach is inflamed and his food is not digested, and his face is often swollen, then cauterize that on the stomach with a large cautery according to what has preceded; and one cautery on the thigh, and another on the mole of him with a claw-shaped cautery, and let the cautery remain open for some time, and then cure him until he is healed.
The thirty-fifth chapter.
On Cauterization of Athletes' Wounds near the Abscesses of Them.
When you cut away the athletes' wounds, then you ignite the cautery that is similar to a ray. And then put that ignited cautery into the athlete's wound cut away, and finally bring your hand to where the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows.
And make it once or twice, because if the wounds are many, then you cauterize each of them according to what we have recounted, and then cure those with water that conforms to their wounds until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on someone, it is more likely to be effective.
The thirty-sixth chapter.
On Cauterization of Fistulas that are formed in the natural openings of the body.
When nature does not obey the work which we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by that, then cure him with a cautery.
Therefore, when you find some fistula in the natural opening of the body that is old and corroded, filled with pus and corrupted humidity, and thus what is most worthy to do is to make an attempt on it with a subtle probe, and then know the quantity of its depth according to the aforementioned probe.
And then ignite the cautery that is similar to a ray. And then put that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which the probe enters.
And repeat that process with the cautery until those corrupted bodies are burned away at once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your necessity.
And be careful not to burn the nerves or veins; or if the fistula goes to the bladder or to the intestines, then beware of all those places; and do not do that unless the fistula is in a place where it is not penetrating.
And then cure that place until it is healed.
And if the place is sealed, and the matters are cut away from it, and it remains like that for a long time, then know that it has been completely cured.
And if the matters are not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or in the process of corrupting, or falling victim to those causes of which a memory will be recalled in its place.
The thirty-seventh chapter.
On Cauterization of the Tonsils.
When in the tonsils there is pain due to congestion or great ventilation, and because of this the patient's throat is inflamed, then it is necessary that you cauterize that on each tonsil with a claw-shaped cautery, whose memory precedes.
And firmly cauterize with the second one a little bit away, so that three lined cauteries will be, and thus they will be more effective.
The thirty-eighth chapter.
On Cauterization of the Bladder.
When debilitation and mollification occur in the bladder due to congestion and corrupted humidity, so that the patient's urine does not retain, then cauterize that on the part farthest from the navel, where the hairs of the navel begin, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the nodules on the foot; and cauterize that with a cautery in the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And let it be a claw-shaped cautery according to what has been processed.
The thirty-ninth chapter.
On Cauterization of the Mare.
When congestion and humidity occur in the mare, and because of this conception is prohibited, and the menstrual flows are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and there occurs pain due to the hinderance of their passage, then it is necessary that the location be cauterized with three cauteries in the circuit of the navel, just as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery on the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be claw-shaped.
The fortieth chapter.
On Cauterization of the Dislocation of the Hip.
When corrupted humidity has flowed into the part of the hip, and causes have been formed that hinder the proper location of the joint, and the sign is that the leg is prolonged over the other when compared between them. And the location of the dislocation is found in the part where the buttock is.
Then it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the part of the hip with a circle-shaped cautery, as you have signaled with a probe in the circuit of that part, and because the part falls into the middle location of the circle.
And let the cautery be of the same form as that which preceded in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize that with three cauteries and one large olive-shaped cautery.
And let the cautery be made according to the quantity of the thickness of the entire cord; and then cure that place until it is healed.
The forty-first chapter.
On Cauterization of the Sciatic Vein.
When pain occurs in the part of the hip, and its cause is congestion and humidity, the patient is cured with water as we have said and does not conform, and it is old, then it is necessary to apply the patient with thick humors using fetid pills or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize that.
And the method of the cautery in that is according to two methods: either a cautery with concombustive medicines, or a cautery with fire.
Then according to two scientific methods, one of which is that you cauterize that on the part of the hip with three triangular cauteries in this form; and make good depth. And let the space between each cautery be equal to the thickness of the said digit, and if it is an olive-shaped or large cautery.
Sometimes there may be a cautery on the middle location on top of the hip bone, so that there are four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with the circle of which the form precedes in the cauterization of the hip dislocation, so that it be a continuous and burning circle that consumes the thickness of the entire cord.
And this is the method of cauterization in sciatica when pain is attached to the hip and does not spread into the joint.
But if it spreads into the joint, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the joint over the location where the patient feels the pain; and with one cautery on the hollow for four digits a little above the hairy part.
And if the cautery is cut-like, and let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the thickness of the cord.
And if the patient says that the pain is spreading into the location near the bones of the feet, then cauterize that where it says with a cautery for three or four or more points if needed.
And if the patient says that pain is below the kneecap near the joint, then cauterize that with a cut-like cautery.
And be careful in all cauterization that you do not stop the cautery until it has burned nerves or large arteries, and because of this it is bad for your patient to have bad necrosis or contraction.
And you have already seen one and another of those which I will cauterize on the hollow and finally in the cauterization, and the inflamed fire burns into the toe until the tumor reaches the end, and the fire perforates and corrupts all the toe. And then comes a strong solution of belly, and with this comes death.
And if the pain is in two parts together, then cauterize each one according to this method.
And they say that the wise men have said in the cauterization of the hip: make it similar to a circle of iron, the circumference of which is half a palm; and let its orifice be according to the thickness of a date pit or somewhat less.
And within that circle be another fourth part; and let the space between them be equal to the thickness of the nodules on the foot; and let those circles be one above the other, and let their length be one nodule or two nodules, and make in those margins a ferruginous decently apparelled in the circles; and this is its form.
And then be ignited in the fire until it blazes up and sends sparks, and then be placed on the part of the hip, with the patient lying on their side. And therefore cauterize that with three cauteries rounded in one stroke.
And then leave that alone for three days; apply a poultice to it with a border and leave the wound open for many days; and then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
Thus says Albucasis: Oh, sons, of this type of cautery we have used little, due to the fear of looking at it, and therefore few have found those who look upon it.
But from the good cauteries that suffered him, and found the place of him.
But a cautery with concombustive medicines is one that you make two circles having an armula perforated in which the guaffo of the iron door should be placed; let the length of the walls be in the height of theirs, namely two nodules or as many as those.
And if the space between each one is equal to the thickness of the said digit; and let them be above and below, and let them contain themselves within each other according to this form:
And then place it on the part of the hip, with the patient lying on their side, and grasp your hand over the part of the hip; and then take cold water and pour it between two circles, and let its quality be in the small fire, little by little, and keep it for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient to endure the mordication and the adjustment of it -- until that mordication ceases as if from fire.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and wash away the cold water from all the hip with warm water.
And then leave that alone for three days and place over it a border until the blackness of the adjustment is restored, and leave it so for some days, and let it be filled with blood; this is the end in healing.
And then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
And if the pain is spread into the joint or thigh, make it like a statue in the water, according to what is done in the hip similarly.
And this is the method of cold water, and you have already written that in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Recipe of alkali and non-extinguished cause of both ana parts one, and crush them and place them in a new wave of which the left part is pierced by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into it ray.
And place the bottom of one wave into another wave inverted, and pour on top of that alkali and living cause with warm water which covers them by one digit, and then you compress them with your own hand for good compression, and leave it so that the hole will descend from the sharp water in the left part to the inverted wave.
And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another living cause and other alkali renewed, because that which is already strong acuity will be administered in many operations of medicine and in the cauterization of other members, for this operation is fiery.
And some of the medicines are mixed with those which are cauterized wide, such as mezize, malanacrate, and causes with salt, so that they are blended.
And Gualia recounted the operation and cure of a man from ancient times who was cured of hip and sciatic vein pain with this method, and magnificently declared it to be very effective, saying that no other cure was needed, and thus he is healed in one stroke just like I recommended, for indeed that one entered into bath and exercise already knowing about this.
And it is said that a certain quantity of greenery should be used, and if not found, a fresh fig should be taken; and it should be crushed with a little gray powder and placed on the hip where there is pain, or in the joint or thigh, and bound.
And it should be left for the quantity of three hours or for as long as the patient considers that the adjustment is giving way.
And then put it in bath, and when the body of him is heated, immerse it in the sun, because the pain ceases and he is healed.
And know that you should not use cautery with these medicines except in proper evacuation of the body.
But already Escorides said that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with a goat's horn, it will be of great benefit to him; and let the cautery be made according to this method: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the bones.
And then take a dried goat's horn and fill it with fire until it is made into charcoal; and then place it on the wool and leave it in until it is spread out. And then repeat this process, and do not cease doing so until the sensation of the burning reaches into the hip and relieves the pain.
And this method of cautery is called the "cauterization of oxen".
Captulo 42.
Chapter 42: On the Cauterization of Two-Pain Dolor.
Sometimes pain is in both sides due to multiple causes, such as bruising or percussion or excessive evacuation, and similar causes by the infusion of moist and humid matter.
And the cautery should not be done except in this one species, which is made by effusion of moist matter.
Then it is good to do evacuation of the patient with fitting pills and similar ones that are made on the two sides where there is pain, three lines according to the latitude of him, plus or minus ten in each line, as much as one can tolerate and as far as his virtue allows.
And then do a cautery with a point cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four point-like cauteries in the middle of the medial line according to this form:
Chapter 43.
Chapter 43: On Cauterization at the Beginning of Gout.
Many times this disease attacks small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that it occurs suddenly on their joints, causing swelling and elevation.
And this can be seen in the last cervical vertebra of the spine and the nodules of the joints, which already begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
And then when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that with a circle-shaped cautery according to this form: that takes the cautery on all parts of the spine equally.
And if you wish, cauterize in the circle of the spine with a point-like cautery two or three lines. And let the points be proper between each other.
And then cure the place until it is healed with this method which we have said.
But beware that cautery should not be administered in gout that is caused by nervous spasm.
Chapter 44.
Chapter 44: On Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.
When joint pains are caused by humid humors that are accumulated in each member of the body, it is common for doctors to call this condition "podagra" properly.
And therefore when podagra caused by humid humors is cured by the method of cure and the pains do not relapse, then reapply the cautery.
And so you cauterize that with evacuation in the circle of the joint of the foot, using many cauteries.
And let it be an olive-shaped cautery, whose form is as follows:
And if necessary, make points on the fascia of the foot, and do so with a point-like cautery. And if the pains rise to the joints or other joints, and this many times occurs, then cauterize that on each joint with three or four cauteries of all parts with this olive-shaped cautery.
And if many cauteries are needed to make these cauteries necessary, then cauterize that and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery before, only so much as to surround the thickness of the cord.
And if the pains rise into the elbow and thigh, then administer the cautery which we have said in our chapter.
And if the pains are only in the most part and is called "suagra", then prick in the circle of the tendons as they revolve, pricking those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the said parts, then prick in the circle of the tendons on each joint and on the crease of the hand.
And if the pains rise quickly in some days to the joints or muscles, then cauterize all of them on every part of the limbs.
And do not evacuate the patient with good regimen and reception of medicines, for if a good regimen is done and phlegm is evacuated by this cautery, it will be healed, God help.
Chapter 45.
Chapter 45: On Cauterization of Wounds.
When a wound occurs in the groin and says that the abscesses are bursting before the saddle at the genitals, and this is beginning to happen, then it is good for you to tell the patient to stop their diet for the day and to use gentle remedies so that the wound may close up from its own vent.
And then follow the patient with your hands on their back above their knees, and command him to keep his leg straight until the wound is completely healed or the abscess appears.
And then return to that place with your fingers and signal by touch the rupture over the bone of the pubic bone, signaling the extremity of which is similar to half a circle at the divided parts of the chest.
And then ignite the cautery whose form is as follows:
until it is hot and sparks fly. And then reduce the abscess or abscess to its natural conformation, and then place your hand on the location to prevent the abscess from bursting.
And you have already located between the joints of the patient and left one joint, and another serves on his thighs, and another on his feet, which has its own masses.
And then place the cautery on that spot indicated by your hand with the cautery standing upright, and apply it to that area until you reach the bone of the pubic bone in the middle of the duodenum; and repeat on another occasion if you do not achieve success on the first attempt, until you reach the bone.
And observe wisely the signs of the abscess at the time of your cautery, lest you burst that abscess and cause harm to the patient, leading to death or great harm.
And know that when you apply the cautery, do not touch the bone, nor compromise your operation.
And it is good that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size and measure.
And then cure the location of the cautery for three days with ointment until the scar of the fire is restored.
And then cure that with other remedies until it is healed.
And the patient should lie on their back for 40 days until the location and wound are sealed.
And it is good that you pause the patient's nutrition according to the length of time of their cure, and that the abscess does not burst forth from the effort of healing.
And then, when it is almost 40 days, apply gentle remedies and keep that for another 40 days.
And let it be diminished in work and repletion of food and drink, and in violent voices, for when one uses this regimen of entire healing, they will be healed.
And you will say the cure of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and you want them not to stop, then cauterize the rupture with that red-hot cautery according to the quantity of it, and let it be as if it were taken out of the cord just like the third part of it; and then cure that with what we have said, and do not adjust.
And already some first ones have said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, since it is signaled by touch:
and it is a paused line that goes through the latitude in the lat and above the rupture, and another line above it; and then place your hand on one cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Chapter 46.
Chapter 46: On Cauterization of Twist.
When a pain occurs in some members due to bruising or percussion and that pain persists for a long time and does not respond to cure with medicines, then it is good to cauterize with a point-like cautery.
And let the cautery be on every member according to its magnitude and smallness, virtue and defect, location of twist and pain.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, good; and if not, then reapply the cautery to him; for it is a custom of those pains that they are punctured in one member to another which approaches them, so that you must achieve those with cautery until the patient is healed.
Chapter 47.
Chapter 47: On Cauterization of Leprosy.
Some lepers have been cured with cautery for great benefit, and more so if the species of leprosy is caused by the corruption of phlegm and melancholy.
And therefore, when you want to cauterize that person, consider if the leprosy is common and has been cured with what we have said in the division and do not despair, nor remain, and fear for the patient that the corruption will comprehend all the body of him and all the composition of him, then cauterize that on the head with v cauteries: one in the middle location of the head, and the second a little below it, and on the forehead to the end of the hair; and both on both temples; and one behind, on the nape or services.
And finally, your hand with the cautery is applied a little to imprint on the bone a small impression, and from there the scales are dislocated, so that the expiration of thick vapors is alleviated for him; and cauterize on the malleus according to what was previously said.
And if the leprosy is already spread out on the patient and appears manifestly, then it is good for you to cauterize that person with those cauteries which we have said in the head; and with one cautery on the tip of the nose, and two on both kneecaps, and two on both vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one great one on the vertebrae near the coccyx, and one on each coccyx, and two on both ankles, and one on each ankle, and two on both elbows, and one on each elbow, and two on both hips, and one on each hip, and two on both shoulders, and one on each shoulder, and two on both hands, and one on each hand; and cauterize that person on all the joints of the said members and feet, and on each heel of his feet, and on the tendons of his legs.
And be careful of the nerves which are over the tendon that you do not burn those.
And some times it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the pubic bone and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more beneficial and congruent it is; and know that the patient does not have pain in the cautery, just like they do in their skin, because of which the body of him has already been stupified.
And it is good that the cauteries be great or small according to the members and joints, as preceded by the species of instruments.
And then cure the cautery with flour from errors cooked with honey and with another remedy until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
Chapter 48: On Cauterization of Stupor.
When some member is numb or falls asleep and is cured with medicines, oils, and emplasters, but does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb member with cauteries according to its magnitude or smallness.
And let your cautery go into the thickness of the cord a little bit. And then cure that with another remedy until it is healed.
And some times it is cauterized with some stupor which occurs in the legs and feet, and in the vertebrae of the back, and one sees the inflammation of the nerves that move that member, and the stupor is restored.
But do not presume on this except for him who is knowledgeable in the anatomy of members and the exit of nerves throughout the entire moving body.
Chapter 49.
Chapter 49: On Cauterization of Moles that are Morpheal.
When moles are old and do not respond to any of the remedies of medicine, then you should cauterize over them with a pre-cooked cautery for a little while according to the quantity of the specific kind of cord until the whiteness and color of it is restored, and the color of it is changed.
And then cure that with flour of errors and lentils mixed with roasted oil and with leaves of arnoglossa, and with blood of dove or with blood of hernia, each portion being one part and all being mixed together; and then apply a cloth to the location and have it remain until it is healed.
Chapter 50.
Chapter 50: On Cauterization of Gout.
When gout is beginning and you want to stop it, then cauterize that with a circular cautery in the circuit of it as it revolves.
And the wise men say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle location; but to me it is not seen this way, for I fear it may be ulcerated, and I have already seen this some times.
And it is better to cauterize in the circuit of it with a circle as we have said, or with many cauteries.
Chapter 51.
Chapter 51: On Cauterization of Swelling.
When some swelling is delayed in maturity, and thus it is due to excessive fluid or the condition of the patient, who is old and decrepit, with little blood, or because of time, and you want to hasten the maturation of swelling; then cauterize in the circuit of it with many small point-like cauteries; and then loosen that which would have fastened in maturity.
But if you want the perforation of it with a cautery, then ignite the cautery whose form is this: and place that in the middle location of the swelling so that it penetrates to the cord.
And if the cautery in that location is more behind, so that the body of the arm is alleviated; and then cure that until it is healed.
Chapter 52.
Chapter 52: On Cauterization of Consumption.
Consumption is a corrupting wandering in the member, which corrupts it like fire consuming dry wood.
Therefore, if you find that consumption in a location which suffers from cautery with fire, then ignite many small point-like cauteries and great ones according to what is suitable in that location where the consumption is.
And then cauterize that from all sides until you eradicate all corrosion and there remains no cause of it.
And then loosen that for three days, and apply oil mixed with turpentine to the locations that were cauterized, so that all scars are eradicated and all corruption.
And then cure that with meat-generating remedies.
But if after three days the flesh grows healthy and there is no corruption in which case it is good; but if not, then reapply the cautery to what remains in the corrupted locations.
And consumption is medicated with acute medicine for some days, because that is a means to locate the cautery. But still, a cautery with fire is of greater benefit.
And I have already said the cure for it with acute medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you have need of it.
Chapter 53.
Chapter 53: On Cauterization of Warts and other similar things.
Many times it happens that there is a lingering part of the foot disease which is called a wart, and it is a big, festering cause that spoils the foot; and cauterization in those places is done in two ways, namely by fire cautery and water-boiling cautery.
But fire cautery is when you ignite the concave cautery similar to a vulture's claw, which is made of iron according to the quantity that contains the wart on all sides, and has subtle edges.
And then pause that ignited cautery over the wart, and then revolve your hand with the cautery in the circuit of the wart until the cautery reaches the depth of the wart. And then loosen that for three days until it begins to fall off. And then apply that with wild marjoram leaves mixed with salt, and loosen the plaster over it for one night, so that it is eradicated from its roots.
And then cure that location with meat-generating remedies until it is healed.
And if it does not convert, and many times it happens on the surface of the body, mostly in the arms and legs, then you must administer cauterization with water, and it is that you take a quill or iron or vulture's claw, and place it over the wart; and then pour into the quill a small amount of boiling water, and hold your hand, and you revolve it with compression from all sides, and press the edge of the quill into the root of the wart, and let the hot water flow slowly to the depth of the cavity; and wait for the patient a little while after the injection of the hot water for one hour, and then remove that, so that the wart with its roots is eradicated.
And thus do it to those, and then apply the other remedy until you reach all of them that are in their place on the body.
And then cure those with pus, which is eradicated from the roots of the warts, with remedies that promote flesh growth.
Chapter 54.
Chapter 54: On Cauterization of Trembling.
When it happens that someone has a trembling due to fracture of the nerves or due to fever caused by fright, or for another similar reason, then you should cauterize that with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cautery; and also on the legs of him, and on his stomach, with an olive-like cautery.
And the trembling of him subsides and hastens the recovery from the frightful disease.
Chapter 55.
Chapter 55: On Cauterization of Accidental Blow to the Body.
When in the body are accidentally struck blows, and pustules are formed which are made of gross corrupted matter; then it is necessary at first to appear as if prepared, that a subtle cautery be applied over the entire head of the fistula with a myrtle stick whose extremity has been extended with fire; or with roots of long-estiolated herbs; or with a lentecular cautery.
And sometimes it is necessary to cauterize the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; and do not believe, and the excess causing those is broken up, and they are cured from those.
But it is necessary that this be done properly with evacuation by phlebotomy.
Chapter 56.
Chapter 56: On Cauterization of Blood Flowing from an Accidental Cut by a Sword.
Many times it happens that blood flows from a wound caused by an accidental cut by a sword, or from the incision of apostemes or cauteries on a member, and then similar things happen, and it is difficult to stop that bleeding.
Therefore, when it happens that blood flows excessively, then you must quickly apply your hand to the wound of the sword, and place on top of it what I have said earlier, and strengthen that many times until the bleeding is stopped, and there will be no further flow.
And then place the olive-like cauteries in the fire, small and great, in many numbers, and blow on them until they are thoroughly ignited.
And then take from those one small or large according to the location and wound in which the artery is broken, on that vein more quickly than you have removed what I have said earlier, and apply the cautery until it is completely absorbed and restrained that blood.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove what I have said and extinguish the cautery, then take another cautery carefully from the ones that are prepared in the fire, and thus do not cease to do this repeatedly until the bleeding is restrained.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and that you bring another misfortune upon the patient.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to restrain the bleeding in those circumstances, and especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: or by the cautery as we have said earlier, or by extraction which is not extracted, because when it is extracted, the ends of it are burned and the bleeding is restrained, or that it be tied with a thread or with a ligament through strong constriction, or that medicines be applied to it, whose virtue is to restrain the bleeding; and they should be strengthened by a pillow or by a decent constraint.
But the one who administers a decent restraint on him with a ligament and strong constriction by drapes or through position of concurring causes and similar things does not respond quickly.
But if it happens to someone and there is no doctor present or medicine, then do the following: work slowly with the above-mentioned cautery on the orifice of that vein as we have said earlier; and understand that the great constriction of him is necessary until the bleeding is stopped from the superior part of the wound, and on the sword-cut it has not been removed; and above the sword-cut be sprinkled with boiling water of great coldness until the blood is congealed and thickened; and also consider in what kind of cauterization or medicine is needed.
On Incision, Perforation, and Wounds, and their likenesses, including Phlebotomy and Wounds.
We have already said in the first chapter all diseases in which a cautery with fire is suitable and with medicine that concurs, and their occasions and causes, and the instruments necessary for those things, and we have arranged the chapters of this book from head to foot.
And you will proceed in this chapter by that method, so that what is sought after may be illuminated to him who asks about it, and thus over what has been asked.
And before you begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter, it is about the terrors of which we spoke in the first chapter on cauterization.
And therefore it is necessary that there be great caution in him, for in the operation which is in this chapter, many times evacuation occurs which is with blood and on which life depends; and so one must be cautious with the sprinkling of the vein or incision over the apostema or warning of exit or purgation of the wound or extraction of a sagitta or incision of a pyre, and their likenesses. And all those are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in most cases death.
And I warn you that on you should not fall this thing in which there is occasion, for sometimes the case demands of men many manners of diseases. And from them some go away with their disease and it is soon for him to die, and so through the intensity of what he finds in his disease, and through the length of his disease, and in the disease there is fear which means death.
And from those some receive from their son's heritage and gift, you waiting for him to be healed, and his disease is pernicious.
And therefore it is not necessary that you consent to what comes to you from which this manner; and your caution should be greater than cove-ity and rapacity; and do not presume any cause over what comes to you, but rather aprop science certain which verifies what comes to you, and by which success succeeds.
And use in the cure of all your diseases prophesying and indicating to you that which is salvation converted, for in that is aid to you over the acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
Oh, sons, God inspires His understanding in you, and does not withhold direction and protection from you, for this is in His hand.
And I have ordered this chapter to be distinguished by chapters according to what preceded in the chapter on cauteries, from head to foot, so that it may be illuminated to you what you ask about and of which you have need.
Chapter 1.
On the Cure of Water that is contained in the Head of Children.
Know that this disease often occurs in children during childbirth and when the midwife tightens the child's head.
And sometimes it occurs due to a hidden cause which is unknown.
But I have never seen this disease except in children; and to all those whom I have seen it has been accompanied by death, and so it is my work left undone in them.
And I have seen that a child whose head was filled with water overflowed, and his head was always magnificently expanded so that it could not cease to pour forth, and more than the humidity was increased until a mortal fire.
And this moisture either accumulates between the skull and bone, or accumulates beneath the bone on the cranium.
So the operation in that case if the moisture is between the skull and bone and the apostema is small, then it is necessary to cut in the middle of the head with an incision in the latitude, and the length of the incision should be two nights so that the moisture flows out, and this is the form of the spatula:
And therefore if the moisture is more increased and the apostema is greater, then there are two incisions according to this method:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, the sign of it is that you must cut the commissures of the head on all sides and the water is squeezed out when you compress that with your hand into the partitions inside and not to be hidden from you. It is necessary for you to cut in the middle of the head with three incisions according to this method:
And carefully extract all the moisture from the incision; and carefully strengthen the incisions with cloths and poultices; and carefully bandage it on the fifth day, and carefully remove the ligature and care for the wound with tents and poultices, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And there is another method of incision, which considers how the magnitude of the apostema and the collection of water appear, for sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in the anterior part, or in the right, or in the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the apostema appears and the accumulation of water, and do so as best you can.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and thus the blood flows and the patient dies from that flow of blood with evacuation of moisture.
Chapter 2nd.
When the case arises with some catarrh or rheums in the eyes or feet, and it is ancient, and does not respond to the cure of medicines, then the final cure in this case is the incision of those two arteries.
And therefore it is necessary when you wish to incise those which the patient's head becomes inflamed, and carefully palpate the location with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and carefully strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and carefully consider where the vein pulsates; and the places of each above the places which are near the ears depressed, and they will be hidden from almost no one.
And carefully cut on the artery with a tent, and carefully incise each one with a spatula from each side, sharp as if to penetrate into the bone, and so that it is in the latitude of the head.
And if you want, insert the spatula below the artery and cut it at the same spot where the incisions are made on the sides.
And the length of the incision should be about two fingers' breadth, because when any vein is cut it begins to bleed with a pulsating egression, which jumps out frequently.
But if the artery does not appear at the incision, then it is necessary that you measure from the ear the quantity of space equal to three fingers' breadth, and carefully insert with a tent, and cut into the bone.
And this amount of blood that is necessary to be taken is about one ounce of wine. and not too little or too much, and all this is according to the quantity which appears of the virtue of the disease and the accumulation of the artery in him.
And carefully consider the wound, and therefore if there remains on the bone any cause of the skull, then incise this so that no apostema appears.
And carefully strengthen the wound with poultices and bandages of linen cloth, and carefully cure that with compresses until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the Extraction of the Arteries which are in the Temples.
When an old emigration or catarrh occurs in the temples, due to humidities and qualities of the lacertae, or an old violent and similar condition to those, and it is medicated by the methods of cure with medicine, but does not respond, then we have resolved on these diseases to extract the arteries in the temples, or cauterize them as we have shown.
And the method of the operation and extraction is that the patient scratches the skin where they are in the temples; and understand that the artery appears in the temple because it is shown to you by its pulsation, and is hidden from almost no one except for a few individuals due to the intensity of the pulse.
And if it is hidden from you, then the neck of the patient should be strengthened with some cloth; and carefully palpate the location with a rough cloth or evaporate the location with warm water until the artery appears to you in its full manifestation. And then take the spatula of which this is the form: And then carefully score the skull with that spatula, making it easy for you to reach the artery; and carefully cut into it on one side and extract that from the upper parts until you extract that from the skull and discover those tunics which are below it, from all sides.
But if the artery is slender, then carefully envelop it with the extremity of the oncus, and cut into that one side according to the quantity by which the extremities of it are lengthened and contracted, and do not let there be a flow of blood, for if they are not incised, the blood will not rise at all.
And carefully evacuate about one ounce of blood. within three.
And if the artery is large, then carefully divide it into two parts with a double fold of caede or with strings to a length, and do not allow the putrefaction to occur before the consolidation of the wound and the flow of blood.
And carefully cut away the excess which is between two bandages; and do this at that hour or approximately another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize that with a cauterizer into the bone with a cutlery-like cauterizer until the extremities of it are incised and remain in the location of that middle work.
And it is better work if the patient has fever or is of scorched complexion; for cauterization is one of those causes that help to dry up the humidity, and therefore it is better in this case.
And it is necessary to carefully extract the arteries that fill the old wound, and be paused over the powder decently made, and be cured with dry medicines that make the flesh appear and with some other remedies until it is healed.
And if while you are working on another occasion the blood flow from the artery occurs again, then you should stop that blood flow, or with a cauterizer, or by filling the old wound, and strengthen your hand until the blood is stopped. And if any of these causes are not present to you, then pause your hand over the location until the blood is congealed, and envelop the location with warm water of vehement coldness until the sharpness subsides, and be strengthened according to what is necessary.
And what is easier in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cauterizer having two coats, since you have marked the two locations with a tent, and deposit each one, hot and burning, until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities of it may be lengthened, because they are not completely consolidated by this cauterization.
And this is the form of the cauterizer:
And the sharpness of the two coats is an example. But however if there is less sharpness than two coats are better, for if they are as sharp as two coats, near each other, and do not cut the flesh with velocity.
Therefore, when in those there is some thickness, the heat of the fire is held in them and the flesh is cut off gradually.
And this work is better than all other works and easier.
And the space which is between two coats is the quantity of the thickness of the said.
Chapter IV.
On the Cure of Eyes with Sharp and Acid Tears.
When the tears are acid and it is the body of those veins which are above the forehead of the head, and do not respond to any cause of medicine, and the face of the patient becomes reddened and feels a wandering movement as if ants were marching, and the eyes of that person are exhausted, damp, and so dry that their eyelids are condensed, and the eyelids are scalded by the acidity of the tears, the old mixture of herbs in the cure of those from this operation, and name that cure with a spatula.
And it is that you command the patient to scratch the skin which is on his forehead, and carefully incise in the forehead three cuts equally distant according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the cut is two fingers' breadth: one cut should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little movement of the lacertae which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
And beware of the incision of the arteries which are in both sides, and stretch your hand from the continuation of both jawbones. And if the space of each incision is equal to three fingers' breadth.
And if you have a sponge or cloths which are dry and rough, with which to absorb the blood.
And carefully insert the spatula of two sharp extremities, the form of which is the incision of it: which is from the part of the temples to the second incision. Excise all the flesh which is between two incisions on the skull which is above the bone, and carefully do this from the first incision to the second. And carefully place this spatula and enter into the first incision once again with another instrument which is called a cutlary, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And pause the lateral part of that sharp instrument on the flesh attached to the bone, and the lateral part of it will enter into the bone, and bring that forward until it reaches the middle fissure, and cut away all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes.
But it is necessary to continue the incision up to that point of the bone, and carefully do this in the middle fissure until the other fissure.
And when there is a quantity of blood equal to that, express the places of the cloths which have been saturated with congealed blood.
And carefully pause in each fissure the old wound, and pause over those powder-like substances soaked in wine, oil, and vinegar, so that there will be no putrid apostema.
And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer great abundance of warm water or tea, and carefully cure with compresses made from basil, rose oil, and other remedies until the wounds are healed.
Chapter V.
On the Cure of Tears by Cataracts and those that descend from the parts behind the head.
When some sharp and continued cataracts occur, and the patient's eyes are exhausted, small, and their regard is weakened, and the palpebral conjunctivae are ulcerated and the eyelids are dry, and in the forehead of the head there is a sharp pain and subsequent exhaustion, then you should know by these accidents that the matters and cataracts come from many veins of the parts behind proceeding.
And the best cure in these cases is this: you command the patient to scratch his forehead, and carefully incise a cut at the middle of the forehead, a little distance from the lateral (beginning with the left temple and going to the right temple; and the incision goes into the bone; and stretch your hand over the lacertae of the temples which are above the mastigatio), until the bone is exposed.
Excise all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth, and carefully fill between the two lips of the wound with old wound dressings or cloths. And carefully place above on those powder-like substances soaked in wine and oil, so that there will be no putrid apostema.
And when you have removed that and see that the apostema is already diminished, then carefully make the bone warm by applying heat to it until the flesh begins to appear, and carefully cure with an emplasting regiment which will make the flesh appear, just as if you were to take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and from that make a poultice and administer it to these wounds at the natural birthplace of the flesh.
Chapter VI.
On the Cure of what occurs in the Ears.
All the causes that occur in the ears are of four species, for one is mineral or similar to mineral, such as iron and vermilion, or it is of plant origin, such as cypress or fava, or it is fluxible cause, such as water and vinegar, or its likeness, or some animal.
And therefore, when mineral or similar cause occurs in the ear, or another cause that does not adjust or believe in the ear, and pause the ear at the sun, and if the mineral is sometimes present, then you should distill into it some cause of violet oil or sambucus, and carefully administer the extraction of it, and make the stornutation occur with conditions, and oppose the nose to the event of stornutation. And carefully place some cloths or woolen strips around the ear canal, and stretch the ear upwards to the upper parts, because many times it is forgotten about these causes.
And if it is not gotten, then you should administer the extraction of it with the instrument called "epicicario" which is subtle and has this form:
And if it is forgotten about the instrument, then it is good; and otherwise, you should administer the extraction of it with a subtle oncus of gentle doubling.
And therefore, if it is not forgotten about this, then you should make a tube of iron and insert the tip of the tube into the ear canal and close around the tube with wax and softened oil, so that only the tube remains. And carefully extract the air from the tube with strong attraction, because many times, as we have recounted, such cases occur.
But if it is not forgotten in this manner, then you should take of hawthorn illuminated or of vine with its leaves which have been prepared so that birds eat a small quantity, and place that on the tip of the ray, and carefully envelop around that wound decently placed. And carefully insert that into the ear canal with ease, and carefully dry out the ear from the moisture.
And therefore, if it is not forgotten about all the causes which we have recounted, then you should carefully cut away that before it becomes a putrid apostema or convulsion.
And the method of cutting away that is to first bleed the patient from the saphenous vein and extract the blood according to the virtue of it, and carefully make that cease between your hands and convert the ear to the upper parts, and then make a small incision in the root of the ear above the grey hair. And the incision should be of a lunar shape until it reaches the bone, and when the bone is blackened, you can stop that if possible with suitable instruments; and carefully close the incision at that hour with speed, and cure that until it is healed.
And if the cause occurs in the ear is one of the fat things that are swollen and inflamed, then you should administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your instructions, then you should take a spatula made of tin or silver, shaped like this: and administer with that the excision of that fat thing which has fallen into the ear.
And do not make that incision when you think that the fat thing has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, and pause that in many pieces, and carefully extract from those with onces or with subtle gestures, or with incisions as we have said, because it is alleviated the extraction of it.
But in the water which has entered the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use stornutation with conditions at the beginning, and fill his own ear with a little old wax, and place a small amount of that on top of the ear where the water is, and if it is forgotten, good; otherwise, you should take many iron pyrites and lemons according to the length of the finger, and heat those in the fire for a while, and the patient should insert one of those into the canal of his own ear and strike upon one piece of that part and pound with another pyrite on the pyrite which is inside the ear. Therefore, do not cease this treatment with iron until all the water is forgotten.
Therefore, do not cease this treatment with iron until all the water is forgotten. And already the water will be forgotten in such a way that you take a piece of paper or of cloth, I, I, I. and place one end of it into the ear and extend the other end in the fire until the wick of it is consumed.
and carefully place another cloth and make this many times until all the water is forgotten, and insert that with a tube as we have said before regarding the extracting iron.
But in the extraction of the beast that enters into that ear, if it is small and similar to a worm, then cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great size, which causes appear to the sense of feeling, then you should administer the extraction of it with gestures and onces, and the cause of it is more easily removed than all the other causes that occur in the ear.
But in the extraction of the worm generated in the ear, when you cure it with what we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations, and your cure does not take effect, then it is necessary that you look at the ear to the sun.
And therefore, if any cause of worms appears here, then you should extract it with gestures or subtle onces; but if no cause appears, then you should take a tube made of reed and above amplified, which has this form: And insert the subtle end into the ear according to the quantity which the patient can tolerate; and carefully suck out with it a strong suction, and do this many times, until all the worms are forgotten.
But if it does not obey your instructions, then you should apply and close the circuit of the tube with wax as we have said; and administer distillations which the ancients have already proven in the cure of worms, and find this in the treatise on distillations.
And your effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, which has this form: And make it of silver or of lead, reed-like, with a small channel and a plate on top.
And therefore, as you enter what is in the conquest of the tube, here where it will be necessary. And if you wish, take the thread and wrap it around the end of it decently, and carefully pour oil into the concavity of the ascending part, or juice from some herb, or whatever you like of these medicines in the tube - and that is in the ear -, and carefully insert the thread with a cut above and express with your hand that on compressing temperately until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the ascending part and the patient feels the oil going out.
And what has been inserted into the ear is already burned with a small fire. And beware that the cause which you will distill in the ear is not too strong, for the ear medicines do not tolerate this.
Chapter VII.
On the Cure of Ear Blockage.
Sometimes children are born with unperforated ear vents from their mothers' wombs, and this already happens to some men, blockage in the meat of the ear due to wound or flesh not being there; and sometimes this blockage occurs in the front of the ear canal which does not allow for feeling, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
And that which occurs in the front of it, which does not comprehend the feeling, is in the greatest difficulties for difficult healing.
And in that which comprehends the feeling, it is necessary that you expose the patient's ear to the sun and look at it. And therefore, if there is apparent swelling, open that with a subtle spatula which has this form:
If the end of it has a small width, in which one part is acute and the other is not; and the spatula is two fingers wide to avoid causing injury to the ear.
And therefore, if the blockage is due to flesh born in the ear or in the canal of it, then you should cut away that with subtle onces and incise it with a violent facility until all the flesh is removed.
And if the blockage is in the front of the ear, then you should take a subtle thread made of lemon and heat it with fire for a while, and carefully insert that into the canal of the ear.
And therefore, if you have sensed swelling with the patient's discomfort and ease, due to gravity of sound, force the oppression of it with ease; and beware that you do not harm the nerves of the ear.
And carefully place in the ear a cloth soaked with linen according to the quantity of the width of the canal which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for some days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take vinegar and dip that into water and powder it on top and use it; and if the ear has already become apostematous, then you should extract the vinegar and replace it with another vinegar which you have wrapped in cerote made with rose oil, until the apostema is cooled; and carefully cure that until it is healed.
But if bleeding occurs, then you should submerge a sponge or cloth in hot water and place it on the ear, and use another cure which restricts the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillations.
Chapter VIII.
On the Cure of Athazil, which infects the eyelids.
Athazils which infect the eyelids of some people are sometimes humid, and at other times dry.
Therefore, it is necessary that you take those with tendrils or onces, and cut them with an instrument of the same kind as their roots, and carefully place them on the spots as if pressed.
But if pain with bleeding occurs, then you should cauterize those with a lunar cautery, subtle and precise.
And the best cauterization is to make incisions and multiple times return when there remains some cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are consumed and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Cure of Grandessia which occurs in the eyelids of people.
Many times it occurs in the eyelids of people some cause which is similar to Grandessia in its strength and hardness, and therefore Grandessia is called.
And it is an aggregation of great moisture in the eyelid above and below.
Therefore, the operation in them is that you should consider whether the Grandessia is coming from above in what appears to be from the eyelid and spreading to all parts; and the cause of it is light.
Therefore, make an incision in that with a fissure by the width, and carefully cut away all parts with ease, and then suspend it with onces and dissect it.
And if the figure is large, then you should adjust it with a suture; and cure that until it is healed.
And if it is small, then you will not suffer harm from it because the medicine of it restores that and makes it flesh.
And if the Grandessia is declining to the outer parts of the eyelid, then you should remove the surface outwardly, and carefully lift the eyelid and suspend the Grandessia with onces, unless you are forced to make an incision; and press that part thoroughly, and if the eyelid becomes elongated through incision, this will not help in any cause.
And carefully wash the eyes with salted water; and cure the spot with that which becomes flesh until it is healed.
Chapter X.
On the Cure of Axirnach in the upper eyelid of the eye.
Axirnach is a greyish substance which is generated in the tunic of the upper eyelid, and more often affects children, aggravates their eyes, and causes their pupils to become constricted; and they are unable to gaze at the brightness of the sun because tears are shed upon them.
And therefore you should wet their faces with tears all the time, and upon their faces they sleep; and so on the eyelids of theirs above, there are moistened cilia, which have already been covered by inflammation, and apparent danger is in the eye; and when you press the spot with those same drops, you will cause the swelling to go away.
And some manner of operation is in that which the patient places his own head on a certain spot, and carefully places a cloth made from linen and water, and makes a circle according to the quantity which contains Axirnach from all parts; and carefully places that upon it and presses with the same drops throughout so that swelling occurs in the middle of the circle; and carefully ends in the middle of that humidity with a spatula incised by a fissure for width, and the fissure is not greater than the one made in flaubotomia.
But in the front it is necessary that you cut through the cord entirely until you reach Axirnach, because in the most difficult processes Axirnach proceeds by fissure according to the form of white gravel.
Therefore, extract that with cloths which you have wrapped between the same drops to the outer parts and turn it between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
And beware that you do not adjust in the fissure because with the spatula you will not reach the eye and you will cause it to be lost.
But if there is no Axirnach at the beginning of the fissure, then adjust in the fissure a little with facility until Axirnach processes; and carefully extract that as we have said; and carefully submerge cloths made from linen in water and vinegar and place them on the spot and strengthen those with powders.
And so, some that are salted place it in the concavity of the fissure because this which remains from that humidity.
And carefully cure that until it is healed.
But if an apostema occurs in the spot, then carefully cure that with compresses which cool down until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
On Manner of Touching the Eye.
When in the eyelids of people there are found by adjustment, the natural hairs and so become old, then those eyes are not suitable for the eye and cause a method of maladies such as continuous tears and softening of eyelids and skin, until that is the cause of destruction of the eye which is called touching the eye, and cure it in four ways: or by cauterization with fire; or with acute medicine according to what is said before in the chapter on cauterization; or it is made to touch by incision and suture; or by canals as I will say.
And therefore it is necessary that you place the patient's head in the correct position; carefully convert the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is converted, be careful; and if not, insert an awl into that which has a thread from the more distant part of the eyelid, and make the awl penetrate through the thread above, and so - next to the edge of the eyelid where there are hairs - next to the hairs, and pull the thread up to the parts above with the eyelid, and convert it with the ray.
And carefully end in the outer part of the eyelid behind the hairs with a spatula incised for the lacrimal major into the lacrimal gland; and carefully extract the thread and place it behind the eyelid with small powder or cloth, and carefully sew on the eyelid with a needle, and be like that as a figure of myrtle's leaf.
But however it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, because this already varies among men, because some of them require a great amount to be incised from the eyelid according to the quantity by which the eyelid is softened.
And carefully end with the spatula on the two lines which you have sewn, and begin from the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor. And if your fissure is next to the natural hairs like it is the greatest thickness of the king.
And carefully place the onyx in one of the two angles of the cord, and carefully remove it all, and carefully adjust with the sutura the two lips with a subtle thread or wool, and wash away the blood, and make what is superfluous from the threads to stick to the eyelids with some causes that are visible, if you wish to do so, and if not, do not cure.
And carefully loosen the sutura of the threads within three or four days, and carefully cure that.
And if you wish, leave the wound without suturing and cure it with what dries up and constrains, because the eyelid is elevated due to the sealing of the wound and the aggregation of pus; but suturing is better. And so thus say our ancient ones who practiced touching.
But meanwhile in him there was solicitude about the patient, and it was of good operation, and not in him fear.
And there is another manner of touching, and it is that you sew on the eyelid a figure like a myrtle leaf, and carefully elevate the eyelid with three threads separated and gathered according to this form:
But if it is not possible to take the threads, and this is not equated, then carefully take an awl with thread and place that in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread next to the lacrimal major, and the second thread next to the lacrimal minor, and adjust between the same drops the threads with equality, and carefully elevate all the cord on which is sewn as we have recounted.
And carefully adjust the two lips of the wound with a suture, and cure that until it is healed.
But if an apostema occurs due to your incision or your fissure, then carefully dress that apostema with cerote and lint, and cover it with powders.
And sometimes it happens that the eyelid is converted into its own hairs, then it is necessary to use on it what we have said about incision; but suture in each case is more artificial.
Taxinating with canals is according to this form: and it is that you convert the eyelid and divide the figure which is outside according to what I have recounted; and carefully, by art, make two canals or two subtle astels of which the length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width of theirs is smaller than the width of the spatula. And you have already incised at the extremities of each partition, where you have the threads.
And carefully add each one with subtlety over what superfluously remains of the eyelid of the eye, and tighten the canals of each partition with a strong stricture, and leave it for some days, because the cord will die and become denuded and will settle in as it will naturally fall.
But if it is delayed, then carefully cut the thread with scissors, and carefully cure the wound until it is healed.
Therefore, when it has hardened, the eyelid is elevated and the hairs do not sting.
And this is the form of two canals which you will make according to this form: and has the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter XII.
On the Elevation of Stinging Hairs in the Eye with an Awl when the Hair is Hard.
When the hairs are unnatural, hard, rough, and stinging the eyes, then the operation in that is that you take a subtle awl and place it in that subtle thread of cedarn or lemon, and carefully adjust the extremities of it and notice each one in a manner very subtle. And the length of the threads should be of the quantity of a palm.
And carefully compose another subtle thread below it in brief, and bind the extremities of that if you wish.
And carefully place the patient's head in the correct position, and be next to the sun so that your work is declared, for it is a subtle and minute operation.
And carefully insert the awl into the root of the adjusted hair which has required engineering, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly until you extract that above the natural hair.
And carefully pull out the hair above and insert it into the socket, and let the hairs be one or two or three and no more.
And carefully pull your hand with it until the hair is outside the socket in the eyelid with the natural hair.
But if it is attracted to the socket and not pulled out the hair, you will pull the socket towards the parts below with the thread which you have composed in that, until it becomes extracted from above the brow.
And leave it with the vision of the eye, because you will extract the socket and the thread, and each one will be closed and tightened the eye, and leave the closure for two or three days, until the hair sticks to its place and grows over that good flesh.
And if the hair is too short, then you will adjust a long hair from the natural hairs, and it will be elevated with that, or let it settle until it becomes stretched to some space, and then you will elevate that.
Chapter XIII.
On the Cure for the Condition which appears on the Eyelid above.
When it appears on the eye as ehacratir, and it is contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted in its own direction, or to the right or left side, due to bad consolidation of wound or section or cauterization, and it is called leporina, and this ehacratir either is natural or accidental, and is caused by consolidation of wound or sections or cauterizations, or by resemblance to their maladies.
The manner of the operation in that is that you cut open that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place it in what is between them a piece of linen cloth, and tie those together until they are healed.
And it is not necessary that you use a cure for that from the causes which dry out and constrict; because if you do so, it will return to ehacratir even worse than before there was no time at all.
Use in that a remedy which softens, such as fenugreek, and soak it in the water in which are cooked high and full of seeds, or emblument oil, which is liquefied with some of the oils, and submerge the cloth in that, and cure with that.
And the treasure of your remedy is that you pierce all that which is not consolidated according to the form that was at the beginning.
And this operation which we have said, is nothing but some correction of ehacratir that does not return to its original form as it was before.
Chapter XIV.
On the Cure for Ehacratir which is made in the Eyelid below.
This ehacratir which is made in the Eyelid below, which is truly called vertadierament ehacratir; and it is of him some natural, other accidental.
But accidental is made by wound or section or cauterization or by other likenesses.
And the way of the operation in that is that you take an awl with a double thread, and place it in the flesh, and make it pass from the lacrimal gland on the left side to the lacrimal gland on the right side, until the thread reaches both extremities of the flesh.
And carefully extend the flesh to the upper parts with the awl and cut it with the awl, and incise with a spatula wide. And therefore if the figure of the eyelid returns to its proper shape, it is good; and otherwise, take the thread and place it in the cleft figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and make the two fissures on the side of the lower eyelid.
And the extremities of the two fissures are at two angles of the incision, which you have made so that they converge, and it is to be done with their own natural angle, so that when they come together, a figure is formed from them.
And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
And carefully cut off the flesh to the quantity that is the width of the lacrimal gland below, which marks the eyelid.
And carefully adjust the separated parts and sew them with a thread of wool; and carefully cure those with what we have said about softening medicines and poultices until they are healed.
And if ehacratir occurs due to a fissure or suture or cauterization, then it is necessary that you cut with a flat incision on the hairs of the eyelid according to what has been previously mentioned. And carefully separate with a poultice between two lips according to what we have said.
In the summary of the sermon on the cure for ehacratir when it is above or below, that which occurs in that operation, according to what has been prepared in the form of ehacratir, and that is in the form of diverse varieties.
And the skilled artisans prepare skillfully in every possible way that is possible to them, so that they may return the figure to its natural form, or almost to that, and that patient according to what is convenient for him, regarding the operation and the instruments in the best dispositions.
Chapter XV.
On the Adhesion of the Eyelid to the Conjunctiva or to the Cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in many men, it is solidified on top of the eyelid as if it were a film, and prohibited from the ease of movement and its natural works, therefore it is necessary that you intervene at the extremity of the ray below the eyelid, and lift it up or extend it with an instrument.
And carefully incise the adhesion with a subtle spatula, which is not sharp like the incisions, having obtuse edges a little bit so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and remove the spatula so as not to injure the eye with its sharpness.
And be the incision which carefully separates that adhesion with facility, so that the eyelid is returned to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
And carefully put in the eye salted water with which you wash; or distill on it dissolved zinc in water.
And carefully separate between the eyelid and the eye with a poultice of lint, and place it over the eye wool infused in the albumen of egg, and carefully use for three days causes that consolidate until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the Incision of the Nail and Eminence of Flesh of the Lacrimals.
Know that the nail is according to two manners, for either it is nervous, and resembles a hard and subtle cypress; or it is non-nervous, resembling white congealed moisture, which when iron touches it, or takes hold of the onychium, is abscinded and the onychium is not fixed in place.
And both species do not begin until the lacrimal major, and gradually become smaller as they cover the eye and prohibit light and movement of the eye.
But the manner of working in this incision is that the patient places his head in the correct position, and carefully opens the eyes, elevates the eyelid with his hand, and carefully collects the nail with an onychium of slight duplication and extends it to the upper parts. And carefully take an awl and insert into it a horse, ox, or cow hair, or something similar, or a strong thread, and duplicate the extremity of the awl little by little and place it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the awl, and tie with thread the nail; and extend it to the upper parts, and excise on one side of the nail what is seen as the pupil. And thus you follow that with the hair until the end of it.
And carefully incise the remnant in the root of the lacrimal with a subtle spatula or small forceps, and loosen the natural flesh of the lacrimal so that through the incision there is not a continuous flow of tears.
And in some cases the nail with the sole onychium extended or with thread, just as we have said, and carefully excised with a lion's spatula of which this is its form:
And be careful not to touch the corneal tunic with the spatula, lest you cause a rupture and perforate the pupil.
And carefully place the incision in the eye a little salt powder or made from sinew, and let it sit for another day; and carefully cure that with water as needed until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the awl, nor is it fixed in that place the onychium, then many times this species of nail is cured with medicines, and is healed just as I have said and recounted in the division.
And if you want to incise that, then you will work on the patient's eye and take a subtle spatula of lion's fur with keen edges according to this form: with subtlety. And if at times it is rarefied and is confused and enters into that root, then you will distill from your own eye with sinew or with rosy cheeks or with salt powder, and apply the eye to another day.
And carefully iterate over that the operation until all that is of it is removed, except for the opposite apostema which is in the eye, because then you will leave it and cure the apostema from the beginning until it is healed.
And carefully iterate your operation over that with reason until it is healed.
The eminence of the lacrimal flesh, if noticed in the eye with great harm, should be suspended with onychium; and incise that from one part, and do not finish the incision so as not to cause a flow of tears.
And carefully distill into the lacrimal rose-colored and made from sinew, until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the Incision of Algae and Water that is born from flesh adjusted in the Eye.
Some times in the eyes of some people is born red flesh, and it is superimposed to cover the pupil, or approaches or stretches over the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids at the outer parts and is assembled like a rose bush.
But the operation in this case is that the patient places his head in the correct position; and carefully opens the eyes of that and collects all that flesh with onychium convenient for water, and takes water with a forceps or a basket; and carefully incises the flesh from the beginning until everything is finished with the instrument, and be careful not to injure the eye which might lead to your operation.
And be the incision with which you cut those or with the spatula which we have recounted in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps with which it is gathered according to the form that will come forth at this chapter.
And so when your incision is completed and all that flesh is removed, then fill the eye with salt powder, or distill into it red powder similar to those medicines corrosive, and place over the eye a cloth made from albumen of egg, until you are assured of apostema cautious.
And if there remains some cause of algae and is carefully removed cautious, and you fear apostema cautious, then leave the eye and cure that apostema with water which will cause that apostema to heal, and carefully iterate over it with operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the adjusted flesh which occurs in the eye of this species.
But always keep in mind that you must alienate all cure of the eye from natural or accidental means, working with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member is sufficient for that operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On the Collection of Scales in the Eye.
Scales which come red and are rough on the eye and prevent the veament from performing its operation, and unfold the eye along with days.
Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the eye in which scales are present is strong and there is no other disease besides scales, then you will collect those scales.
And it is that you command the patient to place his head in the correct position, and carefully suspend those veins with one or two according to your prudence; and be that one thread of subtle duplication according to this form:
or two threads gradually in one case according to this form:
And carefully collect those veins with subtle forces, with subtlety, and wipe away the blood hour by hour, until you see those veins being removed from the eye and turned back.
And be careful that you do not injure the eye with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is in the middle of the day before the sun, and be very firm in your operation so as to cut only those veins.
And when you have completed, then you will distill into the eye green or red liquid so that with its keenness it may dissolve the water that is removed from the scales.
But if this water is not possible for you to collect at that hour, then gather everything in that hour and carefully apply all the water that relieves the pain of it, and leave it for some days until the pain of it is soothed and you are assured of cautious apostema.
And carefully iterate over it according to the same manner, until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Chapter XIX.
On the Reduction of Rhinorrhea to the Nose.
When you cure a rhinorrhea with cauterization or acute medicine, and it is not healed as previously described, then do not intervene in it, but rather cut over the apostema of that maturity, and extract all the moisture which is in it and pour it into until the bone is revealed.
And therefore when the bone is revealed and corruption or blackness appears in it, then you will scrape it with an instrument whose form is:
And it is called "Aspercap", and is made of iron, and has a red head like an ash, which is pointed with a fine point by lime or alkali for a subtle point (like in the following form).
And place that on the corrupted spot of the bone, and carefully rotate it between the said digits, and press your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is removed.
And this should be done several times, and carefully restore the spot with drying and astringent causes.
Therefore if the spot is consolidated and good flesh has grown in it, and the purulent abscess has been removed and remains for 40 days without being renewed or becoming apostematous, nor does any accident occur in it, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then do not intervene in it, but rather reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you uncover from below with iron or acute medicine, and when the bone is uncovered, then you take a thread according to this form:
Be the extremity of the iron triangular, and the handle of it first reduced to the extremity in that way as if times were thus.
And carefully place that over the bone, and it should be that prop of the lacrimal; and stretch your hand a little from the eye, and carefully turn your hand with the thread until it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the patient by finding air to come out so when you put your hand.
Therefore carefully restore the spot with drying and astringent medicines as if it were well taken care of.
Therefore when the flesh and the spot are hardened, then the material which flows to the outer parts returns to the nose, therefore this is less troublesome for the patient.
Chapter XX.
On the Reduction of the Eminence of the Eye.
When the eye protrudes in its entirety and there is no accident or diminution in the veament, then you must loosen the patient, and carefully follow, and carefully pause for breathing exercises without scarification and sucking for good suction; and carefully place a poultice on the eye made of acacia and aloe and onions and sarcocolla, and carefully strengthen the emplaustre on the eye with many powders.
And the manner of the powders is that you take cloths of lion's mane many times, and each cloth be doubled into four folds; and make from those many.
And carefully place one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye requires. And carefully strengthen on top of those with a strong cloth, and iterate the suction without scarification; and carefully stop the suction and leave the eye tightly wrapped day and night.
But if the ligament is softened in the meantime, then you must make it very tight.
And carefully stop the ligament tightly day and night just as we have said.
And if the eye is already reduced, good; and if not, then carefully repeat the poultice with the powders and stricture and suction until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the Incision of the Eminence of the Uveal Tunic.
When there is a disruption in the uveal tunic, and it is elevated and proceeds forth from the eyelids like a grain of rice, and its form resembles that of a human being by this, and you want to incise it, then the operation on it is as we have recounted, which you will insert the awl into the root of the uvea at the lower part and leave the upper part above, and carefully place another awl in the double thread part from the lacrimal side, and make that penetrate and leave the first awl according to its disposition; and carefully incise the location of the double thread and lift with it the part of the uvea into the circuit of the awl, and strengthen that motion.
And carefully extract the awl and place it on the eye lanolin infused in egg white, and leave it until the thread falls onto the grape.
And carefully cure the eye with water that comforts it until the wound is healed.
And some times gather all parts together with a circle of cloth into the eye adjusted to great prominence, and carefully be perforated by the subtle spatula that comes to the edge of the eye, and flow the humoral fluid albuginea, and descend the eye and enter soon.
And carefully strengthen until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the Cure of Alcunati.
This disease which is called alcunati is nothing but pus which is adjusted in the eye similar to water descending and it is not that.
But the manner of working on it is that you make the patient sit over a prepared and straight seat, and carefully take their head in your hands from two parts and make them look until you see the pus coming to the outer parts, and carefully be dried and not descend, and stop the light, and the patient sees the causes just as they saw.
And if it does not descend below, you will know that it is water.
But if the descent of the pus is not prepared with water as we have said, then you will make the patient sit between your hands and carefully take a subtle spatula and find that spot on the panniculus cerning a small part of the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunic in the crown (into the location that is seen), until the pus is forgotten.
Therefore when it is forgotten, then you will distill into the eye cold water in which you have mixed honey and water in which fenugreek and honey have been boiled.
And carefully be cured with other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On the Cure of the Water Descending from the Eye.
We have already said the types of water in the division and which are suitable to be poured into a sermon declaring it, therefore you will do that according to health.
Therefore you must make the patient sit between your hands on a carpet and bind their own eye tightly.
And carefully place your left hand near the eyelid of their own eye, if the eye in which the water is located is the left one; or with your right hand, if it is the right one.
And carefully take almond with your right hand if the eye is left; or with your left hand if it is right.
And carefully place the tip of the almond close to the crown by the thickness of the ray in the album of the eye from the smaller lacrimal part, and carefully anoint the almond with virtue and rotate your hand with it.
And carefully penetrate into the album of the eye and feel that the almond has already reached the visible cause.
And carefully measure the path of the almond to the point where it measures the space which is from the pupil to the end of the darkness, and it is the crown of the eye; because you will see with that pupil through the vision of the eye by the clarity of the corneal tunic.
And carefully place the almond into the location where the water is, and carefully bring it down once or twice, and therefore if the water descends soon, then you will see the patient's eyesight improved over that which they previously had, and the almond in their own eye.
And carefully pause for a moment; therefore if the water has descended, then you will pause that other time before the almond is released.
And therefore when it is dried and does not descend, then you will carefully extract the almond with ease, and slowly rotate your hand with it, and carefully dissolve a small amount of clear gemstone salt in that water, and wash the eye outward; and carefully pause outside the eye cut or stoppered or lanolin infused in rose oil and egg white, and bind with water the patient's own eye.
But we are those of our time who pause over that which is triflingly mixed with egg white.
And if it does not obey your almond at the entrance of the eye due to its hardness - for it is one of the men whose eye is very hard -, then you must take the spatula which is called "alberid" and has this form:
And therefore pierce through with that spatula the conjuncture, and do not leave your hand in the hole, and it is only if you make a way for the almond to reach its subtle location.
And carefully introduce the almond according to what we have said.
And you must complete your work, and be prepared for the patient's sleep, a gentle descent made in the location where they will lie on their back in a dark room, and it is prohibited from all movements.
And pause in the nature of that water so that its nature may be aligned, and not move their head to either side at all.
And let the ligature remain according to its disposition for three days.
And carefully remove that in a more dark and obscure manner, and expose the hidden vision, and make them see some causes, and then return to the ligature on the seventh day.
And it is not necessary to do this at the time of the remedies or soon after the infusion. They had need that you would allay this by reason that the water flows more slowly through great and vehement observation.
But if an apostema occurs, then you must remove the eye before the seventh day, and correct that with water which brings forth the apostema.
Therefore you must absolve the vision of him and pause over his face, as if he were being governed by something dark for some days, existing in the most obscure.
And carefully be taken away from that great darkness gradually and converted into its causes.
And know that in some cases, the disciple is not exempt from vision a few times, and therefore you should be bold in your operation.
And it has already been achieved by some of those who are in Atach, and someone said that made a fire in the Ayrac, a great perforation at which the water was sucked.
But however, you do not see this done in our land, which has perfected this water, nor do you read about it in some of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of magdans by which one can be above those who ignore these:
And they were made of iron or bronze properly, and they had the extreme points of their own shape and this subtlety triangularly, the sharp point just as it is the form.
Chapter XXIV.
On the Cure of Carnage in the Nose.
When in the nose there are born various skins which are adjusted to some cause which is assembled to the tail of a scorpion or a polygamous pes; and this disease is called polypus because it resembles that represented by the shape of those pes. And from it comes a cancerous flesh, blackened and of dark color; and from it also comes the flesh of a lion, not of dark color.
Therefore in that which is in these lion-like skins that are not fraudulent or cancerous, you must make the patient sit between your hands and place them in the sun, and anoint their nose with it, and pierce once into those skins. And carefully extract that from the outer parts, and carefully incise into it with a sharp and subtle spatula from one side until you know that all the flesh has been removed; if there remains any cause by which ablation is possible, then you must ratify this with one of the subtle instruments with ease so that no cause remains in him. But if it bleeds or an apostema occurs cautiously, then you must pause in that which is necessary; or if it is one of the malignant apostemas, then you must cut and cauterize that until the blood is stopped and all the cavities are removed.
And carefully be taken away from the nose, carefully by the incision, with water or vinegar. But if the nose is dry and from it proceeds humidity into the palate, then you must know that it is already healed.
But if the humidity does not penetrate according to what is necessary, then you must know that behind it there is flesh growing in the pustules of the nose, which are above the bones and have not been removed by ablation.
Therefore it is necessary that you enter faithfully into the one who has some grossness, and annoy him in his own words, and pause between each phrase the quantity of the said or less, and generate the patient and enter one extremity of the thread into the nose with the ray or other cause which is possible to him.
And since this will have been done, that he will draw his own odor into being so that it will reach the canals of the nose and be seated on his golayro, for many times children are taught at school to do this, and it is a light cause for one who wishes to do so.
And carefully pause the two extremities of the thread, one extremity that will come out over the nose and the other that will remain in the nose, and carefully administer a serration of flesh with the threads that are in the thread, and do this until you know that the flesh is already threaded.
And carefully extract the thread, and pause in the nose about an inch from the abstraction of the blood a quarter of an inch, and do this for three days or more until the engendered flesh is completely consumed all that remains of the flesh.
And carefully pause in the nose at the end of the cause, with a leaden cannula for several days until it is healed.
But if you need further cure that exists, use this one.
And this is the form of the instrument, the capipurge maker, with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
And make this of silver or bronze, which is similar to a small opened lamp, just like a small shell, and the mouth similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed cannula like a reed, and the cannula of the instrument, the capipurge maker, be flat and uncovered; to which is attached at the end, with which you will hold it when you squeeze out in oil or water whatever juice or causes are suitable.
Chapter XXV.
On the Natures of Warts in the Extremities of the Nose.
Many times is born a warty growth on the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and increased in some days until one can see the regard of it.
And therefore you must incise that in the beginning of its appearance, and root out all of it. And carefully pause over the spot or cauterize or medicine which is present in that place.
But if it is delayed in its incision, so that it becomes magnified, then you must consider whether it is hardened, dark-colored and lacking sensation; then do not touch it with iron because it is a cancerous apostema; for many times the one who incises this apostema will develop great malice towards him whom it had affected.
And if the apostema is of a lion-like touch and not dark-colored, and sometimes incision is possible in all that, then you must evacuate the patient and incise that without fear, and cure the spot with what exists and constrains until it is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On the Suturing of the Nose and Lips and Ears when Continuity is Dissolved by Plague or Similarities.
Know that when dissolution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, few confer in that operation except with some men.
Therefore, when you need to deal with some cause of those, consider whether it is fresh plague with the patient's blood, and then you must adjust the two lips of the wound with sutures, and carefully cure that until it is healed.
And if the lips of dissolution of continuity are already separated, and each is made whole, then you must carefully excise each part of its visible cord until blood comes out. And carefully adjust the two lips with sutures and strengthen those, and over those sprinkle blood of dragon and thrice-trissed, and pause over the powder one day, or some other consolidative plaster, and bind that wrapped for two days or three, and carefully remove that and replace it with another plaster and bind that until the faithful ones are ablated, and carefully cure with engenderment until it is healed.
But the manner of suturing is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles just as we have recounted in the suturing of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with thread just as to your own and make it known.
Chapter XXVII.
On the Extraction of those Causes that come in the two lips in the parts behind.
Many times it happens that some men in the parts behind their lips have certain hard and similar-looking apostemas resembling errors, and some of theirs are smaller and some are greater.
Therefore, you must convert the lips and fissures each of those hardness from all part, and carefully fill the wound with sagacious triple thread until the blood is restrained, and carefully wash it with vinegar and cure the wound with water that is stipticized, until it is healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the Incision of the Flesh Adjusted in the Gums.
Great many times, nay, over the gummed flesh which the ancients called albulus, then it is necessary that you suspend that with once or that you hold that with the forceps and incise that as the reason requires, and let the wound bleed or run with blood.
And carefully pause over the spot with sagacious triple thread or other powders stipticized or excitatory.
And if that flesh returns, then you must incise it secondarily and cauterize it, for the cautery will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
On the Reason of Teeth with Iron.
When in the surface of the teeth on the sides and fore and between the gums are adjusted rough, sharp, and some blackened, and are made citrines or greenish until they can be seen through the gum because of corruption, and are made the teeth rough.
And therefore it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands and pause the top of him in your seat, and remove the teeth in which those roughnesses and causes like sand appear until there remains no cause in them, and this will be done with the blackness and citrinity and the others until they are purified.
Therefore, if this is the case that is in those of the beginning of the reason, good it is; and otherwise, then you must iterate the reason over those for another day, and second, and third until it comes to the last statement as you wish.
And know that teeth have need of many resins of diverse forms and figures according to the preparation for your operation. And for this reason, the resins with which the tooth is prepared in the part behind are another of the resins with which it is rasped between teeth according to other forms, and these forms of resins must be prepared by you which you will see shortly:
Chapter XXX.
On the Extraction of Teeth.
Carefully that you cure the tooth of its pain with all diligence and patience in total extraction from it, for there is no cause that supplies its vigor when it is extracted, for it is subtle substance entering into excuse in the extraction of it.
But it is necessary when the patient is forced to extract that tooth, that you firmly certify which is the aching tooth, for many times the pain deceives the patient and takes it to be in a healthy tooth, and you remove that one and carefully pause the pain until the diseased and aching tooth is extracted, for we have already seen this by the operation of barbers.
Therefore, since you must certify which is the aching tooth, and you know well, then it is necessary that you scarify in the circuit of the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth and the gum from all part, and carefully remove that with your own words, or with fine forceps little by little until it is concluded.
And carefully hold in it the strong forceps for good speaking or sudden fort, and pause the head of the patient between your fingers which you will hold so that they do not become annoyed, and carefully grasp the tooth according to rectitude in a manner that does not break it, nor gives greater pain to the patient.
And therefore, if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place that below the tooth from all parts with facility and effort to remove it as it was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is torn or corroded, then it is necessary that you wrap that tear with cloth and strengthen it at the subtle edge of a ray so that it will not be torn in the hour of your constriction over it while holding.
And it is necessary that you work with great skill with scarification in the circuit of all part of the gum and guard your strength so as not to break it and leave a part of it, and return upon the patient for the malice that may be greater than the first pain of it.
And beware that you do not act as some ignorant barbers do in their haste and audacity towards the extraction of theirs, without administering what we have recommended; for many times they bring upon men great illnesses which are more difficult to be torn out, and their roots become all inflamed, or some of those, or that you extract it with some bones of the jawbone just as many times we have testified.
And carefully wash the mouth with vinegar or sour apple with salt after the extraction is done.
And if it is necessary to stop the bleeding with this, just as many times it has been, then carefully squeeze out some quantity of egg white and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that egg white does not suffice, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and fine tweezers with which the tooth is grasped at the beginning should be of long extra tip, short handle and thick, in order that they are not bent when you must work with them.
And should be like times of thick handle so that when you grasp with those they are not bent, with short extra tips.
And should be made of Indian steel with descending tips and right-angled extra tips, and on the extra tips of those should be teeth which some intrude into others and strain by strong constriction, and sometimes the extra tips of those are in the shape of a bird's beak which has no name, it is called ciconia, so that they are guarded and have strong constriction.
Chapter XXXI.
On the Extraction of Teeth and Removal of the Bones of the Mandibles Broken.
When you must extract a tooth which is broken with some cause, then it is necessary that you pause over the spot cut off with a border for one day or two until the spot is softened; and carefully introduce or grasp the extra tips of those which are assembled to the beak of a bird called ciconia or guanta, the form of the forceps:
Their extra tips are made behind like lime or almond.
And if you do not obey your own eye with these forceps or tweezers, then it is necessary that you cut away the root and uncover all the flesh and introduce the instrument which has no name, but is a small lever whose form is this:
And it should be of short extra tip thick and small, and not be encumbered so that it will not break.
Therefore, if by this the root is forgotten, good it is; and otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extra tip in which there should be some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and with a more subtle extra tip.
And now help yourself with this instrument having two rams of which this is the form, approximately as follows: and with other instruments which precede in the removal of teeth; for shortly after it is made with this instrument which is assembled to great force, and this is the form:
of a triangular extra tip bent or short, which should have some thickness, and not be encumbered so that it will not break.
And know that the instruments of teeth many are so and similarly to other instruments.
But the skilled craftsmen and subtle in their art, find for themselves according to this what the operation means and various diseases; for there are diseases which the ancients did not know nor pause over with proper instruments, due to the forms of diverse species.
But if the bone of the mandible or of other bones in the mouth is broken or splintered, then it is necessary to carefully place a plaster cast on that spot in its location where it is convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and help yourself with gestures of which this is the form:
And it should be in some thickness small by small, and wrapped or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone of all is forgotten; and carefully restore the place with medicines suitable for this.
But if there is a small splinter in the bone, then carefully remove that from that splinter and its blackness, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter XXXII.
On the Cure of Teeth Elevated above Others.
When teeth are elevated above their natural form and shape is lost, and especially when they need to be removed from women and even more so from venerable old ladies; therefore it is necessary that you consider: if a tooth is not properly attached to another tooth, and it is not possible to secure or bind it with anything, then carefully remove it; but if it is attached to another tooth, then you must incise it with this instrument which has the following form; it resembles a pig's jawbone, and is made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp extra tip.
And your incision should be made with the instrument in which you will incise that tooth over many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and so that it is not confounded with another tooth.
And if the elevated tooth is exposed to decay, then carefully remove that with a file of Indian steel which has this form:
And it should be entirely of Indian steel and the margin very sharp; and it should have many small points just like a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth is filed little by little over many days with ease, so that no other tooth becomes confounded and decayed. And carefully file that in the end, and remove it with some rasors.
And if it is a tooth whose part is broken and irritates the tongue, then it is necessary that you file away that portion until the sharpness of that fracture is removed and smoothed out, and be filled so that the tongue does not become irritated nor the word corrupted.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the Restoration of Damaged Teeth with Gold or Silver Filling.
When accidents occur to teeth before concussion and removal by percussion or collapse, and the patient cannot sustain on what they have, and you have treated that with stiptic medicines, and your treatment has not been effective, then for this reason it is necessary to fill those which are strong with gold and not silver, because silver becomes green and soon turns black, but gold never changes.
And the filling should be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the recipe is that you take the filling and take twice as much of it between two healthy teeth, and carefully increase with two twists of the filling between two damaged ones, or if one or many, until the filling reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And carefully repeat the process into the part from which you began, and strengthen your hand with facility and wisdom until it is not damaged.
And carefully bind with the filling that you should strengthen the roots of the teeth so that they do not escape.
And carefully insert the extra tips of the filling with forceps or tweezers, and add those to each location by gesture, and convert them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged one, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue. And carefully leave it as straight as Roman.
But if it is loosened or broken, then strengthen that or those with another filling in such a manner throughout its entire time.
And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the restoration of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, just as these are linked:
And when one returns or two return to their places, and are recreated just as we have described, and remain.
And only a skilled and knowledgeable craftsman can do this.
And sometimes it is suitable for some cause of cow bones, and it is made from them just like the form of a tooth, and it is placed in a location where the tooth falls out, and it is strengthened just as we have said, and remains and serves that one for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the Incision of the Ligament Which Goes to the Tongue and Prohibits Speech.
This ligament which goes to the tongue sometimes or is natural in those who are born with it, or accidental and happens by chance due to a wound that has already consolidated.
And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient, his existing head in your sight; and lift up his tongue, and carefully incise that ligament nerve according to its latitude until the tongue is freed from its recent stiffness.
But if in that area there is some hardness or nodulation, and this is due to the consolidation of the wound, then you should take a knife and carefully cut it along its latitude until you have divided the ligament and dissolved the nodulation.
And be careful that there is not a fissure made in the skin of the flesh, and that you do not cut too deeply and come out with blood.
And carefully wash the vestige of the incision with warm water or vinegar or cold water, and carefully pause after leaving the tongue to relax; this is the way that the patient should leave the tongue relaxed each night so that it will not be consolidated again.
But if bleeding occurs, pause over the spot with a piece of lint; but if the blood flows, then carefully cauterize the spot with a caustic lotion that is suitable for this. And carefully cure it with other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
On the Extraction of Ranula below the Tongue.
Sometimes, below the tongue, an abscess forms like a small swelling that prohibits the tongue from its natural operation; and very little it is magnified until it fills up the mouth.
And the operation on it is that you open the patient's mouth and examine the abscess in front of the sun.
And if it appears to be a dark or black, hard swelling that the patient does not feel, then do not touch it because it is cancerous.
And if it appears to be declining towards whiteness, with moisture, then you should put a sponge into it, and carefully incise that part with a subtle spatula, and remove the entire swelling; and if blood flows during your operation, then pause above a piece of lint, so it is vetriol, until the bleeding stops.
And carefully return to your work until you have completely treated it with the remedy, until it is washed with vinegar and salt; and cure that part with another treatment suitable for this, until it is healed.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the Extraction of Abscesses from both Ears and that which is nothing in the Gullet and other Abscesses.
When it occurs in the Gullet, so are the glands which are assembled together, those which protrude outside and are called two Ears, those which when you treat them with what we have said in the division and they do not heal, then you should consider if the abscess is hard, dark-colored, without sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of a red color and the root is thick, then do not touch it with iron for the flow of blood; before leaving it to ripen, and either you will remove it or break it off by yourself.
And if it is of a white color, smooth, and the root of it is subtle, then that which must be cut.
And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess has already settled down and has reached complete rest or if it has diminished with some diminution; and then have the patient sit in front of the sun, and his head in your sight, and open his mouth, and the servant takes between his hands the tongue of the patient below with an instrument very noble which has this form:
And it is made of silver or iron, and is subtle like a knife.
Then as you grasp with that tongue and it is shown to you the abscess, and you gaze upon it with your own eyes, then take hold of it and place it in the amnion, and pull it out to the outside parts as much as you can. Or another thing that pulls some cause of the tunics, and carefully cut with an instrument which has this form:
Or another thing that pulls some cause of the tunics, and carefully cut with an instrument which has this form: and it is assembled like forceps, however the extra tips of it are curved, so that the orifice of each of those is in the end of the other, very sharp, which is made of Indian steel well embedded.
But if this instrument is not at your present, then carefully cut with a spatula which has this form of it: And it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And after you have cut one notch, carefully cut the other in the same manner of cutting, and then have the patient gargle with cold water.
But if bleeding occurs, gargle with decoction of scorsa of milgrana or of myrtle leaves and similar to those of the causes stiptic until the flow of blood is stopped, and then carefully cure that part until it is healed.
And sometimes there are other abscesses in the gullet besides those two ears, and cut them according to what I have said in the incision of two notches evenly.
And I had already treated a woman with an abscess which was situated in her gullet, which abscess was tending towards a dark color, without sensation, and which had already closed the gullet of hers, and the woman was breathing very tightly, and she had been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and if I had not acted for one day or two, she would have surely died.
And the abscess had already penetrated so deeply that it had eaten through two ridges in order to come out through two holes.
Therefore I carefully cut the fistula and remained in one of them, and pulled it out, and pulling out was a great portion, and then I carefully cut that part of which the other hole understood, and then I had to force her mouth open, and comprehended her tongue, and then I placed the instrument in that abscess.
And then I carefully cut out a great part of it, and there was only a little blood flowing from it. Therefore the gullet of that woman was absolutely cured, and she began to drink water soon after, and then I prescribed food for her, so I did not cease cutting out from that abscess many times for a long time, and successive abscesses occurred in place of it, which I cut into until it was prolonged.
Therefore I mixed and cauterized the gullet of hers, thus adding nothing more; and then I walked away and didn't know what God had done for her through me.
Chapter XXXVII.
On the Incision of a Hovel when it is Abscessed.
When the catarrh descends to the hovel, and it is abscessed and is long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the posterior part thick and rounded, then it is called a bubo.
But when it is cured with the remedy that we have said in the division, and your cure does not take hold, and indeed sometimes the abscess becomes stagnant and is subtle, then you should cut out that which is thickened and rounded; and if it is of such length, and is bloody, dark-colored or black, and there is no sensation to it, then you should tremble at the incision of it, because in that case there is fear for the patient.
And when you cut out that part according to the manner which I have said of its whiteness and length, then you should make the patient swallow and press her tongue with an instrument whose form is described in the incision of two notches; and place the instrument on the notch and pull it down, cutting it with one of the instruments which are described in the incision of two notches.
And you should not cut out that part unless it is adjusted to the natural term without addition, for if you cut too much, you will destroy their own speech.
And then use the same remedy which we have recommended in the incision of two notches, and cure that part until it is healed.
But if the patient is frightened by the incision of it, then you should use your skill in the cauterization of it without fear, and the manner of the cauterizer in that place is nothing but with sharp water, and it is that you pause the head of the patient in its own sight, and carefully press the tongue of it with the instrument which we have said, and take from the water which we have said in the chapter on cauterization, and fill it with living cause, and pause it not thick or subtle, and fill the concavity of the instrument whose form is this:
The extra tip of it should be in the concavity where the medicine is placed, just like the concavity of a spoon, and pause the instrument with the medicine on the vulva, and the patient will lie down on his own side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of that part may flow through the intrinsic medicine, in order to prevent any cause from descending onto the gullet of it and to cleanse it.
And then carefully take your hand and the medicine, and express it on the uvula for about an hour's space until you see that part being darkened and calmed down by the biting of the medicine.
And if you want, take a cloth and wrap it around the extremity of the ray, and immerse the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cloth into a hollow reed until the cloth sticks to that reed, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and then leave it be for three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and then cauterize the abscess with a cloth wrapped around the uvula, and cleanse it with that cloth soaked in the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and treat it externally with embrocation, and gargle inwardly until it is healed.
And this kind of treatment is more saved than incision and more free from fear.
And sometimes the uvula is cured with this remedy which is more subtle than cauterization and incision, for it is treated with subfumigation in this manner: take calament, hyssop, origan, rue, Arabic gum, chamomile, and similar herbs to those of the plants, and mix all these causes or some of them together in a pot, and immerse them in vinegar water, and boil; and let the pot be well stirred with decent stirring, and let there be a hole in the middle of the pot, above which is placed an instrument made of iron or silver according to this manner.
And the extremity should be inserted into the mouth of the patient until the vapor reaches the uvula on the concha, until the uvula is very obscured.
And then repeat this remedy many times until it is dry, and be careful not to do this cure at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses, for it would too much fit into the abscess, and you should not do so, but rather declare the abscess of him first.
But if you don't have this instrument present, then take a reed and shape it into the extremity of it a hood of cotton, in order that the mouth of the patient may be covered, for the closeness of the cotton prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the Extraction of Thorns and that which adheres in the Gullet and other Causes.
Many times things adhere in the gullet or thorn of the pharynx or some other cause.
Then you must extract what is apparent from those things, above which the sight falls, because you press the tongue with an instrument before the sun, in order that it may be declared to you what is in the gullet.
And that which does not appear and is hidden from you in the gullet, then you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because very strongly the attached cause of the gullet will be forgotten through vomiting; or that the patient would take a piece of nap or of razit of lettuce or one bunch of bread, or take a piece of dried sponge and tie it tightly with thread, and then have the patient swallow it, because when it reaches the place where the thorns are and is extracted, then they will be forgotten. And take a snake and tie it tightly with thread, and then place it inside and later extract it; or take a pipe and insert it and later pull it out.
But if they are not forgotten with those causes which we have said, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
And it should be thicker than a ray, a little one, and in the extremity of it there should be a concavity which you insert into the patient's gullet with ease.
And it will make the patient's head rise up and look towards you, and be careful that the touch of your hand on the patient's neck, for so that the bone or the spine will end up in the way or that the patient will put their hand on it.
But meanwhile the patient will insert it [the instrument] into me, through their knowledge of the location of the attached cause and end up in the lower part, and pull out their hand with the instrument above, all according to the quantity prepared there until it is forgotten.
Chapter XXXIX.
On the Extraction of Blood-sucking Worms attached to the Gullet.
When the blood-sucking worm is medicated with the remedy we have said in the division of cures with medicines and it does not take hold, then consider the patient's gullet to be in the sun, because you have comprehended the tongue of him with an instrument which we have recommended.
Therefore, if you find the blood-sucking worm, extract it with a small forceps or subtle gestures decently.
And if it is not possible to extract it [the blood-sucking worm] by that means, then take a concave reed and insert it into the patient's gullet, and carefully pause in the concavity of the reed an ignited iron, and do this many times (until the blood-sucking worm is dead and has come out of the gullet) and abstain from giving the patient water for the whole day.
And then take a full vial of cold water, and open the patient's mouth with it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not make any cause or trouble in it, and waste no time drinking from that water for an hour more with your own hand, because the blood-sucking worm will soon sense the water flowing.
But if it is not forgotten with what we have recommended, then subfumigate the patient with cymets or asafoetida by the instrument which we have recommended in the subfumigation of the uvula.
Do this, and it will come to be so.
And it is another way of performing the operation in suffumigation of that, namely: take a pot in which there are ignited coals and cover the pot with a cloth in the middle of which is a hole; and compose the extremity of the instrument in that hole; and then place above the suffumigation; and have the patient open their mouth to the extremity of the canula, and close their mouth so that the suffumigation is not forgotten until you know that the suffumigation has reached the blood-sucking worm, because the blood-sucking worm will soon fall.
And if it doesn't work, then you must repeat the suffumigation many times, and abstain from giving the patient water, and make them eat salty and bitter causes, and not drink any water, and so it is necessary that with this regimen everything should be forgotten.
And this is the form of the instrument with which blood-sucking worms are extracted from the gullet when seen; and it is similar to forceps like those, except that there is some curvature in it. The one which is placed in the gullet, and the extremity of it is similar to a stork's beak, which is grasping, in which there is sharpened lime, so that when you grasp any cause, it will not let go.
Chapter XL.
In which is the summary of the sermon in warning about abscesses and their section.
The abscesses are many species, of many manners, according to the remembrance of them, each one in this book.
And thus diverse in perforation and section of them by two manners, of which one is according to the species of abscesses themselves; and because we comprehend of the moistures.
And the second manner is according to the locations in which they occur in the body, because an abscess that occurs on the head is different from one that occurs at the anus; and an abscess that occurs in the fleshy part of the body is different from one that occurs at a joint; and each of them has its own judgment by operation.
And besides, some abscesses are such that they do not need to be perforated, but rather should be left to mature and heal on their own or complete their natural course.
And other abscesses that need to be drained when they are crossed, and not mature according to their natural course, such as those that occur near joints, for an abscess that occurs near a joint is prolonged in its own way until it reaches the circuit of the joint, and very soon corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing a contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a main limb, and if you delay the drainage of it until it becomes inflamed to the main limb; or it is one near the anus, then drain it without waiting for it to mature; and do not perforate it with a rough instrument, but rather with a smooth one that is appropriate for the anus, so that the wound does not spread to the surrounding tissues and become elongated outside the anus, causing a fistula to form, or else be left in its final stage without being healed. But it is necessary that you know the time of the drainage of the abscess, and that is when it has matured.
And you know that it has matured when there is the subsiding of pain and cessation of fever, and proper decrease in swelling and pulse, and sharpness at the tip of the abscess, and other signs.
And then know that the drainage should be done in the most dependent part of the abscess and from the direction of the cure of the prominence.
And the drainage should be done through the length of the flesh or body part if the abscesses are in the fat folds or at the joints, and in places where there is no reflection; for in those that are reflected, use drainage according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy location, then it is better to wait until the perforation of it is confirmed through natural digestion according to its natural course, just as we have said; for if you perforate it prematurely, the body will be prolonged in its suffering and much harm will result, and very soon the lips of the wound will become hardened and the depth of it.
But some abscesses are perforated according to the necessity of the flesh or body part, or according to what the member demands.
And it is necessary to administer small perforations in small abscesses, and large perforations and many sections in large abscesses according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And others are abscesses in which the code is concave and should be cut when it is made like a bread and butter plate, in term that has already stopped, just as those that occur in clusters of boils and buboes.
And of those that are cut with a section having three angles; and of those is one in which it is cut like the figure of a myrtle leaf, just as the abscesses of the gangreners.
And of those that are like them, some have a round section and a lunated section, and resemble those that are similar.
But as for the one which is not like those abscesses of lions that are superficially visible, you must perforate it with a superficial or flat perforation only.
And it is necessary when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, that you perforate it and do not stop until you have extracted all the pus in that hour; having extracted one part, and then covering the abscess with a dressing until the next day, and then extracting another larger part, and doing this many times according to graduation until it is forgotten.
And especially if the patient is a young person, or a woman in childbed, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, for the animal spirit many times is resolved with the emission of pus, and very soon the patient will die, and you should open them.
So guard this chapter with great caution, and carefully consider your perforation of these abscesses, for it is necessary that you abstain from plagues. Consider then whether the plague of the abscess is slight, or a flat section, then you should administer some oil or old cloth remedies; but if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then you must pause in each wound until they all come together.
And if in the abscess a part of the code or has concaved it in the circuit, then you must complete it with old cloth or a thread of linen fabric, just as when you have extracted pus or roots, their moisture; and strengthen that within three days; and then process it and cure it with what is needed from the bandages until it is healed.
But if there is bleeding during the hour of your operation, then you must administer cold water and vinegar in those vessels where a linen cloth has been placed, and pause that over the location of the bleeding many times.
But if the bleeding persists, then you must administer remedies and treatments as recommended in many places of this our book and division.
But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is a location of many nerves, then you must wrap powders in vinegar and oil that are warm, and pause them on those locations.
And if it is in summer, and the locations are fleshy, then you must pause powders wrapped with water and oil or with vinegar and oil, and all that should be cool within three days, just as we have said; and then you must loosen the abscess and abstain from plagues and administer to it what is needed in its cure until it is healed.
And thus is what is necessary for the knowledge of the universal cure of abscesses, but according to the method of distinction which I have already said for each abscess in its own way, by chapters.
Chapter XLI.
Of the Section of Abscesses which occur on the Scalp.
On the scalp, small abscesses and species of nodes which contain tunics that are for their uses; and the species of them are many.
And among them are pimples, and those that contain humidity similar to lime. And among them are those that contain humidity similar to powder, and resembling their own kind; and those that are lapidescent, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, since the extraction of them does not cause irritation to the surrounding tissues.
And the operation in section of those is that you express them with an instrument whose form is similar to this one, which is called "entromes", until you know what they contain.
So if what is contained is humidity, then you should divide it with a section according to length, by making a superficial incision in this form:
And begin in the section of the line .B. up to the line .G. Then, when the humidity is evacuated, you should excoriate that part which contains that humidity, and not leave any cause of it, for many times it returns if some cause remains.
And then submerge the cloth in Egyptian ointment, if present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill it with that the wound and leave it for another day, since at that time everything will be corroded from what remains of that skin layer.
And then repeat the process on that cloth with Egyptian ointment, second and third times if necessary, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that skin layer; then cure the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you should incise it in this form: with a section having the form of a cross, and cutting one incision between two lips of the section and scraping off that part entirely, and exert your best effort in extracting the tunic which contains it.
But if your surgery causes irritation to the surrounding tissues, then do what I have previously recounted first.
And similarly do with the abscess that has hardened in section and cure according to what we have said; and section on a hardened abscess is less difficult, since there is little blood and little moisture.
And some times there are cases of these abscesses that are on the head of certain men who do not have moisture; and this cause is because you incised over an abscess on the head of an old woman and then proceeded to extract the abscess in a way that was as if it were a deaf, harsh, white pustule that could not be squeezed out, and if anyone pressed against it, it would hurt.
But in other abscesses that occur on the head, this is not applicable to this chapter, such as those that appear on the heads of children and ears, but the section of these all is superficial.
And pause the perforation of those from the lower part of them, so that it is relieved to the body of the pus in the lower parts.
And then cure those with what is needed for its cure.
Chapter XLII.
Of the Section of Scrofulas which occur in the Neck.
Many times these abscesses occur in the neck and armpits and groin; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and many that are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is surrounded by its own tunic, just as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
And the species of these scrofulas are many, for some are lapidescent, and some contain humidity, and some are malignant which do not respond to treatment.
So, when you encounter one that is well-disposed in the Touchment, whose color manifestly appears to be like the color of the code, and which is spread evenly throughout the entire part, and not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the surrounding tissues, and is not swollen, then you should incise that with a superficial section from above to below, along the line .G. up to the line .B., and scrape off that entire part, and extend both lips of the code by one incision, or by many incisions if necessary, just as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
And be more cautious so that you do not cut into the vein or nerve.
And be careful not to cut too deeply, so that you do not adjust your hand with a false motion or wound the patient, and do not cut where it is not necessary to cut; for if you cut into the vein or nerve and forbid yourself from continuing the operation, then pause in the wound and apply vinegar or other powders which stop bleeding, strengthen the wound, and leave it until the abscess becomes calm and the wound begins to heal. When the blood is drained.
Then return to your operation until you have completed it.
And then inquire about the signs your teacher has taught you if there is any remaining cause of the other small scrofulas, and then incise those and cleanse them.
And if it is in the root of the great vein, then you should not incise that scrofula from its roots. Instead, it is better to leave that alone and not touch it at all, nor incise it, until it falls out by itself without causing any harm.
And then fill the wound with old cloth that you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
And if you incise that scrofula entirely, then it is necessary to adjust the two lips of the wound and sew them together as soon as possible, so that there is no remaining superfluity.
But if you find that there is remaining superfluity due to the greatness of the scrofula, then it is necessary for you to understand how to incise the root of that, and extract it and administer suturing and what is said.
And that of the scrofulas which contain humidity, pierce it with a superficial incision at the location where you see the abscess maturing, and pause the incision below the pus, just as we have said.
And then administer the incision with ointment and resembling those, so that it corrodes what remains of the corruption. And then, when you see the wound already cleansed, cure it with ointment of generative flesh until it is healed.
Chapter XLIII.
Of the Section of the Pilhot (drainage) of the Abscess that occurs in the Groin.
They called this section "Epilhot" and there is not seen in our land any man who has practiced it.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
But in men with varicose veins, it is necessary to avoid the extraction of the epilhot, because through this it would not be beneficial for the patient since all the veins and major vessels are here.
But in those who have abscesses in the mouth, groin or both ears, when the disease is not in the canal, it is necessary to use the section of epilhot to avoid the destruction which is caused by perforation.
So when we want this, it is necessary to incise the epilhot below three circles of the epilhot, or four with a small section along the latitudinal in between two circles for quantity, so that the section is in ciphac, not in cartilage, and this location is suitable for section because it is devoid of flesh and the vessels of blood are nearby.
And if the doctor is hesitant, then it is necessary to extend the code of the groin by one incision, and then cut through the code into the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any cause.
And then incise the ciphac according to what we have recounted; and it is signified on the section of the canal by the flame which is of that essence mixed with water that is broken down and by the abscess of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
So when the hour is arrived in which the perforation is feared, add two lips of the code to the wound, and sew it alone except for the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make the flesh healthy until it is healed.
And I, Albucasis, say that the sum of this sermon which we have recounted is nothing but to see that some of these abscesses have already obstructed the groin of the patient, and the patient has come to death, and the artery of life has been cut off, and some go to incise the epigloss to make the patient breathe over the location of the wound by some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
And therefore I command to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease is consumed; and it is the malice of life for three days; and thus I command to dress the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
And what I have seen through my own eyes is that a servant took a hot iron and placed it on their groin and incised into the wound with it, cutting off a part of the lung's tube, and you were called to treat him, and he began to cough as if it was the dying breath, and uncovered the wound and bled out the blood which had collected from the wound small.
Therefore you confessed that he had not incised a vein nor guided it, and the air was coming from the wound, and cured it until it was fully healed.
And there was not a single accident to the servant except for a slight change in his voice, and then after some days he returned to his better dispositions.
And now I say that in the section of the epilhot there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
Of the Section on Abscess which occurs in the groin outside and is called Hernia of the Groin.
This abscess known as hernia of the groin is a great abscess according to the color of the body, and it occurs more frequently in women.
And it is according to two manners, either natural or accidental.
And in the natural case there is no need to cure.
And the accidental case is according to two manners of which one resembles green nodes and the other resembles an abscess made by occlusion of an artery, and in that there is fear. And it is not necessary to make a presumption about it as if with iron, except in the case where it is small. And then proceed to investigate it with the said method, and if you find that it resembles green nodes, and is not suspended from any of the veins, then you should incise it just as one would cut into the nodes, and extract it with the water that contains the skin and bursa; and otherwise, then thoroughly search all his being, and then cure the location where it needs to be cured until it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
Of the Section on the Species of Nodes.
Of the nodes, many species and I have already said all their species in the division.
And it is necessary for you to recount thus the difference between node and exitura, as it causes doubt.
So you say that in exitura there is heat, fever, and violent pains until the ebullition of the superfluity is calmed; and it is completed putrefaction which then ceases the fever, pain, and heat.
But in a node there is no heat, nor fever, nor pain, and it contains that ciphac lion which is on its own sac.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a cheese and it is made thus with a vessel, whether greater or lesser, and they are according to two species, either greenish and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as you said in the division.
So then, when you come to the cure of a node, it is necessary for you to expose it and inquire into its beginning with an instrument which is called introitus, according to what will be said in the chapter which is approaching this.
And it is the manner of inquiry for abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the most humid location which you find in the abscess, and then rotate the tips of the instrument little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated to the code.
And then, with your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and then extract the introitus and consider what is situated in the vestige of life.
And if the humidity that flows is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you should incise it with a superficial section according to what I have said in other abscesses.
And if from the vestige of the introitus there is no humidity, then you will know that it is green.
And dry it with a section having the form of a cross according to this shape: just as I have shown you, and suspend it with one incision, and excise the code of all parts with facility, and preserve the skin or sac, if possible, over that and extract that pus from the node.
But if it is broken in the operation, then it is not possible to extract that pus, and often times it happens thus, and then you should extract it piece by piece until there remains no further cause.
For if from that point there remains no further cause, be it little or much, the node will return to its former state.
And if you find that from that point there remains a small part, then complete the wound with some corrosive powders sharp and strengthen the wound, and pause over it where the abscess is quiet, and cure that other way until it is healed.
And if it is a great node, then you should sew the two lips together and cure that with what embodies.
But if the pulsating vein is opposite to it, or not pulsating at all, then you should stop and cover the location of the gauze which is like vitriol, and let that stretch for two days or three until the wound becomes quiet and the ebullition of blood subsides; and then return to incising what remains of the node.
Chapter XLVI.
Of the Forms of Instruments Necessary in Section and Perforation.
Of those, the forms of introitus are three species, that is to say, some are great, and some are medium-sized, and some are small.
The form of great introitus is this:
The form of small introitus is this:
Are made of iron, with a rounded end, and a curved extremity, so that the instrument may be inserted into abscesses.
And these are the forms of instruments, and they are called "albered", and one of them is called "berid".
And these are three species, that is to say, some are great, some are medium-sized, and some are small.
The form of the large instrument, form of this:
The form of the medium-sized instrument, form of this:
The form of the small instrument, form of this:
So that they may be used for those abscesses, exitures, and fistulas, and for buboes caused by bone problems and other causes.
And thus, they are made red-hot, large, and sharp-pointed, like great needles with which the sinews are sewn, and they are made of copper, or iron, or silver. And the best ones are when they are made of citrine-iron.
And they are made the instruments of black lead, which are adapted to those who wish to open up the fistulas in the convolution of which there are reflections, that are reflected into their lightness with those reflections.
And these are three species, that is to say, some of them are long, and some medium-sized, and some short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and its constriction.
Form of the great instrument made of lead:
Form of the medium-sized instrument made of lead:
Form of the small instrument made of lead:
The forms of the needles are many species, that is to say, some are simple, with only one curvature, and there are three species: great, small, and medium-sized.
And among them there are needle-shaped instruments, and there are three species.
And among those there are needles that have two curvatures, and there are three species.
And among those there are needles that have three curvatures, and there are three species.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Form of a small simple needle, form of this:
Form of a great needle that has two curvatures: Form of a medium-sized needle that has two curvatures: Form of a small needle that has two curvatures:
Form of a great needle that has three curvatures:
Form of a medium-sized needle that has three curvatures:
And these are the forms of scalpels with which nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped, and there are three species, that is to say, some are great, some medium-sized, and some small.
Form of a great scalpel:
Form of a medium-sized scalpel:
Form of a small scalpel:
The extremities of these instruments with which the section is made are sharp and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not paused in such a way that it is done gently in the excoriation of nodes to avoid cutting into a vein or nerve, and for this reason the patient should be healed and then have tranquility a little due to the adaptation which is found to be necessary for the excoriation of the abscess.
And these are the forms of ligatures, and there are three species: great, medium-sized, and small, as well as those of very fine threads.
Are made of copper and resemble a thread which is also made of gold.
And it is at the extremity that there is a small puncture made with a spatula hidden and in which runs the threads outside and inside, when you want, just as you see.
The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the threads that make up the perforation of abscesses and do not touch the patients, and there are three species: great, medium-sized, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of drains with which the flow of blood is absorbed, and there are three species: great, medium-sized, and small; the forms of them:
Are made of citrine-iron, rounded with some length, and are subtle.
And it is necessary that these species of drains, great, medium-sized, and small, be used by you in order to absorb the flow of blood with speed when needed, and then when your primary intention is not medicine.
However, you should not use these drains to absorb blood in all parts of the body, and you should only use them in fleshy locations, such as in the groins of the thighs and shoulders, and in the armpits and breasts, and similar to theirs, the fleshy humors.
And sometimes they are made from those instruments small and similar to little scissors according to this form; by which the blood is absorbed when it is done through phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made rounded according to this form:
Chapter XLVII.
Of the cure of men's breasts which are similar to those of women.
Sometimes the breasts of some men become inflamed as they begin to sleep when they are tired, and then the breasts become inflamed, and similar to those of women, and full of abscesses, distant.
And for the one who suffers from this, it is necessary to incise these with a lunar section according to this form, between the lines of .B. and .G., and then excise the entire tumor, and then fill the wound with an encarnative medication, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with suturing, and cure that one until it is healed.
But if the breast descends to the partitions and is softened by its magnitude just like in women, then it should be cut into two halves, each with a scar similar to a lunar section, where each one contains the end of the other, until the major line contains the minor according to this form of the line from .B. to .G. And then excise the code which is between the two lips of the wound, and stop the swelling, and administer that which we have said about suturing and those powders which are necessary for healing until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision of that which needs to be cut because of the unrest of the patient and the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with a submergible poultice in corrosive agent and leave that one until the corroding substance that remains from the grease has disappeared, and then cure that one until it is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
Of the perforation of abscesses that come from behind the titillium.
Those abscesses that come from behind the titillium are of the species of scrophulae, hard ones, which contain a sac.
And some of these abscesses contain moisture; and those that contain moisture must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line .G. to the line .B. And when all the blood that is in the abscess has been evacuated, then you should fill it with a poultice and let it rest until the next day.
And then the poultice should be stopped and cured with a suitable application of a poultice to the wound, until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the species of nodes and scrophulae, then you should cut on it as we have said in the section on scrophulae in like manner.
And if the wound is extended to such an extent that it seems to be putrid, then administer in it a cauterization according to what we have said previously.
Chapter XLIX.
Of the section of abscesses that occur through artery or vein.
When an artery is ruptured and the code is consolidated which is above it, then many times an abscess occurs. And the signs by which it can be known that inflammation and abscess are due to the artery or vein: for when an abscess is caused by an artery, it is long and aggregated in the anterior part of the body; and if you press the abscess with your fingers, you will feel a stridor there.
And that which is caused by a vein is round about the manifestation of the body.
And the section on this abscess is an error, and more so in those that are left behind in the armpits, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very great, therefore it is necessary to avoid its cure with iron, and that which is in the extremities or at the head should be avoided.
But in that which is caused by the inflamation of the orifice of the artery, cut in the code section along its length; and then insert the section with needles and tie it to the artery, and deliver it from the tunics until it is uncovered.
And then make an incision on that and have the needle go through to the other side, and strengthen the artery with double ligature in two places,  which cause will be a guide for your extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
And then push the location between two ligatures with a spatula until all the blood that is in it is let out and the abscess is dissolved.
And then administer a cure in which the pus is generated until the ligatures fall away; and then cure that with suitable applications to the wound until it is healed.
And if the abscess is caused by an incision of a vein, then you must take with your hand as much of the abscess and its code as is possible to you, and then introduce the needle behind the location which you have kept with your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that thread double so that you can extract that from the other side, and then ligate the abscess with two ligatures according to what we have said to you about the ligature of two parts on both extremities of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then introduce the ligature with that needle behind all the abscess, and strengthen those ligatures in four places.
And then cut the abscess in the middle of it until when it is settled there, you will incise the excess of the code, and let that which remains be tied.
And then pause over the poultice which you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and administer the cure which is made with some and applications until it is healed.
Chapter 1 of the abscess which occurs due to twisting of nerves.
In the same way as an abscess occurs in an artery and a vein, and similarly an abscess occurs in nerves when it occurs in their percussion or occurs due to excessive labor, and by similar causes.
And it is made in the most part of the places of the assistants or of the ankle, or in any place where the joints are inflamed.
And it is a great abscess, and it resembles the color of another flesh, and it is in the greatest parts of the body, disposed of its own kind, and when it is stretched to its utmost vehemence, one feels in it as if the patient were in a state of stupor.
And it is not an abscess aggregated in the anterior part of the body, and therefore it is left behind the code, and it is swollen to all parties and does not go to the parts before or behind.
Therefore, those that are in the joints should not be incised with iron, for it would very easily lead to contraction.
But that which is in the head or forehead should have the code sectioned with a spatula. But if it is a small abscess, then take it with forceps and excise it from the roots.
And if it is large, then suspend it with needles, and excise it, and then stop the bleeding; and adjust the wound with suturing, and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter LI.
Of the section of abscess which occurs in the cheek that occurs in the abdomen.
I have observed in some men many times in their bellies and in other parts of their bodies, which are called fungals by similarity to those with fungi, from whose roots is subtle and the head of that is large; and already the lips of those are converted, and it is of those who is small, and it is of those who is very magnificent.
And I have already seen one, and in the belly of it there were two fungi-like things, which were more like fungi, and there was no difference between them white, with thin roots.
And already the lips of those had turned inward and were splitting open, and moisture was flowing from it all the time.
Therefore, I incised them and carried away one in a weight of 18 ounces. and the other weighed 1 ounce.
And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider then if the patient is humid, and the color of their fungus is white, humid, with subtle roots; then you will incise them with a spatula late, and they should be in your presence over fire, because many times the section of it is expelled much blood; and if you see the blood flowing, cauterize that.
And if the patient is pale and tremulous, beware of incising with iron; but rather take a leaden thread, freshly made, and strengthen it in that fungus, according to the manner which we have said; and let it be left for two days.
And then adjust it in the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the lead thread greatly in that fungus, until it is excised and falls away by its own natural labor.
But if the fungus is of large roots, then in the incision of it there may be some cause for fear and dread, and especially in that which is in the belly.
But possible is that you excise most of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then cure that until the wound is healed.
And beware that you do not presume to excise a fungus which is of dark color, with little sensation, and little regard, for it is an abscessed cancer.
And I will remember this as a warning to others.
Chapter LII.
Of the cure of an eminence of the navel.
An eminence of the navel is caused by many reasons; or by fissures of the skin which is on the belly, and you see it as a film or blister according to how it develops in other ruptures; or by blood which flows from a vein or artery according to what has been said before, or by constricted wind in that place.
But if it is due to a fissure of the skin and swelling of the film, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and there is no pain, and you will see various situations. And if it is due to the eruption of the blister, then the situation of that with the liquid that we have recounted, but with more violent diversity, and when you press it with those fingers it is hidden, and then returns; and very quickly it is in its place, and it is magnificently swollen many times with great pain and violent labor.
But if it is due to moisture, then there is no pain and it is not hidden when you press it with your hand, nor is it constricted or creased.
And if it is due to blood, then with these signs the abscess appears declining into blackness.
But if it is due to raw flesh, then it is a great and large abscess, hard and thick, and is filled according to a quantity.
But if it is due to wind, then the touching of it is painless.
And the operation in this case is that you consider then if the eminence of the navel is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or wind; and then it is necessary that you be prohibited from the cure of it, because there is fear and dread in that as I have taught you in the chapter where I mentioned the abscesses caused by arteries and veins.
And if the eminence of the navel is due to the blister or film, then you must command the patient to hold their breath and be still extended; and then sense with your tentacle in the circuit of all the navel, and then command it to be turned towards between your hands on its back, and then circle with a spatula late around the navel on the location which you have signified with your tentacle; and then extend most of the abscess into the upper parts with large needles; and then tie in the circuit with strong thread or with waxed cord and the manner of tying decent.
And then make the middle of the abscess extended over the ligature and introduce the said finger into that indicated spot and seek out the blister; and if you have found it or guarded it by the ligature, then you must extract the remaining part and impel the blister towards the outer parts of the belly.
And if you have found the film, then take it with needles; and excise the excesses of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circle around that much, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong threads and introduce the two needles into the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a cross-like manner, so that they will penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, stop the needles and leave the location until the flesh extends and falls away by itself; or excise it when it is subtle and can be pried loose, and then cure that with water as needed, until it is healed.
And if the eminence of the navel is due to raw flesh or moisture in it, then you must conquer the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or moisture which you find there, and then cure that with water as needed and consolidate the location.
Chapter LIII.
Of the cure of a cancer.
We have already said in the division, about the species of cancer and how it is to be treated with medicines, and what should be avoided in treating it with iron so that it does not ulcerate; and we have also said that cancer is generated through excessive and careless treatment of it.
And the ancients said that some times cancer is in a place where it is possible to eradicate it, such as breast cancer or scirrhous cancer and its like, which are located on the limbs and can be completely removed, especially when it is first starting out small.
But when it is old and large, it is not worth attempting to treat it, for you cannot heal it nor have I seen anyone else do so, nor can it be cured.
And the operation in this case is when it is located as we have said, that you precede and leave the patient and purge with black cholera some times, and then sign him, if it is found to be a manifest replenishment.
And then prepare the patient with preparation for the operation, and prohibit in the track of needles those which are necessary for it; and then concave from all parts with a good code of examination so that there is no remaining cause of the roots of it. And then let the blood flow, and do not stop it slightly, and press out the places, and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument that is at your disposal among the instruments.
But if you encounter resistance from thick blood in an incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize that until the flow of blood is stopped, and then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Chapter LIV.
Of the Cure of Hydrocele.
We have already recounted in the division, about the species of hydrocele of water, and their signs, as well as the cure for it with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is only the species of althitas alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of timpanists or to the species of hypoarchaeus, because this is mortal.
And when you have already medicated this species of hydrocele timpanistre with medicines and do not confirm your medicine, then consider, because if the patient is already debilitated, or has another malady, such as in his lungs or bowels and similar to those, then beware that you do not medicate him with iron, for fear is over it.
But if you find the patient to be of excessive virtue, and in him there is no other malady except for hydrocele alone, and he is neither young nor old, then the manner of operation for it is that you lift the patient between your hands, and minister to him appropriately, by draining his belly with his own hand, filling the water at the exit from the penthyl, and then take a spatula with spines according to this form:
be two sharp edges long, with a sharp extremity like a spatula; but however it should be in there some smallness little by little, so that in the operation on him it does not go into the blister and lead to trouble.
And then consider if the generation of hydrocele is from one of the blisters, because then it is necessary that you with the section go away from the navel by the quantity of three said to the left parts, in the right of him above the pentyl.
But if the generation of hydrocele is due to illness of the liver, then your section should be left-handed from the navel by three said.
And if the generation of it is due to bad luck, then your section should be in the right hand.
And it is not necessary that your section be on the side which the patient wishes to lean towards, so that the superfluities do not flow towards that place freely.
And then pierce the entire code with the instrument, and then enter into that section, and raise your hand with the spatula between the code and the siphon, and you excise that; and if it is the quantity of one fingernail or thereabout.
And then pierce the skin until the spatula reaches the location where you want it to be, and that is the place of water. And then extract that and enter with an instrument whose shape is this: and it is similar to a silver cannula; it is made of silver or of iron or of lead, with a small hole at the lowest part of it, and on its sides there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the extremity of it is incised according to the manner of a feather, just as we use to say:
And in the extremity of it is an annulus, because when the instrument reaches the water, then that annulus will soon rest upon the instrument, therefore evacuating from the water in the middle quantity, for if you evacuate more than what is necessary at that time, very quickly the patient will die by resolution of their animal spirit, or you will be led to it, which is approaching death.
But evacuate from it according to the quantity of the virtue of it and according to what signifies to you the dispositions of the patient's virtue, the pulse of it and the goodness of it.
And then extract the instrument, and retain the water which is caused because it is retained by the code which retains the hole that is on the skin of which I have recounted to you that you should pierce it according to this manner.
And then iterate the instrument on another day if you find the patient tolerating this, and extract a small quantity of water, and make it so for some days with caution, and beware of error until there is only a little water remaining.
But if you fear for the patient, and leave a large quantity of water, then cure that with burial in hot sand, and much sweat in bath, and wait for it under the sun for a long time; and cure that with drying medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the gallbladder and liver nearby the extraction of water, according to what I have recounted in this, which is preceded.
Chapter LV.
Of the Cure of Children Whose Bladders Do Not Perforate Naturally.
Sometimes some children are thus from the womb of their mother and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or it is a narrow hole or not in its place).
Therefore, it is necessary to pierce it with perforation as soon as it is born with a subtle spatula according to this form:
And then pause in the hole a small key of lead and tie it, and let it be for three days or for four.
And when he wants to urinate, be removed and washed; and then return that.
And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over the place will not let it close.
But that of which the hole is narrow should be treated with a lead key, as we have said, for many days until it is expanded.
But those in whom the hole is not in its place, are led astray, which cause is because of them, that which is born and grows is at the end of the head of the urethra, so that it cannot urinate into the outer parts, until the urethra raises itself with its own hand to the upper parts; and it is not a generation, therefore the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a miserable disease.
And the manner of the operation in this is that the patient should be placed on his back, and then extend the head of the urethra with your left hand with a vehement extraction, and incise the head of the head of the urethra at the location of the perineum with a sharp spatula, just as it is incised with a feather or if you remove some part, so that the middle of it becomes similar to the head of the urethra, and the hole falls in the middle place according to what is necessary.
And beware that in your operation of bleeding, because many times it happens like this; and pause for him as much as is necessary to stop the bleeding, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LVI.
Of the Ablation which occurs in the Prepuce at the head of the Urethra and of Corruption, Blackness, and Adherence of the Prepuce to the head of the Urethra.
Many times this ablation occurs in the urethra and is an eminence of flaccid flesh.
And one of them is malignant, and the other is not malignant.
Not malignant, requires that you suspend with a subtle needle and remove it until it is completely gone; and then pause above it, submerged in Egyptian ointment; and then, cure it with divine ointment until it is healed.
And if the ablation is malignant, of dark color, then you must administer cauterization near the incision and the ratio of it.
But if the ablation is in the prepuce of the head of the urethra, uncircumcised, and one part of the ablation is inside the prepuce and the other part is outside, then you must remove the ablation that is inside first, so that it is consolidated; and then you cure that outside, because when you cure that together with the prepuce, it is not certain that it will not be torn.
And also it often happens in the genitals and prepuce, blackness and corruption; therefore you must conquer all that which is already denigrated and which already wants to corrupt or has already corrupted; and then apply a poultice over it, using honey mixed with meal of corn cobs and errors crushed and sifted.
And then cure that with the other remedy until it is healed.
But if there is excessive bleeding, then administer lunar cauterization according to this form:
because cauterizing juice is in two dispositions together, that is, in bleeding and in the wound when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the urethra is corroded and destroyed entirely in an hour, then it is necessary that you insert a lead cannula into the flesh of the prepuce, so that the patient may urinate through it.
In the adhesion of the prepuce with the head of the urethra (and this adhesion does not occur except in those whose prepuce is sound and has not been circumcised; and when adhesion occurs due to wound or abscess) it is necessary that you excise with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the urethra is completely freed from all parts.
And if it is difficult to dissect those things delicately, then it is necessary that you excise with a spatula some cause from the head of the urethra and the prepuce, and thus it is because the prepuce, when it is subtle, is easily perforated by its own subtlety slightly.
And then separate between the prepuce and the head of the urethra with a thin thread, which is already moistened in water so that they do not adhere again.
And then it should be cured with a warm styptic until it is consolidated.
Chapter LVII.
Of the Purification of Children and the Cure of that which occurs to those who have been Circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity as are other wounds: but rather it is from our operation and our will, and the purpose of that is properly in children; therefore it is necessary to assign in that the best operation and way most easily lost without harm.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not teach circumcision in their sacred books, because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired through experience, which is why you have found that most of the surgeons and barbers use to circumcise and purify with a new knife and torches; and they bind with a thread and incise with the finger.
And I have already condemned all these methods and did not find better purification with forceps, with thread and needle that is used in purification like the fingernail, because many times the code above has fled, because the code of the prepuce has two tunics, and remains the tonic below, and very easily it is forced to another incision and certain pain. And with purification made by alphecats, which is digital and used by surgeons, it is not certain that the incision of the extremity of the male member is secure, because very easily it enters into the wound.
But in the operation with fingernail, iron very easily obstructs and corrupts your operation. And the code of the child is short by nature, and many times it happens in such a way that there is no need for purification, and I have seen this.
But the purification made with forceps and threads with needle, goodness, experience has revealed to me, because the forceps are of proportional incision, therefore the sharpness that is above is just like the sharpness that is below; and thus, when you press your hand so proportionally two sharpnesses, and inscribe it according to a comparison at one time; and it is made compression of the needle with a figure containing the code of the urethra from all parts, without any error.
And the manner of the first operation is that you should make the child remain mostly still if it is one of those who understands a little, and not do anything except to insert the needle into his urethra only so much, and leave it there until the next day.
And then make him happy in all that manner which is possible to you, from what he receives of his intelligence. And then make him stay between your two most established preparations, and not at all astonished; and hide the forceps in your hand or leave them on your lap, so that the child does not see those nor anyone else of the instruments.
And then insert your hand into the urethra of him and blow into the code, and pull that in so that it is out of sight from the head of the urethra, and then purify that which is aggregated in it of sordes.
The shape of the forceps for purification, this is the form:
Be the outer tips not cutting and the others cutting, so that there is no exit of the claw, and be the length of both sharpnesses just like the length of two handles equally.
But the error in purification is that very easily the inner code is lost entirely or part of it escapes from the incision.
Therefore, it is necessary that you extend that of your hour with your fingernail in front of the abscess of the place and incise according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then take it out with a needle and incise it.
But if three days have passed and the abscess remains below the urethra, then you should leave it until the abscess is calm, and then remove that with ease, and incise according to what is prepared for you.
And beware of the head of the urethra, because it will not be affected by this.
And therefore cure that with the remedy that the wound consolidates with the powders which we have recounted in the treatise on powders.
And if it is incised with the code according to measure, and obeys the parts above, then this will not harm him.
And therefore cure that with what we have said until he is healed.
Chapter LVIII.
Of the Cure of Retained Urine in the Bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by oppression made by pressure or by blood congealed, or by pus or flesh, and resembles those of what we have said about the manners of cure in the division.
And if it is not dissolved with what we have said, then the cause is made to be violent on the patient, then it is necessary that you administer an extraction of him with an instrument which is called syringe, of which this is the form: It should be of silver and subtle like a lion's claw, just like a quill from an ostrich with subtlety of ray long in similarity to a palm and a half, at which there is a thin thread on its head.
And the manner of extracting urine with that is that you take the doubled needle and insert it into the extremity of the lana or coto for good binding; and then insert the extremities of the needle into the left part of the syringe, and incise with forceps if there is any superfluous cause of the lana, but introduce it into the canula with vehemence.
And make the patient sit on a stool, and wrap his bladder and urethra with olive oil and water.
And then insert the syringe with ease into the root of the urethra; and then double the urethra above at the part of the belly; and then push the syringe inwards until it reaches the bladder; and then push that until it reaches the patient, and it is said to have reached the cause of the disease, and not done so according to this order, but rather takes a tortuous route.
And then extend the needle with the thread little by little, because the urine is drying up the thread.
And then remove that and make it for urinary cure, and use syringe, do not stop doing this and use syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient receives relief.
Chapter LIX.
Of the Quality of Cathartics for the Bladder with Clamp-cedra and similar instruments which are in accordance with this.
When ulceration or abscess occurs in the bladder, or blood congealed in it, or is compressed by pus, and you want to distill waters and medicines into that, then make it with an instrument called Clamp-cedra, and this is its form:
but in the extremity of it, it is deaf, i.e. it is closed. And in that there are three holes: two from one side, just like sometimes.
In the beginning it is a concave location, in which there is water that is poured in, and it should be according to the quantity that fills it, without addition, until when some cause is pulled out by it with the moistures, it is drawn towards it, and when it is expelled, it is drawn towards it, and when it is long, as clamp-cedra does, which is filled with naptha in naval battles.
Therefore, when you want to draw out moistures from the bladder, insert the extremity of clamp-cedra into the moisture, and pull towards it the water that is poured in above, because the moisture is drawn into the concavity of clamp-cedra.
And then insert the extremity of clamp-cedra into the urethra according to what we have recounted in the syringe; and then pull out the moisture with water that you pour in, because that moisture flows into the bladder at once, and the patient is cured by it.
The Form of the Subtle Catheter by which the Bladder is Catheterized, and this is its form:
And it should be made of silver or lead, with the head being similar to a small feather, and having a thin thread at its end.
And then take a vessel of motion, and pour into it the moisture that you want to catheterize in the bladder, and then tie it between two with a strong ligature made of double thread, and heat that moisture over the fire.
And then insert the extremity of the catheter into the urethra.
And then stretch your hand over the bladder with the moisture and stretching downward until the patient's disease is cured because that moisture has reached the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder present, then take a bag made of papyrus and make it into a circle; and perforate it all over its roundness; and then insert a strong thread into those holes, just like they are revolved; and then add the circle in such a way that it is added also to the future, so that you put into it what you want from the moistures, and oils and waters.
And then tie that onto the instrument and do with it just as you did with the bladder, and express it onto your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter LX.
Of the Extraction of Pus.
We have already said in the division the kinds of pus and its cure with medicines, and the difference between pus generated in the lungs and pus generated in the bladder, and the signs of it.
And we have said the pus in which operation with hand and section occurs.
And the pus generated in the bladder properly is that which is formed in the bladder.
And you should narrate it with manifest exposition and abbreviation.
So I say that pus generated in the bladder mostly occurs in children; and one of its signs is that the urine which comes out of the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in it like sand; and the patient frequently wipes his urethra, and many times pulls back his penis, and then stands up straight; and with this you will know that there is a discharge from those parts.
And it is easier to heal the children of this disease until they have reached 14 years old; and it is difficult to cure in the elderly. But in the young, it is mid-term because it is between them.
And of that from which pus is more abundant and the cure is easier; And if it is little, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we come to the cure of this disease, it is necessary at first that we purify the patient with a catheter which extracts all the abscesses that are in his bowels; for that abscess sometimes prevents the evacuation of the pus from the bladder.
And then the patient should be pressed with his own weight and continued in a comfortable position for so that the pus descends to the bottom of the bladder, or else it may jump from one place to another.
And then make that person sit between your most prepared things and those of him be left the things of his, so that the bladder is made to decline towards the parts below.
And then pour it out all at once.
Therefore, if you feel the pus in space, then you should cut into it immediately with section above it.
And if you do not find the entire discharge of your touch, then it is necessary that you anoint with oil the indicated digit of your left hand, whether the patient is a child or a young adult, and insert that into his anus. And pour out the pus until it remains below your said finger. And convert that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And then press upon it with your said finger and expel that out to the external parts below the location where you made the section.
And command the assistant to press the bladder with her right hand; and command another assistant to extend the patient's legs upwards with her left hand, and with her other hand to relax the code which is below the legs, in the part of the location where the section is being made.
And then insert the spatula which is incident from which this is its form: and cut into it where there is between the anus and the legs, not in the middle location, but before the left side of the cleft; and let the section be on that pus and your finger be in the anus, and let it be a transverse section, so that the external section may be wide and narrow inside according to the quantity that you extracted from the pus, and no greater, for fear that too soon compresses your finger which is in the anus, and forgets the difficulty.
And know that from the pus there is some which has an angle and margins, for which the extraction of it is made difficult by this.
And from that pus, it is like a glans, and is round, and is made for easier extraction.
Therefore, if it is this kind with angles and margins, adjust in the fissure.
And if not, then it is necessary that you gently push on it, or that you strengthen on it with decent gestures, the extremity of which should be like a file with which you strengthen on the pus, and do not dislodge from there; or that you insert below it the subtle instrument of curved extremity.
But if you cannot push on it, then you should enlarge the hole a little bit; and if you see a flow of blood, cut in strength with vitriol thread.
But if the pus is more than one, then at first you should push your hand into the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it onto that; and then push a little bit further; and similarly do so if there are many more than two.
And if the pus is very great, then ignorance is that you insert it with a great incision, for it will happen to the patient one of two causes: either death or obstruction of the urinary distillation continuous, therefore the location is not fully consolidated.
But administer expulsion of it until it is forgotten, or shape in the fracture of it with forceps until it extracts that in pieces.
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with the juice of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it. And pause over that cloth soaked in oil and vinegar, or in rosinated oil and cold water, so that the abscess may be calmed.
And then resupply the patient with his own bed, and do not loosen the bond until the third day.
And when you have loosened it, wrap the wound with water and much oil, and then cure that with divine balm and devil's balsam until it is healed.
But if in the wound there occurs an abscess that is calm, adjusted and corrosive, and it resembles as if the blood is frozen in the bladder with congelation, and because of this the urine is prohibited (and this is known through the egress of blood with urine), then therefore insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if left it will provoke the bladder to corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and with opposition to all species, according to what is necessary for its cure until it is healed.
And it is necessary during the entire course of the cure that you keep both things in order and adjust the medicines which are placed on the wound.
And if the pus is small and is in the urethra, and is stuck there, and the discharge of urine is prohibited, then cure that with what I recommended before you reach section, for many times by this cure you are accused of section; and now it has been tried, and it is that you take a perforator made of iron with an alfelut, from which this is its form:
of triangular extremity, sharp, fixed in a handle.
And then take a thread, and tie it onto that urethra below the pus so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the urethra, piercing with ease until the perforator comes to that pus. And then turn the perforator with your hand in that pus little by little, and you pierce through the hole until it comes out on the other side; for the urine is soon absolved.
And then press your hand on that which is left of the pus from the outside part of the urethra, because it is torn, and forgotten with the urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this cure is not prepared by you for some reason which prohibits it, then tie one thread below the pus, and another thread above the pus. And then insert on top of the pus in that urethra between two threads. And then extract it. And then loosen the bond and purify the congealed blood which is in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie the thread below the pus, except that it does not return to the bladder, and the other thread above, only because when the thread is loosened next to the extraction of the pus, the code returns to its place and closes the wound.
And therefore it is necessary to you when you tie the thread above that you raise the code to the upper parts, or that you return to your previous statement, and close the wound as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
Of the Extraction of Pus from Women.
Pus in women is rarely generated.
But if you see pus in some of those women, then it is difficult to cure it, and is prohibited by many methods.
One of them is because the woman is very proud.
And the second is because you do not find a woman well knowing that she does not understand if she confides in a doctor when she is chaste, or one of those women who are married.
The third is because you do not have a woman well knowing this art, mainly the operation with hand.
And the fourth is that the location of the section on pus in women is too far from the location of the pus, so you need to make a previous incision, and in that there is fear.
But if necessity prompts you to this, then it is necessary that you take a married woman who is well knowing, and little is troubled.
But if you are deprived of that, then seek out a midwife who is quick and subtle, or present an elderly woman well experienced in the affairs of women, or a woman who has parted from this art.
Then present that one and command them to do all this which you will instruct them to do, from the inquiry about the pus to the beginning; which cause is that they should regard whether the woman is a virgin, then it is necessary that she put her finger into the urethra and seek out the pus.
Then if she finds it, cut it below her finger, and then command her to insert something onto that.
But if she is not a virgin, then command the matron to insert her finger into the woman's private parts and inquire about the pus, since she places her left hand on the bladder, and compress it with good compression.
Then if she finds it, then it is necessary that gradually she relaxes that from the bottom of the bladder to the parts below with the summit of her virtue until it comes out at the root of the urethra.
And then insert onto that an apposition of the middle of the private parts, at the root of the urethra, from which some part may be paraded and centered the pus in that part, and the said finger should not be removed from the pus cut below.
And the section should be small at first; and then insert a ruler onto that section, and if you feel the pus, then adjust in section according to the quantity which you know will be extracted from that.
And know that the kinds of pus are many: for some is small and great, and hard and sharp, and long and round, and having ridges.
Then you know how many kinds there are of it by this which I signify about that which you want.
And if you see a flow of blood, adjust with vitriol thread and keep it for one hour until the blood is stopped, and then return to your operation until the pus is forgotten.
And prepare with you the instruments which I say in the extraction of pus in men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of the blood is from the artery which is inserted, then you pause powder on the place and strengthen it with powders and strictura descent, and do not repeat this; and leave the pus and do not extract it, for very soon the patient will die. And then cure the wound.
And then when the sharpness of the blood is ceased after some days, and the place is healed, then you return to your operation until the pus is forgotten.
Chapter LXII.
Of Section on Hernia in the Groin.
Hernia in the groin is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white pouch which is below the codes of the genitals containing the humor, and it is called a pouch.
And sometimes it is in the proper fold of skin which nature has prepared for the passage of humor, so that what is already another humor may be contained; and it is the code of the genital between the white pouch which we have said, and not just a pouch but rather a sac.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which occurs in the genitals, for which reason this material pours out into them; and sometimes it occurs through a blow or fall on the genitals.
And this moisture has many colors, for the color of it either declines to yellow or to reddish-brown, or is red, or blackish, or white and watery, and that is the most common.
And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of moisture is located are these: for if it is in the white pouch which we have said, then the abscess is rounded and declining a little to length like the figure of humor, and appears the genital, for the moisture contains that from all parts.
And if the moisture is in the proper fold of skin, then the abscess is rounded with a part of humor and by this one estimates that it is another humor.
And if the moisture is between the code of the genitals and the white pouch, then cats are left below the sentiment.
And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then you examine the color of the moisture in the abscess with the instrument whose form is preceded; and according to what it is found in the vestige of the instrument, judge from that whether it is inside or out.
And then when we come to the cure of it with iron, it is necessary that we command the patient to be flesbotomized if this is possible for you, and sometimes wash the body thoroughly.
And then be resupinated on your back over some cause or other, and pause below with many cloths.
And then sit you on the left side of him, and command the assistant to follow on the right side of him, which extends his hand to one or two hands to the code of the genitals and the part of the miracle of the belly.
And then take a spatula flat and cut the code of the genitals from the middle location by length, approximately to the pubic line.
And then make the section according to right and equal distance from the line that marks the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white pouch comprehended.
And then scrape it, and observe, and take care to not insert anything; and your scraping with which you scrape away by part, as if it were suspended in the humor more and subtly examine the scraping according to the quantity possible for you.
And then pierce the white pouch full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
And then separate between two lips of the section with scissors, and extend the white pouch to the upper parts; and do not touch the code of the genitals comprehended, and insert the white pouch in that manner which is possible for you. And then insert it with its totality or in pieces, and primarily the subtle part of the side, for if you do not scrutinize exactly the insertion of it, there is no secure guarantee that the water will not return.
But if the humor proceeds from that outside of its code during your operation, then when you have completed the section of the pouch, return inside and adjust the two lips of the code of the genitals with suture, and then cure it just as you would other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the humor corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you ligate the vessels which are sore the suspensori, and extract the humor, and then cure it with what we have said.
But if the water is accumulated in two separate parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, insert into that part according to what you did in the other, and if it appears to be one operation, then you do it.
And then you wash away the blood, and enter into the sections linen submerged in oil or rose-colored oil; and pause before another linen which you have submerged in wine and oil, and spread it over two genitals and the miracle of the belly; and pause above doubled cloths and powders, and tie those above with a ligament which is according to this form:
and then the two cloths are pressed and filled with Carmelite wool according to this resemblance; and the extremities are made with which it is wrapped in cloth or damp wool, and added to the stretcher in the waistband of the drawers, and one of the extremities takes hold of the cleft from above to below, and the second takes hold of the part of the pubic line, and two extremities above two couches and two other extremities above two agonists, and all the structure is adjusted in the waistband of the drawers.
And sometimes this hernia is medicated artificially with a cauter in the place of section with iron; and it is that you take a cauter cutlery subtle and insert it into that code of the genitals, and ignite according to what we have recommended until the white pouch containing the water is discovered, and then you take the cauter in this form: And it is assembled in Greek letter.
And then pierce into that pouch, and ignite until all the humidity is eliminated.
And then extend the pouch with scissors, and scrape with scissors, and scrape with a subtle cauter that is ignited; and insert it according to what is possible for you until you eradicate all of it; and take care of the humor so that the fire does not touch it.
And you know that this operation is most safe and longest-lasting in terms of bleeding, and better than an operation with section.
But if you encounter contrary opposition in the form of abscesses that cauterize at the time of section or cauterization, or bleeding, then it is necessary that you cure what contrariety arises to you by means of the cure which corresponds to him according to what is said.
But if the patient is poor and does not hope for a second operation due to its horror, then administer perforation according to what we have recommended above; and it is when you are certain, by means of the signs, that this hernia is watery.
Then it is necessary that you place the patient on some elevated bench, and then pierce the abscess in the lowest part of him with a flat spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
And be the perforation wide enough that all the water flows out.
And then pause above the location of the cut and tie it off, so that the remaining water flows out. And then cure it until the wound is healed.
But if contrariety is to the egress of water at that hour, then you pierce it: and this is not done except by means of which the white fold in the orifice of the wound makes contrariety and prohibits the emission of water, then it is necessary that you put into the wound a pain or instrument with which water is extracted from drops, the form of which is preceded; or adjust in the opposite direction of the wound a small one.
And you know that the water returns, and is accumulated after about 2-3 months or around those; and as it accumulates, then it should be pierced according to that same manner, for the patient will thus pass his days.
Chapter LXIII.
Of Section on Fleshy Hernia and its Cure.
Know that in the section on this hernia, there is fear of being lost to destruction in the greater dispositions; for which reason I have beheld the departure of him and being saved by that better.
And you are reminded of the operation on this one, and the kinds of abscesses.
So I say that the abscesses are born in those whose genitals are composed and it is made thus by many causes: either because of acute and sharp superfluity which is poured into the genitals, or because of trauma.
And it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body, and not found in him pain, and it is a grave abscess.
And very often it is a lapified abscess, the color of which is dark, and there is no sensation to him.
And sometimes it is caused by constriction of the arteries, and by inflation of those vessels as if one could already feel a recollection of him, or by inflammation of veins.
But what is caused by inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you compress it with those fingers mentioned above; and it is not necessary that it touch.
But what is caused by inflammation of veins is not dispersed from him for any reason, even when compressed with those fingers.
And it is possible that on this species, you make a section and on the other flesh; and it is that you insert the code of the genitals, and then extend the humor to the upper parts, and extract it from the white pouch, and deliver the suspensorium of the vessels, and tie them, and insert the suspensorium more than you deliver it from all part of the parts of the humor.
Therefore, if the humor is already consolidated in those fleshly parts, then it is necessary that you extract the humor and insert it.
And if there is adhesion due to some cause of the pouch or between what is between the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all that adhesion and insert it with a rounded incision.
But if it is a native flesh in the location of the adhesion which is behind, then it is necessary that you insert all that is from him, and extract the humor just as we have said.
Therefore, when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with linen impregnated in rose-colored oil and wine; and then cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter LXIV.
Of the Cure of a Hernia that is of Vine.
Vine is an abscess wrapped in some wrapping similar to a shoot with softening of the testicles, and it is made difficult for the patient to move, exercise, and walk.
And in the cure of this disease, it is due to fear because of which there is a recollection.
However, it is necessary that we say operation on this one according to what the first ones do.
And I say that it is necessary to place the patient on an elevated bench; and then compress the suspensorium of the testicles into the left parts; and then insert the code of the genitals with those fingers mentioned above with the vessels that are proved by the verge; and hold those other ministers, and stretch them with a vehement extension.
And then insert it with a flat spatula, making a transverse section in the right of the vessels, until the vessels are discovered.
And then scrape off all the parts just as we have said in extraction of artery which are in the temples.
And then place an awl in those with a double thread, and tie it in the first of the places where the vine is located, and tie it again another time in the last of their. And then insert those in the middle location by a straight section according to the length of the body, and extract what is accumulated from the fetid and corrupted humidities.
And then cure the wound with the cure of other wounds in which you want to be generated by so that the vessels which nourish one of two genitals may fall, for it is not bad for this reason.
But if the vine affects all the vessels, then it is necessary that the testicles be extracted or that the testicles by this means are connected to the vessels, in order to be deprived of all nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and be wasted, or that they become rotten because they are not joined with them.
Chapter LXV.
Of the Cure of an Intestinal Hernia.
The advent of this hernia is due to a section that goes into the pouch extended over the belly on the side of the agonizers of the miracle of the belly, so that the bowels of that rupture go into some of the bowels.
And this rupture is either of the pouch or of excrescence from him, and it occurs in these two species by many causes: or percussion, or by shout, or by cry, or by elevation of some grave cause, or by similitude.
And the sign of this, when it is due to extension of the pouch, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess equal in size with the preceding one because the pouch compresses the bowel.
And the sign of him is when it is due to section of the pouch, because at first it makes cause a vehement pain suddenly; and it is an abscess diverse in appearance below the code propagated in appearance, and this is by emission of the bowel, and his body to the parts outside of the pouch.
And sometimes it is forgotten with the bowel membrane, and this is called intestinal hernia "cirbel".
And sometimes it is made in ventosity, and sometimes it runs into the bowel fissure, and there it is retained, and this is at great peril of the patient, and sometimes it causes very bad pain and especially when it is pressed.
And in the cure of the species of this disease with iron there is fear, because it is necessary to avoid the danger in that.
And the manner of the operation on that is that you command the patient to straighten out his bowel with his own hand towards the parts outside of his conquered territory if he obeys his returnment, and then it should be elevated above his back between your hands, and lift up his legs from him.
And then place the code which secures the code of the testicles to the upper parts, and insert the code of the testicles all along; and then place it in two lips of the section scissors according to what you need to fill the section with those.
And if the section is according to the quantity that it is possible for you to forget the humor from that.
And then scrape off those pouches which are below the code of the testicles, until the white pouch is revealed from each part.
Then you enter the finger mentioned above into that which secures the testicle, between the white pouch and the one below it, which is below the code of the humor, and between the second pouch and absolve with that adherence which is in the part behind the humor.
And then take hold of the code of the testicles with your hand, and stretch out the white pouch on the left side, and lift up the humor with the pouch to the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the humor upwards and you dissolve the adherence that is behind with complete solution.
And search with those fingers mentioned above, so that there be no cause for the bowel to be enveloped in the white pouch. But if you find some cause from him, then you compress it to the belly below.
And then insert into the part below the code of the testicles by section of which blood and pus may flow in such a way as we have recommended above.
And then administer the linen soaked in oil to the wound; and pause there; and administer the binding which we have recommended (and sometimes the white pouch is cauterized, as we have said above, in order to prevent flux of blood, for many times those things occur) and leave the binding until it falls by itself.
But if the bleeding is delayed, then let cold water be poured over it, and pause there until it falls as we have said.
And then cure the wound with the other cure of wounds until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI.
Of Hernia Ventosa.
In this hernia, no one has seen anyone who was burned by the cure with iron.
And the first ones said that it is done just as we have recommended in the hernia which is with wine; which is that you tie up the vessels near the section over there with ease of him; and then cut in the middle place around the abscess with water that brings that about, until the vessels fall.
And cure the wound according to what we have said, until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
Of the Disruption that is made in the Anginors.
Sometimes a rupture occurs in the anginors just as we have said, and it protrudes to the location.
And there is no need for the genitals to have any cause of the bowels at the genitals; and if there is, it is little; and it returns again in all hours.
But if the time is prolonged with this, it is adjusted fissure in the pouch until it descends into the pouch; and it occurs because of the extension of the pouch which is in the anginors just as we have said, which cause is that the pouch is stretched, and then it becomes softened and the location is abscessed and protrudes.
And the cure for this is with a cauterizer just as we have previously described.
And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this manner: and it is that the patient lies on his back between your hands, and then cuts the location of the rupture of the abscesses protruding in a section by latitude according to the quantity of three fingers.
And then strengthen the white pouch which is below the code until it is revealed.
And then take a ray and pause that over the protruding part of the pouch, and press that against the belly's forepart.
And then close the two protruding parts over the extremity of the ray of the pouch, and adjust with a suture one to another.
And then extract the extremity of the ray, and do not insert it into the pouch entirely, nor extend the humor, nor any other cause just as you would know to be in the cure of intestinal hernia.
And then cure that with the cure of wounds, and as you insert the threads, cleanse it and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for the pouch has constricted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
And cauterization is better in this location, since it is closer to health.
Chapter LXVIII.
Of Softening of the Code of the Testicles.
Many times the code of the testicles in some men is softened because those fleshy parts that are between it are softened, and it is conducive to its regulation.
Therefore it is necessary for the one who is present in the cure to make the patient lie on his back, and insert all the code which is softened over the natural code; and then adjust two lips with a suture.
And if you wish, close at the beginning the excess of the softened code with three or four cauterizations and a firm suture.
And then insert between the sutures; and then cure by curing other wounds until it is healed and the threads fall.
Chapter LXIX.
Of Castration.
Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but for a reason it has been written to me, so that I may remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to recall it except by two manners, of which one is because of the science of the doctor when he is interrogated about it, knowing the cure of him to whom it occurs; and the other manner is that many times we have needed castration of other beasts for our own purposes through those, just as with horses, oxen, pigs, and similar animals.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two manners: either by incision or by section through a cut.
But in that which is done by incision, the way of the operation is that we make the animal be cut in cold water until its genital parts are softened and tied with linen threads. And then take those with your own hand, until they are resolved and do not appear to be left behind the touchment.
But in castration done by section and cut, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the code of the testicles with your left hand.
And then tie the suspenders and insert one section over each humor until two humors process.
And then insert those more than you will have excoriated. And do not leave any cause on the pouch of the testicles, but only the subtle pouch which is above the veins.
And this manner of castration is better which is done by incision, because incision does not leave any cause of the testicles so that the animal desires to copulate.
And then cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LXX.
Of the Cure of Hermaphrodism.
Hermaphrodism in men is according to two manners: one is when it appears in that which is the space in the code of testicles, between two testicles, a figure like that of a woman's, with breasts.
And sometimes from it flows urine which is in the code of the testicles.
But in women, it is a species: and it is that the woman's vulva on the pubis is like two testicles of a man a little bit outside, just as the male perineum and two testicles.
And the cure is of three species: of two of men and one species of women. And it is that you must insert those adjusted fleshy parts until it escapes the pressure of that, and then cure those with the cure of other wounds.
And in the second species of men from which urine flows which is in the code of the testicles, there is no cure or operation in it.
Chapter XXI.
Of Leninge and Fleshy Eminence due to Causes of Women.
Leninge is quickly adjusted over natural causes until it is stretched and its regulation is made firm; and sometimes it is magnified in some women to the point where it spreads like in men and penetrates into coitus.
Therefore, it is necessary that you take the excess of Leninge with your own hand or with a forceps and insert it.
And do not leave any excess, especially in the region of the rectum, for fear that blood may flow.
And then cure that with the cure of wounds until it is healed.
But born flesh is flesh that grows in the horrific of the mare until it fills that, and quickly it is emitted to the outside parts like a cock (and therefore we will call this "malautia caudata"); therefore it is necessary that we insert it just as we insert Leninge, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXII.
Of the Cure of Alratica.
Alratica is when a woman's vulva is not perforated or if it is only slightly pierced. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to disease that has preceded, and it is caused either by flesh not well adjusted or by subtle or thick pouch.
And it is caused either in the back of the mare, or in the sides of him, or in the highest part of him, or in the lowest part of him, and forbids coitus, engagement, and childbearing, and strongly forbids menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is made by examination of the metro-na, if the obstruction is apparent, direct it; but if it is not apparent, then search for it with the threads or with a probe.
But if obstruction is due to subtle pouch and is directed towards the two lips, then you must cut and disrupt that.
And it is that you pause over the two lips of the pulse, and then pause the threads indicated by both hands at the same time.
And the woman lies on her back, her arms extended, and then extends the two lips with force until that subtle pouch is broken and the obstruction is opened.
And then take lanolin and anoint it with oil and pause that over the location, and lie down as a man by day for so that the location is not consolidated.
But if the pouch is thick and dense, then it is necessary that you insert it with a spatula or with myrtle leaves.
But if the obstruction is due to fleshiness, then suspend that with forceps and insert it.
And are with you the medicines that stop blood flow without biting, such as ahaemia, dragon's blood, and resin, adjusted with album of humor.
And then administer a leaden cannula wide enough to prevent the wound from being consolidated slightly.
And keep that for some days and administer lukewarm water.
And then be cured with another cure of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes accidents occur in the natural birth of other flesh, and it is necessary that you insert according to this manner. But if it is due to green abscess, then do not make any contradiction with iron in any manner at the green abscess which is in the mare.
Chapter LXXIII.
Of the Cure of Hemorrhoids and Tail and Red Botch that occurs in the Vulva of Women.
Hemorrhoids are an affection of many veins' orifices, until those veins flow with continuous blood; and when old hemorrhoids become formed and their throats are filled.
And I have already said in the division of those species and signs of those, and to say that those who receive cure and those who do not receive cure.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and throats when they are in the back of the mare and do not appear to the sense, then in those there is no cure made with iron.
But those which are in the orifice of the mare above which one feels sensation, are those that can be cured.
And it is necessary that you put the woman in a warm bath and then extend the throat with forceps or with rough cloth, and insert those into the roots.
And then powderize over those the flows of blood from one of the insertable powders without biting, such as acaasia and similar to those.
And then apply her feet for an hour, and then pause that in cold water.
And if the bleeding persists, then make that cease in a decoction of Sumatra and scorched millet and gallberries and similar things.
And then take oatmeal flour and mix it with honey and vinegar and make an embalmment with water on the back of him.
And if the blood is stopped, it is good; and otherwise, make adhere with two poultices, and to the nipples without scarification.
And then take lanolin and submerge that in the juice of colicandre or in the juice of arnagloza or in the juice of guarravier with pentit vinegar and make adhere to the location; and then cure the location with ointment until it is healed.
And cure that until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
Of the Perforation of Accidental Discharge in the Mare.
Many species of accidental abscesses occur in the mare, such as green abscess, lapidated abscess, ulcers, adhubelation, erpetromenitis, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and rough throats, and other abscesses. And I have already said these diseases and the species of those and their signs, and their cures in the division.
And it is necessary that you say in this treatise of cauterized abscess which appears in the mare when it is one of the abscesses that requires surgery, and if you want to know how the operation is done with iron.
Therefore it is necessary that you consider whether the pain of the abscess in its initial stages is sharp with percussion and inflammation and fever, and at times becomes inflamed and if one feels sensation on it, then do not open it by perforation, but cure it with water that helps with maturation until the acuity of the accident subsides.
And then it is necessary that you make the woman lie on a cushion that has two cushions; and recline on her back and adjust her feet at the lowest part of the belly, and her arms be expanded, and pause her hands below her nails, and tie each one with a ligament to water suitable.
And then the midwife follows directly and administers the instrument with which the orifice of the mare is opened, in the shape that will come forth according to those causes that are about to be made.
And then it is necessary when you want to administer this instrument that you make it in the shape of a ray on the back of the mare of the woman, and what is entered into the mare from the instrument is not more than the back of the mare and leads the patient. But if the instrument is greater than the back of the mare, then it is necessary that you powderize over the texture of the back of the mare so that it prohibits the entrance of any instrument into the back of the mare.
And then it is necessary that you pause the vertebrae which runs in the instrument of the left side and above, and that the minister hold the instrument and turn the vertebrae so that the orifice of the mare is opened.
And when the excitation appears and is touched with the hand and is lion-like and moist, then it is necessary that you dry that part of the head of him with a spatula.
And when the pus is evacuated, then it is necessary that you pause in the wound a poultice submerged in rose oil or green oil with some stiptic properties; and pause the caustic in the section on the back of the mare.
And then pause before the mare and above the pubic area a clean lanolin submerged in water in which mulberries have been boiled.
And then be cured within two days with ointment which is suitable for that until it is healed.
And sometimes the mare is washed and the wound is cleaned with water and honey, and then applied with water in which is boiled root of lily or long aristology, and then returns to the ointment.
And if the wound is deep in the mare's udder, then it is necessary that you be prohibited from curing it with iron, having cured it with water as we have said in the division.
Chapter LXXV.
To teach midwives how to medicate children's bodies when they are sick according to an unnatural figure.
It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of natural childbirth by signs from above, and is that when you see the woman expelling at the lower partings and desires to smell the air, and above this is relieved by what is on her, and hastens the emission of the child, then you know that this part is according to a natural figure, and it is the emission of the child over its head, and the secondine with that or suspended or hanging from the umbilicus.
Therefore, when you see those signs, then it is necessary that the child's belly be compressed so that the child descends slightly because when they are born over its head, they give secondine to it, and it is cleansed of those superfluities with good cleansing.
But that which is another part is not natural and not acceptable, because when the child is born over its feet and its body is born before its head and its feet, and the hand of it one or at the foot of it, ..., or is born the head of it and its hand, or at the belly of it, and very strongly it is converted over its neck, and similar to the figures of it not acceptable.
Therefore, it is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guards against error and deception.
And you are showing the whole figure of those, and what kind of sign is in them so that it may be signified by that and has been on that.
When the child is born over its head by natural extraction, and that is vehement on the woman and is made to her part difficult, and sometimes the virtue of it already weakened, then make that cease, or that women have it, and evaporate the womb with fenugreek powder and moist oil.
And then insert the metro-na between the two said spatula and gap with that, or cut it with its own nail into what is in her of humidity. And press the woman's belly until the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then it is necessary that the woman be cleansed with ptilly mucus and fenugreek mucus with camomile.
And then command it to him, and to the cleanser, that it be compressed and make it sneeze with condiments; and take his mouth and nose for an hour, because the fetus will soon forget.
And if the two hands of the fetus are forgotten at the beginning, then it is necessary that you reduce them with small steps of ease. But if it does not obey the instrument, then pause the woman on a cushion and lift her feet up, and then conceive the cushion on the ground; and the woman be held so that she does not fall from the conception.
And if the hands are not returned and the fetus dies, then insert those and extract the remnant of the fetus or tie the body to the hand of it with cloth and extract that with equality, because it will soon be forgotten.
When the fetus is born on its feet, then it is necessary that you impel them inwards, and then convert the small fetus into one, and then bring forth one foot of it and extend those little by little.
But when they are born into the armpits, then you command it to come forth, and make it sneeze with condiments, because it will soon be forgotten if God so wills.
And if it is not forgotten with what we have recounted, then you return the small fetus little by little until it pauses according to natural figure, because that will be forgotten at a lighter birth.
And if it is prohibited by all that we have recounted, then take mugwort and dissolved gum, and strike everything in the mortar for good striking, and then line up with water the vulva of the woman, at the lowest part of her belly. And then make that cease in warm water until it reaches the hypochondria.
And when the lower parts of it are relaxed, then make a sub-fumigation with myrtle and pause that on it. And when the sub-fumigation is done for an hour, then you make it cease on a cushion, and then make that sneeze and extend its mouth, and take it from there, and press the lower part of her belly with gentle compression, so that the fetus will soon be forgotten.
Birth of the Fetus sideways hanging one of its fingers. It is eased into reduction with the hand of her, but if you cannot reduce that, then lift up the woman and make her go.
And if she cannot go, then make her lie down on the bed, and conceive the armpits of her with violent concussion, and then administer lukewarm lukewarms which we have recounted.
And if the childbirth is complete, then make that cease on a cushion, and then study on the reduction of the hand, and bring forth the child according to natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command it to compress itself until it is forgotten.
Birth of the Fetus with its fingers spread out and the fold of it on the back of the mother's shoulder. It is necessary that the midwife take the hand of the fetus and then turn it little by little, and make it easy for it.
And when it is and when it is equalized, then pause on the vulva of her with that which we have recounted of oil and mucus.
And then command it to be massaged little by little, and when you have done that, then make that cease on a cushion and command it to be inclined over the right side, and then command it to be compressed; and make it sneeze with condiments. The exit of the prepared fetus onto the side.
When the horror of the mother is over according to this manner, consider, and then you insert the secondine with your nail until it is evacuated of humidity.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and back of her, then you insert that of the umbilicus, in order that it not be retained and die.
And then push the fetus into the lower parts until it pauses according to what is necessary, and command the woman to compress herself several times, and if God so wills, it will be forgotten at a lighter birth.
The exit of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are sometimes born multiple times, and sometimes three or four, but this is strange and does not end well; yet there are causes of nature, and they do not live.
And then, whether they are multiple or not, a secondine is formed, and they are separated by ciphac, distinguishing them between the ligament in the umbilic of each of those. And sometimes they are forgotten like one fetus at a lighter birth, and sometimes they are born non-naturally like what we have recounted.
And if some of them are difficult to deliver and come to what we have said about the non-natural figures, then you cure those just as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is subtle and makes it so that it brings about ease and subtlety, and in tardiness, and is inclined according to all figure as it is prepared by nature leading to salvation.
Remembrance of what is formed in the womb from embryos and aborted fetuses.
Some women are formed in multiples of one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and up to ten, and it is necessary for me to verify that one woman aborts at the seventh month, and another has all her children, which was caused by measurement according to the wise sages.
And thus it is necessary for the midwife to have knowledge of this because very much alike is similar to that, and therefore pause at that point with so many as are needed.
Chapter LXXVI.
On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not forthwith extracted, and you are forced to use operation by hand, then it is necessary that you consider if the woman has a healthy virtue and is not affected by any of the accidents whereby upon her is feared destruction.
Then it is necessary that the woman be laid on her back on a bed, and have her head inclined downwards and her armpits elevated.
And the attendant shall hold that in two parts or bind it on the bed, for the sake of the body not extending too far during the extraction of the fetus.
And then you moisten the mouth of the mother with oil and mucus, and with mugwort and fenugreek and seed of flax.
And then the midwife inserts her hand with those oils and mucus into the mother's body, and then eases it in with facility, and then searches for the spot where the fingers will rest on the fetus.
And finds a suitable spot: then you consider if the fetus is prepared to descend onto its head, and then place your fingers on the nose of it, or on the neck, or in the mouth, or on the palate, or below the beard, or in the furrow of it, or in the places proper for the ribs, or below the hypochondria.
But if the descent is onto the feet of it, then in the armpit or in the middle of the ribs.
And it is necessary to take the fingers with the right hand, and pause the curvature of it at that spot which is between the said bones of the left arm, and insert the hand with ease and place the fingers in some of those spots which we have said, until one comes to the cause of birth.
And then pause and place another finger or the third if necessary, for a drawing equalization, and not an extension according to its straightness only.
And thus be good at all part, for that the delivery of it is alleviated as if made in debt towards the eradication of it.
And it is necessary in that which is between them that the extension be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife must anoint some of its bones with oil and insert those expertly and turn around with those waters which are retained.
Therefore, if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then the fingers must be made pliable to get into the place where it is higher up; and make so that the entire fetus is forgotten.
But if the hand is stuck before the other, and it is not possible to reduce that by the contraction of it, then it is necessary to wrap a cloth around that; and then extract that until all is forgotten, and insert it either at the junction of the arm or in the armpit.
And thus it is necessary to do so with the other hand and both feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or there occurs contraction during delivery, or water is adjusted in the head, then it is necessary to insert between the bones spines and cut the head and drain the water, or that dissects that with an instrument which is called "alundat", whose form will come with the forms of other instruments in the chapter which is next to this.
And similarly do so if the fetus is naturally large-headed: and then it is necessary to insert that with an algemate, or take that with an alundat as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is extracted and is contracted at the furrow, then it is necessary to cut through until the moisture which is in the feet is poured out.
But if it is not complicated, nor follows extraction, then you should insert the head as soon as possible according to what seems best to you.
And if the afterbirth is apostematic or is in a state of hydroptic swelling, then it is necessary to perforate that until the moisture which is in it runs out.
But if the fetus is on its feet, then the attraction of it is slight and the direction of it to the mouth of the mother is slight.
But if it is contracted in the belly and feet, then it is necessary to extract that with cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and cut open the belly and feet until the water that is in them flows out.
But if the other members are still and turn back to the head, then put your left hand into it; but if the mouth of the mother is swollen, then insert your hand into the pelvis, and search for that head, and pull it with those fingers into the mouth of the mother, and then put one finger, or two fingers, into it, and draw it along with them.
And if the mouth of the mother is contracted by an apostematic swelling which comes to one, then it is necessary that no trouble be given about it; but rather administer an effusion of humid and fatty causes. And minister plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
And if the fetus is on its side, then if possible, it should be punctured: and water that we have said in the living fetus should be administered.
And if this is not possible, then insert it into pillows, and extract it.
And it is necessary that no cause be left behind the secondine.
And when you have completed all your operation, then administer the water that we have said for the cure of apostematic swellings which occur in the mother.
And if bleeding occurs, then administer purgative waters and give the other treatment.
And I have already seen a woman in whose womb was a dead fetus, and then another pregnancy had begun, and the dead fetus was another. An accident occurred to me, about a long time ago, an apostematic swelling in my own umbilicus; and it inflated so that it became a large boil, and began to suppurate.
And I was called to the cure of it, and medicated it for a long time, but the wound did not consolidate.
Then I applied to it some plaster of strong attraction, and extracted from it a bone, and after passing some days, extracted another bone; and I was too astonished, as in the belly there is no bone.
And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Then I examined the wound, and extracted from it many bones, the woman existing in her own milks and dispositions, and already living in such a way for a long time, brought forth one small piece of flesh.
And I did not find it strange, but rather because in that is science and aid to that which the physician-artificer administers with his hand for cure.
Of the forms of instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of vertex which is opened in the mother:
This is the form of strengthener in which are equalized the freed limbs, to which equalization two vertebrae are joined at two extremities of two feet. And however this vertebra must be more subtle than the strictor, and made of ebony or of boxwood.
And the length of each stick is two fingers and a half; and in the middle place of two sticks are two adjustments of those same sticks which are already fixed, the length of which is one palm and a little more, and the width of each is two fingers or a little more.
And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is opened to receive them when you revolve the two prescribed vertebrae.
Another form similar to that one, more subtle and lighter:
Is made of sticks of ebony or boxwood according to the likeness of forceps. But in the extremity of it are two additional pieces like that, and the length of those additions is one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the mother with those, then you must make the woman lift her feet off the bed and bend over, opening what is between her armpits. And then, with your hand on the instrument, as you would make forceps equalize according to the quantity that you want of the appreciation of the mouth of the mother until she makes what you want.
The form of vertex which was said by the ancients:
Form of impeller, with which the fetus is impelled:
Form of misdirection, with which the large head is counteracted.
And it is assembled to forceps which has teeth on the extremity, like times, and some times is made long like forceps according to this form, like times, to which teeth are similar to teeth of a saw that is inserted and counteracted. Form of misdirection slightly:
Form of finger having one spine:
Form of fingers having two spines:
Form of spine having two extremities, with which the head is cut off.
Form of two lateral spines:
All those instruments are exercised, and when more species of them are multiplied and prepared, then the artisans should be more skilled in their operation and have greater quantity of them.
And do not neglect those instruments however small they may be, because the necessity for them is inexcusable.
Of the extraction of the secondine.
When the secondine is retained in childbirth, then it is necessary to command the patient to retain her breath and then make that stornudate under certain conditions, and strengthen your hand over the mouth and nostrils of it, and if by this means it has been expelled, good is.
And if not, then you take a cloth and pierce it in the cover of a hole and pause in that herb which opens the mouth of the mother, like calament, ruda, anet, camomilla, Arabian squill, and cassia lignea, and saffron. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the cloth, and pause that on the fire.
And then pause a reed of cane in the mouth of the mother, and hold it until the evaporation comes to the concavity of the mother.
And then make that stornudate as we have said, and the secondine is expelled quickly.
But if this cure does not work and the secondine remains, then you command the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or in a mixture of high-quality alta, and insert it into the concavity and seek out the secondine, and when she has found it, take it and stretch it little by little. But if it is annexed in the pelvis of the mother, then insert your hand according to what we have recounted, and when you have found the secondine, extract it gradually, following its natural course, so that the mother does not suffer from the strong attraction. Before all, it is necessary to make it pliable at the right and left sides with ease.
And if the mouth of the mother is contracted, we have already recounted the cure with stornudation and medication of the cloth with herbs.
But if it is not expelled with all the causes that we have recounted, then beware that you do not fetigues on it in iteration of abstraction, but rather make sure that what has issued from it to the mouth of the mother lies at the breast of the woman, and then christenize it with a gentle touch and tetrachloride; for that will cause it to be putrid after some days and dissolve and be expelled.
But when it putrefies, it is elevated to bad authority at the head and stomach, and then leads the patient astray; and therefore it is necessary that sub-fumigations and conveniences be administered accordingly.
But some of the Ancients have already been experimented with sub-fumigation of navel-worts and dried figs.
Form of instrument by which the woman is sub-fumigated for the retention of menses and secondine:
Is made of veyre or eram.
And it is paused with the subtle extremity in the concavity and the broad extremity over the fire, and the sub-fumigation is paused above the arms of the fire.
And hold it until that sub-fumigation is consumed and iterate another.
Of the cure for the child's unbroken navel.
Many children are thus and their navels are not pierced, which already have a subtle and opaque cicatrix. Then command the midwife to pierce it with her finger that cicatrix; and if not, then pierce it with a sharp awl, and be careful not to touch the skin.
And then pause on that lanolin infused in wine and oil; and then cure it with a gentle touch until it is clean.
But if you fear that it may be obstructed, then pause in the hole a reed for many days, and stop when the child will desire to pass.
And if an obstruction of the navel occurs due to consolidation of a wound or apostema; then command that this consolidation be inserted, and then cure it with the water we have said for the cure and with lead.
Of the cure for fistulas that remain after childbirth.
The fistulas that remain in the aftermath of childbirth, which are lower and more swollen due to edema and grossness, and those that remain close to the navel or in the space of one part.
And it is a single fistula or multiple ones.
And when that swelling is ancient and flows with white watery humor or subtle putrefaction, and some times are penetrated by these fistulas.
And those that are penetrated are known by what has issued from them through egression and flatulence; and some times the patient uses laxatives, and then a great deal is issued from these fistulas.
And some times those fistulas penetrate into the space between the bladder and the urethra, and even into the flesh of the vulva; and some of these penetrate into the junction of the scrotum and into the notch of the clitoris.
And this is how a penetrating fistula that does not penetrate is known, namely by inserting the tip of your finger into the navel and then introducing a subtle probe made of eram or iron into the fistula when there is no tumorosity.
But if there is a tumor in that fistula, then insert into it a subtle probe made of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or hair in your finger.
And if you don't feel it at all or if there is no discharge of anything from the hole, neither pus nor wind, as we have said, then know that it is not penetrating, and be careful to proceed with the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the flesh of the vulva, then the significance of it is issuing urine from that place and prohibiting it to that extent, so that the location where medicine is applied is consolidated.
But if it is penetrating into the junction of the scrotum or into the bone and causing pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the probe passes through here if there is no tumor in the bone, and pain in the circuit of the part; and that from it there will be a putrid discharge at all times; and that it will not be cured with medicine, nor consolidated with gentle touch.
And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the cure of these is a great deal of labor and expertise of skilled physicians upon which we have fixed.
But in that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing with iron is hoped for according to what I have recounted to you, and what has already been tried.
And it is that the patient lies between your knees over their back and lifts their legs up to yours, with the thighs inclined towards the belly of theirs, and then insert a probe made of lead or eram into the fistula if there is tumorosity in it, until you know the place where the probe goes in.
And if the patient feels pain around the navel, then command that you insert your finger into the navel.
And if you feel the probe already having passed through and penetrating, or if you feel between your finger and that siphac or flesh, then you will certainly know that it is penetrating; and then do not trouble with it, as there is no healing in it, just as we have said.
But however, some may say that it heals in certain people.
And the medication by which healing is expected in this case is that you ignite a subtle cauteri according to the size of the fistula, just as we have said, and then insert that ignited cauteri into the fistula until it reaches around the navel; and then repeat that process two or three times until you know that all those adjusted flesh folds that are like feathers on an owl's tail are now adjusted.
And then cure that with cloths wrapped in boiled linen until all those adjusted flesh folds are fully healed and consolidated; and then cure it with medicines generating and consolidating the flesh, and if it is healed, good is; and otherwise, never will be cured by any other treatment.
And if the probe enters and does not penetrate into the navel which is in the navel, but rather passes through that soft flesh or cicatrix, and sometimes the fistula opens up on the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it drying with the probe, and be in the fistula until the drying reaches the location where the extremity of the probe is inserted, and through the probe is liberated and cleansed.
And then clean those flesh folds which are like the feathers of an owl and do not remain with any remaining cause.
But if there is a flow of pus that comes between you and your operation when you are cleaning those flesh folds, then use the mill that is and take the least painful instrument, which is cauterization with fire or acute medicine, for cauterization with fire adjusts two good habits: it is adjustment of those adjusted flesh folds, and ablation of pus from excessive humidity.
And then cure that with cloths wrapped in boiled linen or in threefold cloth until the location gets firm, and then command to cure the wound with gentle touch, generating and consolidating hard flesh.
And thus medicines in which there is astringency and excess; when the patient is restored, it is already healed and you do not fear relapse.
But if the fistula has already penetrated into the pelvis of the navel and is elongated from its surface to the body, then insert your finger into the navel and investigate with it.
And therefore if you feel the probe and it is gently on cicatrix or flesh, and is prepared for penetration, then there is no operation in this case except according to the way of faith and hope.
The cause is to administer in this case one of three ways: either to cauterize it as we have said; or to dry it until you achieve the desired condition of the navel so that you can insert your fingers and carry out the cure provided; and do not proceed with any drying method so that you do not incise the skin containing the navel, and what happens is in accordance with the patient's own will; and then cure it as we have said, for it will soon be healed; or to lengthen it slightly and remove the pus that has accumulated by drying it out as much as possible over the navel, either with a probe or another sharp instrument of acute extremity, and then thoroughly cleanse those flesh folds which are in the section where you can see perforation; and then make every effort to restore the entire wound through drying, and if the opening above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open on the part of the navel, it will be even easier for the patient. And sometimes the fistula is finished in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is in the lateral part of the navel around the surface of the body with the skin and on the margin of the navel, then take a probe of perforated extremity, which is like an awl that prepares the holes according to this form:
and insert it into that faithful envelope of 5 or those around them; and then insert the probe gently into the fistula until you achieve the desired condition.
But if it is penetrating in the margin of the navel, then you extract the probe from that hole just as you insert your finger into the navel; and extract the extremity of the probe and adjust the two extremities together, and strengthen each one, and let it remain like that for a day or two, and when more you insert the probe into the flesh, strengthen it well so that those flesh folds are inserted which are between the two extremities of the probe and fall.
And then cure the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate, in whatever way you are prepared, but not so that it is in the prepuce, because it is not for you to do this so as not to incise the skin; and then make it so until it is healed.
The form of the awl with which the fistula is pierced: its curvature is very acute and the other part is not acute, so that you do not incise what is not necessary, just as sometimes.
Of the suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows during the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are according to two ways, for either they are between the anus resembling charcoal or those which are like ripe grapes. And of those that are small and large, and the blood flows from them at all times and is one, and many, and outside the anus, and in the extremities of it.
But however, those that are outside the anus are according to the months of little humidity, from which a yellowish water or a small amount of blood flows with the body continuingly, and according to the color of the body.
And the cure for that which is outside the anus is that you command the patient to settle down and express himself until the anus opens up and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you take hold of them and suspend with the fingers or what you have as your fingernail, and then cut off those roots.
But if the fingers are not suitable for grasping those due to their moisture and softness, then take them with a rough cloth or a piece of leather or a woolen rag, and extract them with your fingers, and then cut off those roots and powder some powders nearby the incision, so that they stick to those places like cauterization; or cauterize those as is preceded in the chapter on cauterization. And then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
And if the anus does not obey evacuation, then anoint the patient with an ointment in which there is a small amount of bitter substance, and wash it with that water that is in the navel and that will cause evacuation slightly when the patient presses.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause of their being is slight, and it is that you take them with your fingernail or with an awl, and cut off those roots, and then cure those with water as we have said until they are healed.
And that which you have incised, you must administer suturing of theirs according to this manner: take a needle wrapped and insert it into the awl and then extract the hemorrhoids from the upper parts, and make it penetrate into the root of the other part, and wrap the two extremities of the needle in the outermost part of the awl, and so latitudinally; and strengthen the hemorrhoid with strong stitches, and then remove the needle and awl.
And do this to all of them, and leave one and not close it, for so that the superfluity of blood flows from it.
And then pause over the anus with a cloth dipped in rose oil or cerote; and pause that over the anus and command the patient to rest. And then let it rest until it is closed; and when it is closed, cure those with gentle touch or another cure until it is healed.
And since they are so old and do not respond to that medicine, then it is necessary to reason with those at the point of awl or with your fingernail until they become moist and the discharge above is blocked from consolidation; and then cure those until they are consolidated.
Then you must grasp those with reason more violent than the first, until there is much blood and they are exfoliated; and then cure those until they are healed.
Know that Almesmir is thus, it is the key, and not if not noted according to the color of the skin resembling a cap of cloves, and it is made throughout the body and most especially in the parts below the feet and hands, and therefore it causes pain through those who do the amending.
And then it is necessary to cut out that which is in the circle of the key, and to be held by forceps or awls, and to be eradicated from its root; and then cure that.
And if you wish, cauterize it according to what is preceded in its own chapter.
But verucca is a small, hard, round excrescence on the surface of the body, and many times it appears on the skin of children.
And the cure for it is that you stretch and cut out that excrescence, or that you strengthen it with a needle or thread until it closes. And if you wish, cauterize it, according to what we have said, with fire or acute medicine.
But formica is a small, fatty or fistulous excrescence on the surface of the body growing downwards towards the groin, and when the skin finds that excrescence it seems to be bitten by a formic worm, and it is made around the body.
And the cure for it is that you take a reed pipe made from goose or from wolf's tail, and make it strong, and pause it on the formica until it contains the circle of the reed pipe in its parts; and then turn your hand with the reed pipe until you cut out what is in the circuit of the formica, and pause it in the groin of the flesh, and that eradicates the formica from its root.
And if you wish, do this with an iron or steel reed according to this form:
Be the upper part of the reed pipe drawn out to subtlety, smooth (it is not perforated), wrapped in such a way that on the said point it takes hold and turns around itself.
And if you wish, cauterize the formica according to what is said before in the cauterization of atheyl in the chapter on cauterization.
The form of the instruments that are administered to give ointment.
Some times it is made ointment of silver or lead or melted iron or hammered; and some times it is made with small and large instruments according to those which are administered, for that which is administered in the cure of small children is small; and the ointments of those whose buttocks are sore or painful, are small.
The form of great and little ointment:
The head of the reed pipe above, in which the pouch is tied, should be wide according to this manner; and there should be a distinction at the point where the pouch is tied, as it sometimes happens.
And the extremity of it that is inserted into the anus should be smooth (it is not open) like a lion's back, going towards subtlety; and on one side there are two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole should be according to the thickness of the rays and a little larger.
And the pouch should be made in such a way that medicines from the bladder of an animal or the wool of a sheep are placed inside it, and the root of it should be one palm.
And it should be perforated by many small holes, as if it is being turned over; and the space between the holes should be the thickness of the same.
And then insert the needle into those small holes, a strong and sharp needle made from the bone of ten or more needles, or one that is similar to them; and adjust the pouch (borsa) over it; and when the pouch is placed in it, be stretched at the top of the ointment between two distinct parts with strong constriction, and then cauterize each hole: But the quality of cauterizing is that you fill the pouch with medicine, which should be heated according to the quantity of tolerance of the patient; and be careful not to make it too hot or too cold.
And then the patient should be placed on their back over the said spot, with their legs lifted up and their feet placed one on either side of the cauterized area; and then a cloth or a lansol should be placed over it, and a small amount of oil or albumen of hen or mucilage of fenugreek or something similar should be applied to the extremity of the cauterizer; and then insert that into the anus with ease, and the minister should take the pouch and squeeze out what is in the ointment with two hands and sometimes with vehemence until everything is evacuated from the container; and then remove the ointment and the patient should lift their legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces him to evacuate immediately, let him do so as much as he can; and if he sleeps with that for a whole night, it is more beneficial in its effect.
But if you cauterize that in the illnesses of diarrhea and the evacuation of stool is slow, then you must iterate the cauterizer until he is cured.
And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then it should be the cauterizer of subtlety and lion, among the cauterizers which children are accustomed to.
The cure of plagues.
And I already said in the division of the cure of plagues that this is suitable for the free, and I will say thus the cure of these with me and with medicines according to the complement.
Therefore I say that plagues are diversified according to this, in which the plagues are made and according to the place where one makes the plagues.
And the causes by which many times plagues are made are thus as follows: by bite of a snake, or incision with a sword or with a cotelet, or percussion with a lance, or with a club, or with an arrow, or similar to these many causes.
But the plagues that are on the parts of the body are thus as follows: plague which afflicts the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the thigh, and similar to those of the members.
And I am recommending the cure for some plagues, because it is rational and a rule for other plagues.
And I will begin with the simple plagues of the head, for the recollection of the complex ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore I say that when a simple plague occurs in the head and is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to snakebite or something similar, and you have already noticed that the patient has only just begun to swell and is now experiencing great pain and fears an abscess will form, then you should immediately take a lead bullet and apply it to the cephalic vein, and not delay; and remove the blood from the wound according to the quantity of the virtue of the medicine if there is no other cause prohibiting this, especially if the blood that has been drawn from the plague is little.
And it should be the bleeding of the opposite side of the affected part; and beware the patient from taking in too much food, drink, and heavy nourishment.
But if there is any other cause prohibiting it, then let the nourishment be reduced and not approach meat or wine.
And pause over the plague, if it becomes an abscess, cut off in oil rosated or in wine that is stipticated.
But if it is certain that the abscess is not serious, then pause over the plague, if it is recent with its own blood and the air has not changed the powder which I recommend to be applied little by little.
And if the air has already changed it, then pause over another ointment until it is healed.
But if the plague is great or is due to incision with a sword and similar things, and the lips of it are not adjusted by poultices, then adjust those with suture according to what I recommend for the suture of them.
But if the plague has been discovered from bone and flesh, and there is no retention of it except a small suspensor, then cut into that and apply cure to the plague with medicines and restore the flesh in place of coding, and command the patient to eat foods in which greasiness is gross: heads and forms coit and similar things to theirs, until they are composed.
And if you find putridity in the coding and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut into all that putridity and take it away, and apply cure there.
But if in these plagues there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow and it is not cut off by medicines, then you should inquire about the artery, and if you find that one that has not been cut off, then you should cut into it with a spatula, or ligate it; and if necessity demands that what we have said does not occur, then you should cauterize until the blood is stopped.
And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; therefore you may powderize over those this powder, which will consolidate before the air changes those.
And the manner of the powder is this: take oil of dragon's blood one part, blood of dragon two parts, and unextinguished candle three parts; grind all together and crush well, and then fill the plague with it, and compress it with good constriction until it adheres well to that place, and coagulates with the blood.
And apply the powder above as poultices and let it be, and do not remove it until it is thus as if there were an abscess, for then the medicine will not be absorbed into it until it is healed.
And sometimes it is done alone with this powder, when there is not enough of you in person and blood of dragon.
And this same operation is done in great plagues when it is necessary to pause over those and be stretched, and new plagues with their own blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially in the summer, then it is not advisable to apply this powder, but rather cure those with what we have said, by suspending over those certain ointments or powders made from barley flour mixed with water and honey until they give a purging; and then apply cure to those with another remedy until they are healed.
But if it happens with a fracture in the bone and it is small, then you should extract that with gestures.
And you should say the cure for fractures of the head in what is poisonous.
Of the plagues of the neck.
But if the plague occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in medicine between it and the plague of the head when simple.
But if the nerves of the neck are cut or artery is affected, then if it is nerve, not in you but rather be avoided any cure that would cause vehement stipticitat, such as ziniar and zegi that is vetriol and similar to theirs which does not nourish the nerves and contracts them. And do not pause over the plague any cause that is all frozen, for the substance of the nerves is frozen and its continuation is to the brain, which is the most important of all members.
And if it is so with what is cured by light medicines, such as when it is washed with warm water and then infused in rose-colored or uncolored oil, and thucia when it is washed with warm water and the other parts are softened according to this manner, and ointments moist.
But if the plague is great, then you should administer sutures, or bind the lips of it, and apply cure to that with poultices until it is healed.
But if the plague is deep or occurs at the lowest part of the poultice, then you should pierce it in the most depressed location.
But if in the plague there is already incised artery and it has resulted in blood flow, then you should separate or dry that, or ligate that, or cauterize that if necessity demands it to that.
But if the vertebrae of the backbone or all have been incised and the veins of the neck are saved, then you should adjust the lips of the spine with sutures over the canal of the backbone and do not touch that; beforehand equalize that and reduce it to its natural figure, and apply strength to that with decent stretching, and leave that for some days; and apply cure to that with ointments in which there is stipticitat and excitement until it is healed.
But if the plague has made a fracture in the bone, then you should pierce it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those that you can from them; and what is not properly set, leave that until the plague subsides, and be separate and the excrescence of it be alleviated.
And if the plague is recent, then powderize over that the powder which I recommended to you. But if the plague has made a fistula, then cure that with that of which remembrance will come to you in its own chapter.
If it is a blow from a lance or axe, and the wound is deep, then you should consider more carefully if there is ventilation of the plague when the patient exhales; know that the plague is mortal.
And if it is not deep and the plague is recent with its own blood, then you should pause over it with powder in the first hour, and do not strengthen that which might cause the blood to be retained in the depth of it and return to the heart and afflict the patient; rather, pause over it with an attractive ointment, and remove it twice a day.
And if the ointment is not present, then you should pause at the orifice of the plague and cut a small vein so that it sucks up the water that comes from the humidities; and make the patient sleep on top of the wound so that the water that is in it will be adjusted.
But if from the plague three days or more have passed and there is no spasm nor tremor of heart nor constriction of breath, and sometimes other good dispositions are present in him, then know that the plague is saved; and therefore cure it with calmness and with another remedy until it is healed.
But if the healing of him is excluded, and already all time is open, then know that already a fistula has been made; cure therefore that according to its own chapter.
And if the plague is from incision of spaza or cotel, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or hand, then cure that with what precedes suturing, if it is great, or with powder, if it is small.
But if there is already a fracture in the bone, and you have incised pessas (fragments) from it, then you should torque the plague and pull them out to extract those pessas, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then you should leave them alone until the plague subsides, for the extraction of them is alleviated.
And for other plagues that occur in other members, the treatment is the same as what we have said.
Of the plagues of the belly.
The indisposition which occurs in the belly is either great, or small, or middling.
And a small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and it seems that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not take care of the introduction of them to their place soonest, for they open up and are engrossed, so that the instrument of it is made difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is middling, for in that there is not difficult the reduction of the budel, just as it is difficult in the two species mentioned above.
And know that the suture of the belly is according to four manners, but two sutures are common that are necessary in sutures of other plagues of the body.
And two other sutures proper communicate with other plagues, but however are more proper in the suture of the belly.
And you recommend to you what is exposed and declared.
So I say that when the plague is small and there is some cause of the budel for it, and it is made difficult to reduce that, then this is in one of two ways: or by the smallness of the disruption just as we have said, or when the budel has come to be inflated due to the coldness of the air.
And therefore when that is so, then it is necessary for you to scrape off that area with a sponge or damp cloth, or to apply water of the following mixture: cyperum, spic, and embrocation, and pour that over the budel until the inflammation is resolved.
And some times I have seen in which there is constriction, and it is better that water alone does not resolve the inflammation.
And therefore when the inflammation is resolved, then you should moisten the budel with water in which there is high and bad humor, because of this it is alleviated the instrument of it with little cause.
But if the instrument of it is excused from this cure, then you should divide the disruption into small pieces with an instrument in which there are inserted bloody vessels.
And the first cure is better when it is proper and not a section, and there is no occupation to cut too close to necessity and deficiency.
Of the instrument, see if its shape is like this:
The one part of it is bent acute, and the other part not acute, and the extremity subtle, and not sharp like a spatula, but rather obtuse by a little.
And therefore when the plague is amplified and outside the budel, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to the form of it in its natural place, if possible on top of it, because it is better.
But when the disruption is wide and is in the lower part of the belly, then you must make the patient lie on their back with their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should place the head lower than the feet.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then pause your intention and consideration at this point so that the part where the plague is located is higher than the other.
And thus you should administer this in great plagues and in middling plagues.
And in small plagues, pause on what is to your liking, and make sure that the minister is between your most pious ones, who has the entire disruption in their hand and adjusts the lips of it, and make sure to uncover from this to that which will be some cause for another suturing.
And this is the common method of suturing: take the needle, or count the needle according to the size of the amplitude of the plague; and make sure to leave from the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and strengthen the needle one time, so that you do not put faith in the two extremities of the code, with the two extremities of the ciphac that is left over the code of the parts outside, until it penetrates that part; and you have already added the two extremities of the code and the two extremities of the ciphac, and so make four orders.
And so strengthen with double faith in the circle of the needle, and sometimes from two parts together, and so add the two lips and the wound by decent addition; and so leave the thickness of the finger and place another needle in that one, and so link it with a thread just like the first needle; and do not cease to do this if necessary with the needles until you have completed all the contraction of the wound.
And the needles should be middling between grossness and subtlety, because the subtle needles barely touch the flesh; and the thick ones are difficult to manipulate in the code, and therefore it is necessary that they be middling in subtlety and thickness.
And it is not necessary for the needle to be placed in two extremities of the code at once, so that the flesh is not cut lightly and the wound does not become inflamed before its consolidation.
And it should not be prolonged in its suture, so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
And so insert the extremities of the needles in such a way that they do not disturb the patient's sleep; and pause over the suture, spreading out the powder all around, which has the extremities of the needles; and leave those alone until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And this type of suture with needles in this manner is more suitable for small wounds, because it takes only one needle or two around those.
But the second suture is common: and it is that you administer with suture the four extremities, of the code and two extremities of the ciphac, in one go, with a needle in which is faithful enveloped in subtlety and thickness.
And then, when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, reduce the needle to that middle part from which it began, so that the thread retracts into the most superior part of the wound, so that the suture is according to the suture of cloth with which the cloths are strengthened.
And pause between each suture the amount of thickness of the little finger.
And this suture is known to men.
And with such a suture, I cured the wound that had been inflicted on a man in his belly, which was caused by a cotelet, and it was the disruption of the major wound of one palm, and it was situated around two palms of the belly button, and it was the disruption in the middle of the member; and then I reduced it from there, since the belly had been for 24 hours.
And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or around, and I cured it and he is healthy; and so he lived for many years, and is converted to his usual dispositions.
And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by a miracle, it was so, because you did not cure him with an ointment, since there was no ointment nor any medicine found in that place, but instead, you paused over the wound twice a day and performed constant ablutions with water of honey until he was healed.
But you will learn two species of suture proper according to the narration of Paraula.
And you begin with the suture of the code, and enter the needle from the outside to the inside.
And then, when the needle enters the code and meets with the lacertz (ligament) according to right and length throughout the entire body, and leaves the extremity of the ciphac (muscle) in which you inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from the inside to the outside in the other extremity of the muscle.
And then, when you have made the needle penetrate once, make it penetrate again in that same extremity of the muscle from the outside to the inside; and leave the extremity of the ciphac (muscle) that is on this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from the inside to the outside.
And make the needle penetrate to that point where your penetration makes it penetrate into the muscle in the extremity of the mirror which is on this side, until everything penetrates.
And then, starting from this side of the code, and cutting that with the extremity that is of the ciphac on the other side, and extracting the needle from the code which it has penetrated, and then reducing it to that code and cosing the extremity of the ciphac that is on the other side with this same extremity of the mirror; and extracting that from the code which is of this part of lu.
And make it so that there is one pass and another, and make it so that there is one pass and another again, until you close all this that is outside according to that example.
And the sum of this suture method is that you close with sutura of pellicies with which you close the pels, in such a way that you close the ciphac once from the part of the extremity of the code, and then leave it open until you have completed.
But the second species of suture proper which is called Gualia by you, and this is according to the word of Lu and recommended for Lu, is that you close with the second semilitut with which all medicants close with it, in such a way that they add all part to their own corresponding part, as nature allows; and they apply the extremity of another from Lu and the extremity of the mirror to the other extremity of Lu, and this is done according to what you have recommended.
So that you put the needle in the extremity of the mirror at your own pace from the outside, and make it penetrate into the inside in that same spot, and leave two extremities of the ciphac; and then turn back the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside through two extremities of the ciphac.
And then turn back those stitches, and make each one penetrate from the inside to the outside through two extremities of the mirror that are on the opposite side.
And this manner of suture is better than the common light suture, and it is the suture which I mentioned earlier.
And this is the word of Gualia.
And some may say that the suture of the belly is corrected with two needles, so it is that you insert a thread into each one and begin with the introduction of needle from where it should be, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the suturing method of those who sew the skin evenly.
And you should know that when disruption is in the middle of the belly, the suture of Lu is more difficult than in other places of the belly.
But the judgment of wound healing is a judgment of other wounds.
The reason is because when you successfully treat a recent wound with your own blood before it has time to alter that, and reduce the swelling and close the wound, and prepare it decently, then pause over that powder-like flesh.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then pause over that and consider the cases of those who are present before you, until they make a strong impression on your mind and cause the threads to break, and be consolidated ciphac and mirror; and then cure it in the same way as the healing of other wounds until it is well.
But if you are not present with the medicines, then pause over that for now, because it begins to generate a branch, coto veil, and exchange it two times a day, just as I have taught you, until it is well, since you do not need other medication in many situations when wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound may communicate with lesions in the main members, then it is necessary that you immerse a lion's fleece (lana leon) in high-quality olive oil or rose oil and pause it in the circuit of the places between the armpits and leave it as such.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your own swelling (budels), since many times this happens, then pause over that with vinegar stiptic black tea, and especially if the abscess has penetrated into the cavity of the wound.
And you should know that the swelling that is in the large vessels (budel gros) is easier to heal than the one that is in the small vessels (budels subtils).
And it is difficult to heal because the swelling that is called "gegunu" does not receive healing from wound that breaks out in it; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and the magnitude of it that is in those, and because of the subtlety of the body of that, and because of its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the wound is a web (tela), and you succeed in obtaining that which is recent, then reduce it according to your rectitude with which you reduce the swellings evenly.
But if it has passed through the space and is already green or black, then you should strengthen that with thread (fiel) over the location that is denigrated from it, in order that the flux of blood may come, since in the web are veins and arteries.
And then you should inscribe (inicieys) what is another ligament, and pause the two extremities of the thread while it is pending from the left side of the wound to the outside, so that above you may be alleviated the attraction of the wound's discharge and emission of the branch of the wound.
Remembrance of wounds when they occur in the swelling (budel).
When disruption occurs in the swelling (budel) and it is small, then it is possible that it may be restored in certain people, for this reason why you see someone who was once wounded in their own belly with a lance blow and had a wound on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had become a fistula, and there was great movement and venting.
Then you should continue the treatment of it, whether or not it was contained in the healing of it, but rather subtly treat that until it is well and the place is consolidated.
And you should see that the place is already consolidated, then take care of the patient who has suffered from the bad accident in their own belly; and do not neglect anyone because of this bad accident and remain in their natural habits eating and drinking, and also enter into a bath and exercise in their usual ways.
And some experienced ones will say that when a wound occurs in the swelling (budel), and it is small, then it must be tied according to this manner: and that you take threads of great caps; and then adjust the two lips of the wound and place one thread from those which have an open mouth over the two lips of the wound; therefore, when you put it on them and strengthen its mouth, cut off the head (abscindeys le cap de lu), for it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then place another thread (formigua) right next to the first one, and do not stop doing this with threads one after another according to the quantity of all the wound.
And then reduce (reduzeys) that and close the wound; and those attached caps remain in the swelling until the swelling is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
And it is possible that the swelling (budel) be bound with a fine thread (fiel subtil) made from the swelling of an animal attached to it, since it is more in the shape of an awl; and it is that you take the end of these threads of the swelling, and it is quite bare, and then tie the end of it with another thread, enveloped, and then insert that thread into the awls and close it with the swelling, and reduce the swelling in the disruption.
And this method of suture with threads is not just according to one way, but rather through faith and hope.
But if the wound is great and wide, especially if it is in one of the subtle swellings (budels), for then it is not just a matter of subtlety (subtiliacio), but rather a complete healing of all.
The chapter on the cure of abscesses (zuchem) and fistulas.
Know that every wound (plaguada) and abscess (apostema) when it becomes old and worn out, and is made into an ulcer (ulcus), and is not consolidated and keeps getting worse over time, and is not cut off, wherever it may be, universally is called a fistula (fistula) and we call it azukem.
And fistula, according to truth, is a hardened, durable, and white nodulation (nodacio feutrada) without pain (e no es dolor), which is conquered (conquavitat) in the same way that a penance (pena de ausel) is conquered; and for this reason it is called alcus rizatz, id est penalty.
And in some people (alcus homes), it is watery (humida), which drips (geta brac); and the moisture (fort leu la humiditat) is drained off in a few hours. And in some cases (alcunas veguadas), this moisture (humiditat) is abundant (mota), and is little (pauca), and is thick (grossa), and is fine (subtil).
And I have already shown all those causes (totas aquellas causas) and their signs (senhals), as well as the cure for them with medicines in the division.
And it is necessary that you know how to cure a fistula, which is made by surgical operation with my hands.
And know that fistulas can occur in all the members of the body (totz les membres del cos); for some are fistulas that penetrate to the great veins and arteries, or nerves, or to the ribs, or to the swelling (budel), or to the bladder, or to any of the costs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to any of the joints composed of bone and cartilage in such a way that they are close to the main member and resemble.
And therefore that type of fistula which is according to this manner (es segon aquesta manieyra) is one of the difficult-to-cure diseases (malautias de dificil sanacio), and does not receive treatment or care, and its occupation (occupacio) with ignorance (trebalh e ignorancia).
And if some of these fistulas are so deep that they do not reach the points I have mentioned, and you wait and hope for their cure, and wish to gain understanding of them, then you take a tentative approach with iron or steel, and if the fistula follows the natural course (va segon rectetut), you will examine it with the aid of your own judgment.
But if the fistula is twisted (tortuissitat), then you investigate it with a subtle lead (plom subtil) because lead with the lightness of its own body (am la levitat del sieu cors) is relieved and curved in such a way that it can straighten out the twisting.
And if the fistula is full of many horrific things (havent motz horrificis), it is not possible for you to signify anything over it with a tentative approach.
Then you must cleanse the orifice with its own orifices, because the moisture that you use to cleanse it flows into other orifices and comes out of them.
And approach this inquiry with exquisite precision, according to which manner it is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves (os o nervi) here, and whether the conquest of the fistula is long-standing (longinqua) or recent (propdana), or whether it is a fistula with many orifices (motz orrificis) and is situated above all with the sum of your strength, with your introspection, with which you understand the illness (enterroguacio), and the invention of pain as a result of your compression with the hand on the location, and similar signs and causes that occur to the abscess.
And when you have considered all those causes (totas aquellas causas) and have arrived at the truth (stacio veraya), then you will go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider whether this fistula is an apparent one near the surface or in a place of salt, distant from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of the locations which I mention to you and say.
And then you will cut open the fistula according to what is said before in the narration of it, and you will take out what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what has been born in the orifice of the flesh, or of the bone and similar things, and cure it until it is healed.
But if the fistula is of long-standing depth and follows the natural course (es segon rectetut), then you must incise it in the preon as far as it is possible for you to reach, and appropriate mondify all its corrupted flesh; and appropriate administer some enveloped medicines, and introduce those into the conquest of the fistula which has been comprehended by iron.
And make this with that some times until the acute medicine corrodes all that remains in the conquest of the fistula from corruption.
And then restore that with the substances which generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed through this, then you must cauterize that according to what we have recounted.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone (os) and it is necessary for you to be certain about this, then you must inquire into that and cut open that according to what we have recounted, unless you prohibit some cause from a vein or nerve or main member in the way that we have said.
But if the bone is revealed to you and it contains some corruption and blackness (negror), then you must remove that entire corruption and blackness, and appropriate cure that with what is in that place until it is healed.
And if it is not healed and remains black like that, then you must know that you have not achieved the total eradication of corruption; and therefore, you will discover anew over it with exquisite precision and make the reason for it and the purification of it with the utmost strength and power, and appropriate restore that.
And therefore, if it is healed, then good; and otherwise, you must know that the corruption is in the deep-seated parts of the body (profunditat longinqua del cors), which has not been achieved, and accordingly, there is nothing for you to do but leave it as it is.
And if the corrupted bone is small, it is to your advantage to attract that, then you must attract it with subtle forceps which are suitable for this.
And if there are many bones (motz osses), then you must make the extraction of all those in an exquisite manner, and leave no cause behind with your strength.
But if any cause of humidity arises in your favor, and there is no fear or error in them, then you must inscribe those limbs or flesh if they are here, and deliver the bones.
But if your preparation is not suitable for removing the bones of that hour (ostar les osses de la tua hora), then you must pause over this wound (plagua aquo) which will render that wound (plagua aquela) into a condition where it can be surrounded by those bones (osses de carns e de liamentz), and guard the wound so that it is not consolidated, and the section which you have inscribed in your operation (seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio) must be constrained.
They had said, if you fear, pause over the wound submerged in soporific oil, or the wound submerged in Egyptian anguish, or in any of the green herbs, for when those limbs will be decomposed, and the bones are separated from their ablation, and that attraction is alleviated.
But if it is a great bone, like the bone of camba or coyssa or similar to those, and that which is corrupted from it is only the surface, then you must remove that with a razor only as far back as necessary until the blackness and corruption are removed, and appropriate restore the wound.
But if that which is corrupted from it is a great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone (la medulla del os), then you must necessarily close that and entirely inscribe it within the location where the corruption has taken place, and then cure that until it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you that you seek out a man in his couch (en la sua coyssa) so that he may pause and give you an example and assistance over your operation.
Seek out a young man of about thirty years old, to whom it happens that he has pain in his side (cueyssa), and the parts dedintz are mauled (mauguda) is on the material dedintz within the body (entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa), and it is material of abscess with great abscess, and there is no external cause.
And then the time was extended with that because of the mistake of the doctors until the abscess was ruptured, and a great many materials (materias) flowed out, and his cure was almost paused, until the camba became fistulated, and made its way through the orifices (motz orrificis) which were all pouring forth pus and fluids from the body.
And then I was summoned to the many doctors for about two years, and they did not know in those what they knew in the art (ma en la art), until you were called.
And I saw the camba of that and the materials that were flowing from it through great holes (orrificis) for a large body (gran cors); and already the body of that man was totally stabilized, and the color of it was yellowish (citrina).
And then I introduced the probe into one of those orifices and guided it to the bone (os).
And then I examined all the orifices and found that those which were coming from the bone (os) were coming from all parts of the camba.
And then I cut and inscribed over one of those orifices until I uncovered a part of the bone (os), and I found that part corrupted, and it was already rotten and corrupted and denigrated; and already a part of the camba had penetrated into the medulla.
And then I took out what had been discovered and prepared from the bone (os) that was uncovered.
And I saw that it was not in the bone (os) but that corruption which abscessed and was removed, and I had already drained it.
And then I paused to restore the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, but it was not consolidated.
And then I iterated and uncovered over the bone (os) secondarily on the first discovery, and found continuous corruption in the bone.
And I removed what appeared to be from that corruption, and then I was forced to perform the cure and restoration, but it was not restored.
And then I discovered another way and did not cease to inscribe the small bone (os petit) little by little particularly, and forced the restoration of it, but it was not restored until I inscribed around a palm's width from it, and that extracted with its own medulla, and I re-established it with medicines, and it consolidated gradually and healed.
And it is not necessary to iterate in the operation of the abscess and its section, but rather due to the disposition of the flesh (freulesa) of the patient and the scarcity of tolerance of the patient and their fear of death, for the patient is subject to constant hours of superfluous evacuation by bad syncope.
And therefore the healing is complete, and nothing remains in place of hard bone (os carn dura); and it has been done well the disposition of him in his own body and he has returned to his virtue; and it has been converted into its own dispositions and he does not make contrary movements in ambulation nor any harm in any cause.
But if the bone is prominent in the body already traumatized, you must cut it according to this manner: take a ligament and stretch that in the extremity of that prominent bone; and command someone to extend that over there; and pause that ligament of wool thicker than the first ligament; and then tie that over the flesh that is left on the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you can pull the flesh to the parts left, and then uncover the flesh over the place where you want to sew so that the seam does not cut the flesh.
And pause at the fist or table left on the bone decently, for when you do this it is not prohibited to cut the seam that does not cut the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that the suturing be done slowly and carefully over the corrupted area, little by little, because if there is corruption in the concavity of the bone and it does not appear on its surface to the sense, then you must make another incision in a different way.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, it is better to remove one part and continue with the other; and if the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then you must uncover all parts completely; and then pause at the fist left there, and then sew that from the first part where the corruption is into the continuation of the suturing of the other part.
And let the suturing be done according to the location of the corruption, a little at a time, as we have said.
And if the corruption is at the junction, cut out that corrupted junction and sew the bone where it continues with the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in reason but rather by art.
And if the corruption is in the breast of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, you must inquire into the corruption and how it appears to you, and then cut out that which is corrupted, and shape it according to each disposition that is possible for you, and by all means rectify it to your own being, unless it contradicts your veins or nerves.
And you must know what instruments and how to use the scissors to cut these bones are most suitable according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, size, subtlety, grandeur, smallness, hardness, and rarity; so that it is necessary for you to prepare all kinds of surgical instruments that are convenient for each operation.
And you must know that this operation requires of you over the species of the instrument which you need; when you are great in study and long and profound knowledge of the ways of this art, and witness to the ways of diseases, for then already you have them by yourself that is convenient to all maladies.
And you should also note at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will pause with, as simple ones, with which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experience on others. I think I see where this is going!
The same shape as before?
A larger shape!
A new shape! Now we're talking about the details of this rasp!
Now we're talking about how to use this rasp!
Another shape!
A new shape!
A new shape! A new shape!
A new shape!
Another shape!
Another shape!
A unique shape!
Another shape!
Another shape!
Another shape!
The shape of the rasp gets even more detailed!
The final piece of the puzzle!
The grand finale!
The conclusion!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence! The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final section!
The final section!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence! The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The title of the next chapter!
The first paragraph of the new chapter!
The next paragraph!
The next paragraph!
The next paragraph!
The final paragraph!
The final sentence!
It seems like we've reached the end of the text!
The final sentence! The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
It looks like we've hit a snag!
It seems like we've reached a rather interesting and detailed passage about varicose veins!
The final sentence!
The final passage!
The final passage!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final passage!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence! The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
The final details!
The final topic!
The final passage!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final passage!
And then when the extremity appears on him, you must wrap around it a lead weight of which the weight is one third of an ounce, and tie it off with a string and leave the weight suspended from his hip.
The final sentence! The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence! The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence! The final sentence! The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence! The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence! The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
It seems like we have reached the end of the text!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
It looks like we've reached the final sentence of the text!
The final sentence! The final sentence! The final sentence! The final sentence! The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence! The final sentence! The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence! The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final list of locations!
The final statement!
The final sentence!
The final instruction!
The final note on ventosities!
The final location!
The final warning!
The final caution!
The final instruction!
The final reference!
The final caution!
The final reference!
The final instruction!
The final reference!
The final note!
The final reference!
The final instruction!
The final reference!
The final instruction!
The final reference!
The final sentence!
The final note!
The final instruction! The final note!
The final instruction!
The final note!
The final instruction!
The final note! The final note!
The final note!
The final sentence!
The final instruction!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The final instruction!
The final question!
The final instruction!
The final instruction!
The final instruction!
The final instruction!
The final instruction!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The final chapter!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note! The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The final note!
The beginning!
The first chapter! The opening remarks!
The author's advice!
The author's dietary advice!
The author's final advice!
The author's final words on fracture treatment!
The author's final warning!
The author's final reflection!
The author's final recommendation!
The final classification!
The final statement!
The final note! The final classification!
The final note!
The final sign! The final description!
The final conclusion!
The final warning!
The final wisdom!
The final guidance!
The final insight!
The final conclusion!
The final recommendation!
The final guidance!
The final warning!
The final advice!
The final warning!
The final recommendation!
The final detail!
The final detail!
The final instruction!
The final reminder! The final instruction!
The final step!
The final caution!
The final instructions!
The final description!
The final instructions!
The final warning!
The final caution!
The final instruction!
The final remark!
The final warning!
The final conclusion!
The final recipe!
The final touch!
Another method for applying an ointment to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion: recipe of assafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, which is the root of salvaged milgraner, one third of an ounce each; of myrrh and aloes, one third of an ounce each; of alochil, twenty times the weight of a drachma; all are crushed and sifted and mixed with water or albumen of egg if the patient's complexion is scorched; and then use this ointment, which has good composition and restores broken bones slightly, and gives strength to men.
Another method for applying an ointment that gives strength to fractures and torsion: recipe of myrrh and white alta one third of an ounce each; of myrrh and aloes one third of an ounce each; of acacia three ounces; of Armenian balm twenty times the weight of a drachma.
The final instructions!
The final recipe!
The final warning!
Another recipe for a plaster that can restore broken bones!
Another abbreviated method for administering a plaster to restore broken bones and resolve abscesses! The final instructions!
The final caution!
Another method of plastering that is even stronger in its resolution than the first one, when there is a persistent abscess and needs restoration of the member: recipe of roots of aloes and seeds of lily, and of balm, melilot, majorana, violet flowers, chamomile, all mixed together with Ana's partition and equalized; all are sifted and mixed with water of sage or with boiled water or with wine, according to the quality of the member and the repose of its color.
The final caution!
The final recommendation!
Another recipe for a plaster that relieves injury and pain!
The final caution! The final warning!
The final instructions!
The final words of wisdom!
The final repetition!
The final instructions! The final guidance!
The final adjustment!
The final tip!
The final critique!
The final reflection!
The second chapter!
The different types of fractures!
The different causes and appearances of fractures!
The different types of fractures!
The mysterious "capillary fracture"!
The mysterious "intrusion fracture"!
The mysterious "intrusion fracture" continues!
The final conclusion! The final farewell!
The final observation!
The final observation about the "capillary fracture"!
The final consideration!
The final conclusion!
The final cause!
The final consideration!
The final recommendation!
The final guidance!
The final guidance on treating the plague!
The final conclusion!
The first method of operation!
The first method of operation continues!
The variety of inserters!
The importance of careful percussion!
The importance of careful penetration!
The limitations of the taravels!
The importance of having a variety of taravels!
The three species of taravels!
The importance of subtle incision!
The importance of caution when using inserters!
The importance of precision when extracting the bone!
The importance of carefully extracting small and delicate bones!
The second method of operation!
The description of the lenticular and acute parts!
The importance of careful percussion!
The release of the bone from the surrounding tissue!
The importance of carefully smoothing out the bone surface!
The importance of administering the bone in a gradual and controlled manner!
The importance of administering care in a subtle and precise manner!
The importance of thorough study in the field of medicine! The conclusion of the text!
The application of dressings and liniments!
The application of medicine to promote healing!
The application of powdered medicine to the wound!
The importance of cleanliness and caution in wound care!
The consequences of poor wound care!
The application of a mixture of honey and rose oil to the wound! The application of a dressing and the administration of medicinal substances!
The next chapter!
A new topic!
The anatomy of the nose!
A procedure for treating a broken nose! A warning about the importance of caution!
A specific technique for treating a fracture in the upper part of the nose!
A technique for treating a fracture that occurs in two parts!
A recommendation for when to re-apply the treatment!
A description of a treatment for nasal fractures!
A description of the treatment process!
A description of a treatment for nasal fractures!
A note on flexibility in medical treatment!
A description of a treatment for a different type of wound!
A description of a treatment for a different type of wound!
A description of the treatment for nasal fractures!
A description of the treatment for a wound behind the nose!
It seems that we have reached the end of the text! Well done on making it through the entire passage!
It seems that we have a new topic!
A description of the fracture of the jawbone!
A description of the treatment for a fractured jawbone!
A description of the treatment for a severely fractured jawbone!
A description of the treatment for dental disrupcion and fractured jawbone!
A description of the treatment for dental disrupcion and fractured jawbone!
A description of the treatment for dental disrupcion and fractured jawbone!
A conclusion to the treatment for dental disrupcion and fractured jawbone!
A description of the treatment for a secondary infection!
A description of the treatment for a fractured jawbone with an accompanying wound!
A description of the treatment for a severely infected wound!
A description of the treatment for a wound!
It seems that we have reached the end of the text!
A new topic!
A description of a fractured collarbone!
A description of the three types of collarbone fractures!
A description of the surgical procedure for a fractured collarbone with an accompanying wound!
A description of the surgical procedure for a fractured collarbone!
A description of the surgical procedure for a fractured collarbone!
A description of the surgical procedure for a fractured collarbone!
A description of the surgical procedure for a fractured collarbone!
A description of the surgical procedure for a fractured collarbone!
A description of the surgical procedure for a fractured collarbone!
A description of the shape and size of the instrument!
A description of the instrument's length!
A description of the wound closure technique!
A description of the wound dressing technique!
A description of a treatment for severe infection!
A description of the treatment for a fractured collarbone!
A description of the treatment for a fractured collarbone!
A description of the treatment for a fractured collarbone!
A description of the treatment for a fractured collarbone!
A description of the recovery time for a fractured collarbone!
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
We're now in the section titled "De restauracio de fractura de la spalla" which translates to "On the Restoration of Fracture of the Shoulder".
A fascinating passage!
A crucial passage!
A detailed description of the treatment process!
A crucial step in the treatment process!
A crucial step in the treatment process!
A crucial step in the treatment process!
The final step!
The final outcome!
The final step!
The final instructions!
We've reached the end of the text!
A new section!
A description of foot fractures!
A vivid description of the consequences of a foot fracture!
The restoration process!
The application of plaster and bandages!
The correction of the wrapping!
We've reached the end of the text!
A new section!
Insight into rib fractures! The importance of knowing one's own body!
The goal of restoration!
The consequences of untreated rib fractures!
The use of ancient knowledge!
The use of natural remedies to treat the patient!
The importance of caution and careful planning!
The use of reason and caution in medical decision-making!
The use of natural remedies and careful treatment!
The importance of careful consideration and caution!
The importance of proper wound closure!
The use of poultices to treat apostema!
The importance of proper positioning!
We've reached the end of the text!
Restoring fractures of the spine and neck!
The importance of careful observation! The importance of careful consideration and observation!
The signs of healing!
The importance of considering the patient's overall condition!
The signs of impending doom!
The importance of identifying the underlying cause!
The treatment for the patient involves soothing the apostema with a warm oil compress!
The importance of rest and relaxation in the recovery process!
The importance of proper wound care and closure!
The importance of proper bone alignment and stabilization!
The importance of proper wound care and healing!
We've reached the end of the text!
The importance of restoring the wide opening!
The consequences of broken bones in the wide opening!
The process of restoration!
The importance of proper alignment and adjustment!
The importance of preparation and gentle treatment! The application of the splint!
The importance of proper alignment and relaxation!
The importance of treating the underlying cause!
The importance of treating the underlying cause!
We've reached the end of the text!
The importance of restoring the fractured joint!
The definition of the adjutori!
The process of restoring the fractured adjutori!
The placement of the wooden plate!
The patient's positioning and arm placement!
The importance of proper suspension and alignment!
The alternative method of treatment!
The importance of additional support!
The importance of proper placement!
The importance of proper placement at the shoulder blade!
The importance of gentle and careful application!
The treatment of a serious infection!
The method of strengthening the area!
The importance of proper positioning!
The use of stars!
The use of stars to guide treatment!
The importance of applying strength!
The importance of a tight dressing! The relationship between dressing length and fracture severity!
The importance of restoring the limb to its natural position!
The importance of avoiding infection!
The importance of proper ligament placement and avoidance of complications!
The importance of patient confidence in the healing process!
The importance of proper positioning during sleep!
The importance of maintaining proper dressing and ligature during the healing process!
The importance of adjusting diet according to the patient's condition!
The importance of gradually increasing strength and mobility!
The importance of patience when dealing with slow-healing fractures!
The 12th chapter!
The restoration of fractured arms!
The anatomy of the arm!
The types of fractures in the arm!
The treatment of wrist fractures!
The challenges of treating elbow fractures!
The severity of double fractures!
The importance of prompt treatment for wrist fractures!
The importance of more extensive treatment for elbow fractures!
The importance of strong immobilization for double forearm fractures!
The importance of proper positioning and immobilization for hand injuries!
The importance of a supportive surface for the patient's comfort!
The importance of proper positioning and alignment for the patient's comfort!
The importance of proper alignment and correction for the patient's recovery!
The importance of thorough examination and correction for complex bone fractures!
The importance of addressing separate irregularities and distortions in bone fractures!
The importance of taking care of wounds and injuries!
The importance of applying dressings and treatments to promote healing!
The importance of understanding the names and locations of the bones in the arm!
The importance of applying pressure and stability to the fracture site!
The importance of using soft and moist dressings for fractures!
The importance of monitoring progress and adjusting treatment! The importance of addressing complications and relieving pressure!
The importance of allowing the limb to rest and re-stabilizing!
The importance of ensuring proper alignment and correction!
The importance of ensuring proper nutrition and circulation!
The importance of patience and not rushing the healing process!
The importance of gentle exercise and rest for the patient!
The importance of understanding the natural healing process!
Let's begin translating Chapter 13!
The title of Chapter 13 is:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
Let's begin translating Chapter 14!
The title of Chapter 14 is:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying: The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
It looks like we've reached the end of Chapter 14! Would you like me to translate the next chapter (Capitol .xv.)?
A new chapter!
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
A new chapter!
A new chapter!
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
A new chapter!
A new topic!
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying: The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
A new chapter!
A new topic!
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
A new chapter!
The title of Chapter 19 is:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying: The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying: The author is saying:
The author is saying:
The author is saying: The author is saying:
It looks like we've reached the end of the text! The ".xx." indicates that this is Chapter 20 (Capitol .xx.). Well done on making it through all the Latin text!
The title of Chapter 20 is:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
We've reached the end of the text!
The title of Chapter 21 is:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
We've reached the end of the text!
The title of Chapter 22 is:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
We've reached the end of the text!
The title of Chapter 23 is:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
We've reached the end of the text!
The title of Chapter 24 is:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
The title of Chapter 25 is:
The text is saying:
The text is saying: The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
The title of Chapter 26 is:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying: The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
The text is saying:
It looks like we've reached the end of Chapter XXVII!
It looks like we're starting a new chapter!
It seems we're diving into the complexities of the coccyx (coyde) dislocation!
It seems we're discussing the importance of prompt reduction and treatment in cases of coccyx (coyde) dislocation!
It seems we're getting into the nitty-gritty of the reduction process!
It seems we're discussing the specifics of reducing a coccyx (coyde) dislocation in the anterior (front) part!
It seems we're discussing what to do when the reduction process doesn't work!
It seems we're discussing the importance of having multiple assistants when performing a reduction!
It seems we're discussing the final steps in the reduction process!
It seems we're discussing the final stages of the reduction process!
It seems we're discussing the post-reduction care and treatment plan!
It seems we're discussing the final stages of the treatment plan!
It seems we're discussing what to do if the joint doesn't heal properly!
It seems we're discussing what to do if the patient experiences gravity-related issues during the reduction process! It seems we're discussing the process of treating the joint after the initial reduction! Corruption has already spread over the linen bandage, so that it is stained.
It seems we're discussing the process of treating a wound!
It looks like we've reached the end of Chapter XXVII!
A new chapter!
It seems we're discussing the treatment of a wrist dislocation (malassen) that has occurred several times (alcunas vetz), and how it's different from other joint dislocations.
It seems we're discussing the steps to reduce a wrist dislocation (malassen).
It seems we're discussing the importance of considering certain factors when reducing a wrist dislocation (malassen).
It seems we're discussing the importance of patience and careful consideration when reducing a wrist dislocation (malassen).
It seems we're discussing the importance of understanding and respecting the natural curve and flexibility (tortuositat) of the wrist joint (junctora).
It seems we're discussing the post-treatment care and rehabilitation of a wrist dislocation (malassem) after it has been successfully reduced.
It seems we're discussing the treatment of a wrist dislocation (malassem) that is experiencing stiffness and discomfort after the reduction process.
It looks like we've reached the end of Chapter XXVIII!
A new chapter!
It seems we're getting started with Chapter XXIX!
It seems we're discussing the reduction of a finger dislocation (dislocacio dels ditz) that has occurred in the palmar or dorsal surface of the hand.
It seems we're discussing the post-reduction care for finger dislocations (dislocacio dels ditz).
It seems we're discussing the post-reduction care for finger dislocations (dislocacio dels ditz) in more detail.
It seems we're discussing the importance of consistent and gentle treatment after a finger dislocation (dislocacio dels ditz).
It seems we're discussing the treatment of a wrist or hand dislocation (dislocaci al ventre de la ma) that has occurred on the palmar surface.
It seems we're discussing the treatment of dislocations that have occurred in other parts of the body, beyond just the wrist or hand.
We've reached the final chapter!
The final chapter!
The gravity of the situation!
The severity of the condition!
The final blow!
The final note!
The final words!
The final note!
The final sentence!
The final details!
The final instructions!
The final steps!
The final note!
The final moments!
The final resort! The final solution!
The final instructions!
The final details!
The final details!
The final tightening!
The final instructions!
The final treatment!
The final note!
The final warning!
The final warning!
We have reached the final chapter of the treatise!
The title of the final chapter!
The wisdom begins!
The four ways of hip joint dislocation!
The majority of hip joint dislocations!
The signs of hip joint dislocation!
The sign of hip joint dislocation!
The signs of hip joint dislocation!
The signs of hip joint dislocation!
The reduction of hip joint dislocation!
The reduction of recent hip joint dislocation!
The treatment of persistent hip joint dislocation!
The extension of the joint or limb!
The extension of all parts!
The common extension!
The conclusion!
The reduction technique!
The powerful minister!
The easiest reduction method!
The importance of cooperation!
The proportions!
The patient's position!
The treatment technique!
The reduction technique for outward dislocation!
The setup for the reduction technique!
The final stages of the treatment!
The reduction technique for anterior dislocation!
The reduction technique for posterior dislocation!
The application of compression!
The final stages of the treatment!
The final check!
The final confirmation!
The follow-up care!
The final step!
The end of the treatise!
A new section!
The types of hip joint dislocations!
The sign of hip joint dislocation!
The restoration of hip joint dislocation!
The sign of reduction!
The final steps!
The final instruction!
The final note!
The final chapter!
A new section!
The types of ankle joint dislocations!
The sign of ankle joint dislocation!
The treatment of ankle joint dislocation!
The treatment of ankle joint dislocation!
The positioning of the hands!
The reduction technique!
The repetition of the technique!
The final step!
The outcome of the reduction!
The alternative approach!
The final positioning!
The final check!
The final step!
The caution!
The recovery process!
The final stage! The warning!
The caution!
The final chapter!
A new chapter!
The reduction technique!
The positioning!
The gentle pressure!
The aftercare instructions!
The final chapter!
The varieties of dislocation!
The consequences of neglect!
The importance of humility! The importance of prompt treatment!
The treatment plan!
The complex case!
The closing remarks! The final phrase! The final word!
