Oh, sons, now I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, since its completion has led to its end, and through its explanations and declarations, it seems to me that you will be able to understand that treatise, which is a part of my operation, namely surgery.
For my operation is scattered throughout our region and in our time, deprived of everything, so that the science of it is very much endangered, and its investigation remains stalled; and there remain no more than some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been corrupted by many errors and confusions, until their intentions are sealed and the force of it and the art are exhausted.
And it appears to me that you should bring this order of the treatise to life through the method of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that I may provide the forms of surgical instruments and other tools of the craft, as well as add to the declaration and prepare for it, which is necessary.
But the reason why a good craftsman is not found with his own hand in our present time, is because the art of medicine is long and complex, and one who wishes to be proficient in it must first be exercised in the science of anatomy, which was known by Galen, so that he may know the joints of the members and their forms, as well as their conjunction and separation; and have knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and their arrangement; and of the pulsing and quiet veins, and the locations where they are inserted.
And therefore says Hippocrates that with a great name comes little honor, but most of all in the craft of one's hand.
But we have already spoken of him in the introduction to this book; for one who is not knowledgeable about anatomy as we have described it, will not be spared from falling into error which will cause men's deaths, just as I have seen many of them, since some are formed in this science and think they know it without true knowledge or experience.
For you saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor who had inserted an abscess in the neck of a woman, and had cut through some arteries of the neck so that great blood flowed out, until the woman died among her companions.
And I saw another doctor who had applied a poultice to a man's wound, which was great and had progressed in his condition, and the poultice came loose from his skin, so that that man died three days later.
And you yourself had previously said that it would not work out for this one, and I saw that because of the great size of the wound and the patient's condition, you knew he would die.
And I saw another doctor who took pay from a duke of our land for surgery, and endeavored to set the fracture of a blacksmith on his leg; but the doctor's ignorance was revealed, as he extracted the fracture, placing it above the wound with pillows and bandages with excessive tension, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And then he undid the binding according to his own desires, and then he re-wrapped it, and then he left it for some days and commanded us to undo the binding; and thus it was that the leg and foot became inflamed, and it led to perdition.
And you were called to him, and I helped you to undo the binding, and thus we achieved quietness and he became relieved of his pains.
But nonetheless the corruption had already been confirmed in the member, so that it could not be restrained and did not cease to spread its corruption in the member until the patient was imperiled.
And I saw another doctor who had pierced a cancerous abscess and it became ulcerated about three days later, so that the evil of it was magnified with its lord.
The reason for this is that the cancerous abscess is pure of melancholic humor, therefore it does not need to be treated with iron from head to toe, but rather should be treated as a member that has been entirely possessed by evil.
And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation of my craft be divided into two parts: one is in operation which is associated with health, and the other is a work where there is peril in the greater dispositions.
And you have already existed in every place of this book where the operation is one that involves error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to keep guard over this and leave behind those who do not understand, lest they should not know how to speak and to desecrate.
And therefore take up your own arms with zeal and protection of God, and your own patients with felicity and firmness.
And use the best way with the grace of God to achieve salvation and praiseworthy succession, and lay aside terrible diseases that are difficult to cure, and keep your own arms from this which makes you fear, so that the situation in your faith and in your name does not escape you: for it is more remaining to your glory, and more so in the world and in eternity to your sanctity.
Galen already said in some of his own monodies: "Do not heal bad illnesses, lest bad doctors be named."
And you have divided this book into three parts.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter, ordered from the head to the feet, in the forms of instruments and ironworks of cauteries, and what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on suction and puncture, and on cupping-glasses, and on wounds, and on extracting splinters and like things, all organized and ordered in the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on curing of hernias and like things; chapter organized from head to feet, and in the forms of instruments.
You should know the quality of the joints in that cautery and the defects of it, and in what condition it is forbidden to use a cautery.
Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the joints in the cautery and its defects is a long and prolix discourse, subtle by science, and secret and hidden; and many learned men have spoken about it, and they have disagreed among themselves, and I will only mention a small part of their sermons, fearing prolongation.
And therefore I say that cautery conforms to all universal completeness, whether it is in material or non-material, except for two complete ones which are complete without material.
In the complete and dry material with no material, it will be desiccated; for some would say that cautery is beneficial to it, and others would say the opposite of it, that cautery is not suitable in a disease which is due to quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that the caustic and dry material be cured.
And those who say the opposite of it would have you believe that by means of cautery, the joints are made healthy in all caustic and dry diseases that are found in the bodies of men; for when you compare the body of a man to its humors with the completion of fire, you find the body of a man cold.
And I say by the sermon of that, that this experiment is already known to me at times to have discovered.
But it is not necessary for it to come forth on this matter that has already been experimented and exercised in the chapter of cautery, and that you have known the diversity of the completeness of men and the disposition of diseases in their members, and the causes of those, and the accidents that happen to them, and the space of time that passes through these.
But in other completenesses, there is no fear for you, and especially in cold and moist diseases, since all doctors have agreed on these, and are not discordant about the joints with cautery in those.
And know, sons, that the secret of healing through cautery with fire and its goodness is that over cautery with medicine they are combined, for fire is simple, whose action does not reach beyond the member that is cauterized, nor does it harm another member connected to it except with a slight disadvantage.
But the action of medicine combined reaches that member which is distant from it, and very easily brings difficult-to-cure disease into the sick member, and very easily causes harm.
But fire, due to its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do this except in a superfluous way. Already we have known through experience and the long duration of service in studying the art on the truth of causes; and therefore I am excused from the length of the sermon. And if it were not for the fact that it is hidden from your free book in this pause, I would reveal to you the secret hidden in fire, and the quality of the operation of it in bodies and its expulsion by which diseases are expelled, through a philosophical demonstration that would pierce your very soul.
And know, sons, that some do not agree on the time when it is best to perform a cautery and pause for the best time of spring.
And I say that a cautery is convenient at any time, because the harm caused by the accidental timing is submerged in the joint of what is attracted to the cautery, and more so if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, which are strong and fierce, and do not tolerate delay, for fear of those who come with malice, which is greater than a small harm entering through time.
And thus it is not considered in your souls, or sons, that this is not esteemed by the common people and foolish doctors, so it is that for that disease which is cured by a cautery, there is no reduction of time, and pause at the consequence.
And the cause is not like that which they say by this, for a cautery is only in place of medicine which alters the completeness and dries out the humors which are the cause why pains come.
But a cautery is superfluous over medicine due to the desire for its utility and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that its disease will return at some hour of time, according to the completeness of the patient and the location of their disease, and the virtue of it, and what is prepared in the body of it from the aggregation of superfluous things, and what has been brought to it through its acquisition of foods and similar causes; unless that disease in which a cautery is administered is a subtle disease in a member with few superfluities and humors, such as a dental cautery for pain and similar to that, it is possible that in that case the pain will not return, but rather it will be reduced in size.
And besides, the common saying is that a cautery is the last resort of medicine, and it is a desperate remedy, not according to what I understand in this case, for I believe that there is no cure that profits by medicine or any other nearby cause through a cautery.
And the cause is contrary to that; and I understand that a cautery is the last resort of medicine only when we administer the methods of healing in some diseases, and those medicines do not confer, and apropos at the end of the cause, one administers a cautery, and it profits accordingly. And I see here that a cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to my understanding which I understand from the common people and many foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that a cautery with gold is better than one with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
And they said that the place of the cautery does not make a difference, as if it were absolutely true, for you have already proven and demonstrated that it does not do so except in some bodies, and the cautery with gold is good and better than one with iron, just as they say; but meanwhile, when you perform a cautery with fire on gold, it is not declared to you, because it is hidden according to the quantity you want for the roughness of the gold, and in order to prepare to receive cold; and if you add over it ignition, the gold melts by the fire, and case in the fire some plates so that the craftsman can see through the occupation of that.
And for this reason, it is done to make a cautery with iron in such a way that we can approach the straightness of operation more lightly and more promptly.
And I have already ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those from head to foot, so that the demanding one may take what they want from it.
The First Chapter.
This causticization confers upon the humidity and frigidity over the serving accident of which there are two causes, namely, the cause of soda and the multiplicity of raumatic fluxes, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears that flow, and multiplicity of sleep, and toothaches and the throat, and universally all disease that comes through frigidity, just as paralytically, soddy, and apoplecticly, and similar in those diseases.
The form of this causticization is this: first, I command the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine in the morning, for three or four nights, according to what the virtue of the patient and their age and habits demand.
And then I command him to shave his head with a razor, and next to make him sit between his thighs on a well-cushioned bench and let him rest his thighs on the floor.
And next, pause the razor on your palm, right above the nostrils between your eyebrows. But meanwhile, since the said place of the middle is reached, mark that place with a tent, and next ignite the olive cautery in which this is the form:
And next, place that on the marked place with a tent, in a way that it descends, by which your hand is slightly constrained little by little, and you rotate it.
And next, raise your hand slightly and look at the place, and if you see that some quantity of bone has been uncovered, just like the quantity of grain of errors, then lift your hand, and if it does not return to that iron, with another one, if it is refrigerated, until what I have said to you is visible.
And next, take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the place, and let it be for three days.
And next, apply to it a poultice wrapped in cloth and let it be on the place until the scar of the fire is destroyed. And next, cure the place with an ointment of four-fold medicine until it is healed.
And they said that as long as the wound remains open, so much the better it gets, for it is more excellent and beneficial.
And some of them said that the cord should be cauterized inside the bone and held until some part of the specificity of the bone is melted.
And next, remove what has been fused to the bone, and then cure it.
And others said that with the cautery one should arrive at the last, until it presses strongly on the bone and the bone cracks, and this is the form of the small alfabet: And they believe that from that place, the vapors of the head will escape.
And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be cured until it is consolidated.
But to me, these two types of cauterization are not visible in their entirety, except in some men according to the way of fear; and I leave that to you, for it is better for health when it is; because the head is revealed by the solution of continuity, just as we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head is of a fierce nature.
And the first type of cauterization is more saved and better for me; and from that house and with that work, salvation comes.
Second Chapter.
On Caustics for the Head.
When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the head in a patient who is prolonged in their illness, and uses remedies such as wars, cochias, capipurgers, emplasters, poultices, cadels, and gualinas, and especially if the patient has already been cauterized with one cautery that does not benefit them at all, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong creation in their nature; and if it is not fierce and finds a great cold, then that same head is cauterized with another cautery, leaving a little gap. And next, cauterize it on the crown of his head with a cautery until the cord is divided. Cut the cord and uncover the quantity of bone which we have recounted, and cauterize it with a cautery in the back part of the head at the location called "vas", -- and that is the place where the wind pipe is situated. And lift your hand away from there, and do not uncover the bone, because the patient by this will experience a great and different pain, unlike any other pains caused by all the other cauterizations of the head.
And you will say this cautery in its place, because it is necessary to cauterize the crown of the head and the occiput with a more subtle cautery than that which is used for the middle part of the head; and this is the form of it.
Third Chapter.
On Caustics for Migraines not Ancient.
When the pain is mild in the head or spread out to the eye, and it does not respond to laxative medicines or other treatments that I have mentioned in the chapters on diseases; and nothing helps, then cauterization should be done in two ways: either with a sharp medicinal compound combined with an acute treatment, or with iron.
But the cautery with medicinal compound is when you take a sweet almond, scrape it out and cut off the extremities of both ends. And next, incise the location of the pain in the temple with a blunt knife until it is made into a small hole, leaving the cord behind, so that it may be hidden.
And next, strengthen the spot with a poultice applied by gentle compression, and let it be for three hours; and then remove the poultice and treat the almond, and leave the wound for two or three days, and next apply a poultice wrapped in cloth to the spot until it becomes solid.
And next, cure that with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, do this with some medicinal compounds which I have written about in the two treatises on medicinal compounds.
But the cautery with iron, according to this method: ignite by means of the cautery which has this form:
...and it is called "claus clavilhs", because the head of it is like a keyhole shape with some curvature, and in the middle part of it there is a small prominence.
And next, place the iron on the location of the pain, and hold your hand - so that the wire which is left behind is not melted - and rotate the small iron gradually with speed.
And if the quantity of what is melted by the specificity of the cord is like most of it, and lift your hand so that the artery which is left behind is not melted, so that no blood flow comes.
And next, soak the poultice in salt water and place it on the location, and let it be for three days; and then remove the poultice wrapped in cloth, and cure with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize at the extremity of the sword-like shape according to the cautery, and be careful not to cut into the artery in this non-ancient type of migraine.
Fourth Chapter.
On Caustics for Ancient Migraines.
When you cure an ancient migraine with what we have said about the previous treatment and what we have said in the chapters on diseases, and the treatment does not help, and sometimes because of the disease it does not reach what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire; then it is necessary that you ignite the cutaneous cautery until it is white, since you signify on the location of the pain with a line of length which is most of it, or if it is not so; and put down your hand for one moment and strengthen it until you incise the artery and reach the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to beware of the continuity of the mandible, which is disturbed by mastication, and that the ligament is not melted and the nerves that are affected by this, and that there is no spasm.
And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is being cut, because in the cutting of it there is fear, and especially to one who does not know what they are doing and is not skilled; and leave the operation at the beginning.
And you will find in this book a reminder of the regimen for the flow of blood that occurs by accident to the artery according to its own manner, in its own location.
And if you see that this disease does not respond to this cautery and you see the patient's body tolerable, then cauterize it in the middle part of the head just as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on cutting with two cloaks, and it is better to cauterize this way and more conducive.
Fifth Chapter.
On Caustics for Earaches.
When in the ear there is pain due to cold and it is cured by laxative causes and by other treatments which I have mentioned in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one called "punctum", of which this is the form:
And next, make the puncture on the ignition and be directed to the entire ear, just like a wheel is revolved, or in the circumference of each sample if the pain is in any one. Draw out the cautery along the root of the ear little by little, until you have marked the location with a tent.
And if the cautery of these dots is applied to the entire ear, and each one, then cure the locations until they are healed.
Sixth Chapter.
On Caustics for Torture.
Torture which is cured and with cauterization is nothing but the species that comes through phlegm, according to what we have said in the chapters on diseases.
Avoid cauterization of the species that proceeds from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you cure that species of torture with jarring and capipurgies and guarguarisms, and your treatment does not conform to it, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteris: the first at the root of the ear, and the second a little behind the temple, and the third at the conjunction of two lips.
And pause your cautery for the contrary of the affected part, because softening only appears in the part that seems to be healing.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with a cautery in the right extremity of the ear, slightly above the crown of the head, and another one on the temple, the length of which is according to the length of the thumb's breadth, and put down your hand with the cautery until the quantity of most of the cord's specificity is consumed.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of sword-like shape, the form of which is before us. But however subtle it may be, that little bit you see is what you need to cut out the excessive grossness a little.
And next, cure the location with water as before, until it is healed.
Seventh Chapter.
On Caustics for Ancient Apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you cure it with the water we have said, and your treatment does not conform to it, and the patient has no fever, then cauterize that with four cauteris: on all the horns of his head; and with a cautery in the middle part of the head, just as we have said; and with a cautery in the back. And the manner of the cautery is made according to what has been said above.
And already it is cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more posterior; and next, be cured with water as before.
Eighth Chapter.
On Caustics for Oblivion caused by Phlegm.
For it is necessary that the patient be given in the beginning great jars and pills of purging medicines.
And next, remove the head of the patient and place on the back of it an ointment described in the treatise on ointments.
And pause that for a few moments, because that is the manner of the cautery. And do it according to that method which I have already said.
And therefore, if it is cured thus; and not, then let there be made three cauteris in the back part of his head, which are descended from the upper part of the head down to the lower part of the neck. And pause between each cautery the thickness of the finger, and then cure the wound with water as it has proceeded.
But if you wish to add more and the patient is water-tolerant, then make the cautery in the middle location; and if you wish for greater addition, then cauterize it on both horns.
And cure that wound until it is healed; and be the cautery olive-shaped according to the form given above.
Ninth Chapter.
On Caustics for Paralysis and Softening of the Entire Body.
For you should proceed in the softening of the head with jars and water as we have said; and then remove the head of the patient, and next cauterize it with a cautery on the middle part of the head, and another one on all the horns of the head, and another one on the back part of it, and three more on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the disease of softening of the body that there are many such cases and the patients are tolerant, then let there be made four cauteris on the vertebrae of the back, and gradually with a cautery until it is consumed by the cord's motive power, and lift up your hand. And cure that wound until it is healed, and this is an olive-shaped cautery.
Tenth Chapter.
On Caustics for Epilepsy.
It is not cauterized the epilepsy, but that epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
And therefore, it is necessary to soften the brain at first with jars and with other treatment which we have said in the division when the patient is great and is tolerant except for medicines.
And if the patient is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer guarguarisms and mastigatories as purging medicines for several days with good nutrition.
And next, remove the head of the patient, and next cauterize it with a cautery on the middle part of the head according to the previous manner, and another one on the back of the head, and on each horn of the head. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then let there be made those cauteris which I say, having paralyzed and softened the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And be the cautery olive-shaped according to what has been said before.
But if the patient is a child, then pause with a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Eleventh Chapter.
On Caustics for Melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and thickened phlegm, then let there be made those cauteris which we have said in having paralyzed.
And if the cause of melancholy is excessive descent into melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then let there be given water that softens the brain according to what has preceded in the division.
And next, remove the head of the patient, and next make a tortoise shell in the shape of it on the circle, and then place that in the middle part of the head.
And let the patient be seated comfortably, and be held by all parties.
And next, apply a liniment; and it is more worthy of an ancient border of sheep's wool. And warm that over the fire with tempered heat by measure, which is sufficient for the patient when they are in it. And next, place that in the middle part of the head on the circle, and leave it until it is warmed through.
And do this with the patient for one week at a time, with another regimen of it good until it is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that with small points according to what is most suitable, so that you hold your hand with a cautery thus arranged: this is a species of cautery which moistens the brain with equality.
And next, place that bundle wrapped in cloth or gray gauze.
Twelfth Chapter.
On Caustics for Water Descending into the Womb.
When you have declared the beginning of water in the womb by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient water that softens the head, and keep it away from all humidity.
And place that in a bath of hot water for several days.
And next, command that the patient's head be shaved, and cauterize it with a cautery on the middle part of the head; and next, cauterize it with two cauteris on both temples if there is the beginning of water in both wombs, or one latz if there is the beginning of water in one womb.
And cut all the veins and arteries which are left by the cord; and let the cauteries be in that length in the latitude of the temples.
And beware of flows of blood when it is being cauterized; and if you see flows of blood from it, stop the bleeding with some medicine which is to your ability.
And you will find wisdom in the extraction of arteries and in the ablation of those and caution against flows of blood.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the vertebrae left between two bones with two cauteries gradually produced.
Thirteenth Chapter.
On Caustics for Ancient Tears.
When tears from the wombs are ancient and superfluous and by the veins and arteries which are in the manifest location of the head outside and it is verified that this is excessive phlegmatic moisture, then let there be made those cauteris which we have recounted in the chapter on the beginning of water descending into the wombs, and with a cautery in the middle part of the head and with two cauteris on the vertebrae between two temples, and with two cauteris on the vertebrae between two bones. And if you need addition, then let there be made a small cautery on the entire length of the coccyx bone over the extremity of the sacrum.
Fourteenth Chapter.
On Caustics for Stench from the Nose.
When you treat that with water as we have said in the division and your treatment does not improve, then prepare yourself and give to drink to the patient cockroaches for three nights; and next, remove the head of the patient, and cauterize it with a middle-shaped cautery and an olive-shaped cautery. And next, cauterize that with a clove-shaped cautery and two cauteries on the two sacral bones left under the hair a little.
And beware of cutting off the artery so as not to cut it.
And of the clove-shaped cautery, this is the form.
Fifteenth Chapter.
On Caustics for Softening of Eyelids in the Wombs.
When the eyelid of the womb is softened by disease or humidity, then let there be made a cautery on that eyelid with a lunar-shaped cautery; and this is its form:
And if you wish, cauterize that on the two sacral bones a little with two cauteries in all parts, and be extended to the temporal regions. And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the sacral bone.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is accustomed.
Sixteenth Chapter.
On Caustics for the Eyelid of the Womb when the hairs are transformed into inner parts and the womb is clenched.
When the hairs of the womb are transformed into inner parts and clenched like that, then cauterize them according to two manners: either with fire or with medicine concurring.
If with fire of that kind, command the patient to sit before you and let them comb their hair as those who make it smooth, until they are prolonged and equalized; and if clenched that, then you should strengthen the wombs of that with a band so that there is no harm until the hairs are born.
Then when they are born and equalized, then pause the patient's head in your seat, and next, inscribe on the eyelid of the womb with a tenta, with a sign which is according to the figure of a leaf of myrtle, and be the beginning of the sign near the hairs.
And next, place that bundle wrapped in alum or mucilage of papyrus on the womb.
And next, ignite the cautery which is in this form:
And next, cauterize on the figure which is inscribed, little by little, in many times, until the surface of the cord which is like a leaf of myrtle, appears properly.
And the sign of health for this work is that you see the eyelid of the womb already contracted and the hairs of it raised above the puncture of the womb.
And then lift up your hand and leave that for three days, and next, place on top of it a cloth wrapping until the scar is elevated. And next, cure that with an ointment until it is healed.
But if some cause returns for the hairs to their original state and the eyelid is softened, then let there be made another time the cautery on that just as you did previously.
But if the hairs are in the eyelid left behind, then let there be made a cautery on that until it is elevated to its natural place and equalized, so that the hairs do not trouble the womb.
But the cautery with concurring medicine is that you command the patient to comb their hair until it is prolonged and equalized, and next, make a cloth wrapping in the shape of a leaf of myrtle.
And next, take one ounce of known soap and live cause vinegar. End of the text. And thus, and next, mix those causes well, and make it with a festination so that it is not warmed up; and next, spread this water over the cloth which is made in the shape of a leaf of myrtle, and place that on one womb or both; and leave the womb bundle wrapped in alum, and the patient's head be in your seat.
And pause the said on the medicine and press that a little and not harm it until the patient feels the effect of the medicine, for the effect is in it like fire.
And thus, when you perceive that the patient has experienced the effect, then let them take the medicine and make it with your said; and thus, when the effect ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the womb with water; and then consider if the eyelid is already lifted as it was washed with fire or with incision, for you are well; and if not, return to that of the medicine on the location where the medicine has not been applied and do not neglect until your operation is equalized and the womb is contracted.
And next, place on top of it a cloth wrapping until the scar of adjustment is eradicated, and next, cure that with an ointment or another until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you to diligently watch over your operation so that in the womb there does not fall out any residue of medicine; and if the eyelid, after some days, becomes softened and some cause of hairs troubles the womb, then let there be made another time the medicine on that location which has become softened, just as you did at the beginning, and next, envelop it so that it is healed.
And this is the form of the leaf of myrtle.
And know that the wombs of men are diversified according to their greatness and smallness, and therefore according to this is made your contraction.
And do not hide the way of rectitude from that to which it is studied in this art.
Seventeenth Chapter.
On Caustics for Fistula that is in the Lacrimal of the Womb.
When you cure a fistula with the water that we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not confer your cure, then let it be that you cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to place their head on your lap, and hold the head of him some minister between your knees in such a way that it is not harmed nor agitated with his own head.
And next, place a bundle wrapped in alum or mucilage of papyrus on the womb of him.
And next, ignite the cautery which is in this form:
which is concave, like the shape of a reed or a quill of vulture, from one extremity to which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it should penetrate into the other extremity. And if you will, let it be as a tent.
But in any case, the one that is concave is better for your work.
And next, press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry it up. And if it is not open, then work on it and extract the tumor from there.
And next, place the cautery on it which is well ignited, and take with your hand a little of the cautery from the head to the nose part, so that you do not err or disturb the patient, and then place the cautery in the gray parts of the head and corrupt it.
And thus, if at the beginning of your cautery it penetrates into the bone, that is good; and if not, then let there be made another or two times if necessary; and leave that as is for three days, and next, place on top of it a cloth wrapping and surround it with an exsicative ointment until it is healed.
But if it has been 11 days and it is not healed, then let there be made a sharp corrosive medicine on top of it until the bone is exposed and is scraped according to what is written in your capital.
And there is another way of cauterizing a fistula which some first doctors also said: take the location of the fistula and fill it with that and place in that fine fissure which is its shape, and pour into it one ounce of melted lead; and hold your hand with a fine grip and good retention, so that the patient is not harmed because the melted lead does not reach the womb of him; and let there be placed on the patient's head a bundle wrapped in alum or water, for lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it by marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed with the water that we have said about cauterizing and curing, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a thrust of the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to what will come in its proper place.
Eighteenth Chapter.
On Caustics for Wounds of the Pots.
Many times accidental fissures occur on the lips, and most often on the lips of children.
Therefore, when you cure those fissures with the water that we have said in the divisions and your cure does not take hold, then ignite the small cautery knife according to this form which is seen:
And be the concavity of it according to the subtlety of a cuttlefish.
Next, place that cautery so carefully in those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
And next, cure that with cerotes until it is healed.
Nineteenth Chapter.
On Caustics for Fistulas in the Mouth.
When in the root of uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth an apostema forms and bursts, and is antique, and flows forth and makes a fistula, and you cure that and your cure does not take hold, then let it be that you ignite the cautery according to the quantity received in the fistula, and next put that ignited thing into the hole of the fistula, and with your hand until it reaches the bottom of it, and finally do this once or twice; and next, cure that with water as we have said about curing until it is healed.
And thus, if the pus is abscessed and healed, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the location and expose the corrupted bone according to what will come in its own capital.
Twentieth Chapter.
On Caustics for Teeth and Softening of the Gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are damaged, and you cure those with medicines and do not succeed, then place the patient's head on your lap, and next ignite the cautery in the shape of which will come to this, so that you place the cauterized area over the tooth and insert into it the ignited cautery hastily, and with your hand a little, until the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
And next, lift up your hand, and next repeat the cautery several times according to what you wish.
And next, have the patient fill their mouth with salt water and hold it for one hour, and then spit it out, because the damaged tooth is closed and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
Twenty-First Chapter.
On Caustics for Toothache.
When toothache is due to coldness, or it is warm or worm-like, or your cure with medicine does not take hold, then let there be made a cautery in that according to two manners: either the cautery of oxen's fat, or the cautery by fire.
The cautery of oxen's fat is when you take the fat of oxen and boil it in a cauldron with iron, and next, take a bundle and wrap it around the tip of the tent, and next, immerse that fat-boiled bundle and place it on the painful tooth hastily until it is cooled down.
And next, repeat that several times until the virtue of fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you wish, immerse wool or a cloth in the fat mentioned above, and place that on the painful tooth, and then place over it hot iron until the iron reaches the bottom of the cavity of the tooth.
But in any case, the cautery by fire is when you attend to the ember or iron glow, and it should be in the core of it some roughness and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And next, ignite the cautery in the shape that will come, and place it on the tooth and with your hand until the cautery is cooled down; and do this several times because the pain is reduced or on that day or the next day.
And it is necessary that by the effect of that cautery, the patient fills their mouth with good fat and holds it for one hour and then spits it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
And cauterize in whatever way you wish, according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the Caustic.
Twenty-Second Chapter.
On Caustics for Hernias.
When hernias are of flesh and cold humors and do not obey digestion by medicines, and you wish to induce digestion in those mildly, then let there be ignited the cautery concave with this form, having two extremities humps so that the smoke from the cautery flows through the other extremity, and place that ignited thing over the apostema once, and another if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the apostema.
And if the apostema is small, then let there be placed the cautery according to the quantity of the apostema, and next leave it for three days and place over it a cloth wrapping in fat so that what the fire has burned up is reduced.
And next, cure that with ointments and tents and cloths until it is healed.
Twenty-Third Chapter.
On Caustics for Quinsy of the Throat and Constriction of the Neck.
When the humors come out on the surface of the lung, and most especially when this is due to coldness of congestion, then let it be that the patient is evacuated at first with laxative medicines, and next cauterize that at the root of the gullet in the affected location.
And take care not to let the cautery reach the throat or burn the lining of it, but only a little.
And next, cauterize that with another cautery at the joint of the neck in the last vertebra of it. And let the cautery be sharp like a chisel according to the preceding manner.
And next, cure that with water as preceded until it is healed.
Twenty-Fourth Chapter.
On Caustics for Disease of the Lung and Cough.
When cough and disease of the lung are due to cold humors, and the patient does not have fever or chills, and is an old disease, then let there be made two cauteries on the furcula at the affected locations, one above and one below; and another cautery in the middle location of the foot between the two mamillae; and let the cautery be sharp like a chisel according to the preceding form.
And if you wish, let your cautery be punctate with the cauteries that are called puncture, according to the form which precedes in the piercing of earaches.
And let there be punctures until they come out to those places; and next, cure that with water as preceded until it is healed.
And now let the cauteries have three ramps where cauterization is done with this: in one instance, you can do three cauteries according to this form:
Twenty-Fifth Chapter.
On Caustics for Titillating which is the Head of the Helper.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating humors and does not remain in place during its return movement, as it is accustomed to returning to its original position, and then for a small movement it becomes dislocated so that it seems to be, as we have testified, then let there be made a primary reduction of the dislocation, and next, let the patient be reversed over their own back or on the right side; and next, lift up the membrane which is in the lower part of the citillic above, with the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated downwards.
And next, ignite the cautery having two heads; and this is its form:
And next, cauterize the membrane until it penetrates into the other side; and then the figure of cauterization will be like this: with four heads of cautery.
And some times it is adjusted according to this count, and that's why there are eight cauteries.
And next, place over the cautery pure salt, and next, cause the patient to adhere to tranquility, and let the member not be damaged for any time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is above and that is done, then let there be made a cautery on the muscle with sharp or punctate cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is reduced and the patient is healed.
Twenty-Sixth Chapter.
On Caustics for the Stomach.
When cold and many humors come into the stomach until that excess is expelled from its congestion and are multiplied in it, and if you continue with the methods of curing and do not succeed, then let there be placed over the patient's back, and stretch out their arms and legs, and next cauterize that with three cauteries: one on the foot for the quantity of a finger with a sharp cautery, and two on both sides of the cautery, until the figure of the triangle-shaped cautery is formed; and lengthen between them so that they are not adjusted to make a pressure.
And if the depth of the cautery reaches two-thirds of the thickness of the membrane.
And let the figure of the cautery be according to this form, plus addition, And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle location of the stomach according to this form; and that is one cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form:
And let the stomach be cauterized punctate according to that which is feared from this cautery: and it is when you sense on the stomach point by point, as much as you wish with a tent, and next cauterize those points with a cautery; and next, cure that with the cure that precedes until it is healed.
Twenty-Seventh Chapter.
On Caustics for the Fretful Foot.
When pain develops in the foot due to coldness or humidity or excessive sweating, and it is not cured with water as we have said, then let there be placed over the patient's back three cauteries according to this form and this quantity mixed on the foot left of the hipbones, where the position of a lying person.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cauteries be in the shape of a right cross.
And do not compress your hand on the moving cautery.
And if the quantity of water that is added is equal to the thickness of the membrane of the codena, and not yet adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them lie down, with their legs extended and their arms raised.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a sharp cutting cautery, when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
And take care not to process too much in the cauterization, and let the subtlety of all the membrane be mixed so that it is mixed throughout the whole body and reaches into the vessels, for this membrane here is subtle; and know this.
Twenty-Eighth Chapter.
On Piercing of Apostema of the Foot with a Cautery.
When there is an excrescence or apostema on the foot and you want to know if that apostema is in the flesh of the foot or in the skin of it, then let it be that if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient's gravity and pain will be increased.
And if it is in the skin of the foot, then great pain is sharpened and at times it tires out even the doctors' cure.
Therefore, let the patient be turned over onto their back; and next, sense the location of the apostema with a tent; and next, ignite the cautery which is similar to rag, according to the form that has preceded on the other page. And cauterize with that cautery until the entire membrane is burned, until it reaches the skin, and until a healthy pus forms.
And next, cure that with the cures of other apostemas until it is healed.
And it is not fitting to use this form of cauterization unless one has studied and prolonged their learning in the art of medicine, and has known many diseases; but this one may be bold on occasion with this operation, yet nonetheless let us leave that to others, and it is better.
Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
On Caustics for Pleurisy.
The ancient ones have said that the cauteries of Aristology are to be applied to pleurisy in a cold and dry manner, according to this method, which is taken from the roots of Aristology, one long and dry root is found, and it is as thick as a finger.
And next, immerse that in oil and ignite it at the fire, and next, let there be a cautery on that place which is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; and with two small cauteries, one slightly declining towards the side below the beard, and with two cauteries in that part which declines between the fifth rib and the navel, declining a little towards the rear parts; and another on the middle location of the foot; and another above the stomach; and three cauteries from behind; and one cautery on that place which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries on both sides of the foot, leaving the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
And it is not fitting to compress your hand on the cautery, but rather let it be in the manifestation of the membrane at work.
And some ancient ones have said that certain men who used a cautery of iron like a ray and ignited it, and put it in that place which is between the ribs, until it reaches that apostema and purulent matter is formed, just as we have said in the apostema of the foot.
But in this piercing with a cautery, there is no fear, for so many times it happens in that place where the fistula forms and there is no healing.
Thirtieth Chapter.
On Caustics for Melaena.
When you cure the disease of melaena with water as we have said in the division, and your cure does not succeed, then let there be made a cautery in that place according to three methods, all of which are right-angled, one of which is that you make three or four lines according to the length of the melaena, following the figure of the cauteries of the foot, the figure of which has preceded.
And let the thickness between each cautery be as thick as a finger or slightly more, and the method of the cautery be the same method which we have said in the cauteries of the foot, namely.
And do not compress your hand on the cautery; and let the patient lie down on their back.
And there is another method of cauterizing, so that you ignite the cautery with two sparks, which cause we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift up the membrane which is in the end part of the melaena, where the patient's left side lies.
And let your elevation be with which you lift up the membrane according to the length of the body, so that the cauteries are made according to the latitude of the body.
And next, insert the two sparks, ignite one, in that place where with those you will penetrate the membrane from the other side.
And next, extract the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three sparks.
And next, cure the cautery so that it remains laid out for several days, for it is more certain than the other causes preceding in the cure.
Thirty-First Chapter.
On Caustics for Hydrophobia.
Cauteries are not taken in hydrophobia, but rather in acute properness.
When you cure the hydrophobia with the methods of curing which we have said in the division and your cure does not succeed, then let there be made a cautery with four cauteries in the circuit of the navel, and one cautery above the stomach, and another cautery on the foot, and another cautery on the melaena, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery on the right side of the foot, and another cautery above the stomach. And let the quantity of the depth of the cautery be proportional to the subtlety of the membrane.
And next, leave the cautery uncovered so that it may remain laid out for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient of cure next to the cautery with water as is needed, so that two intentions are added to it, and thus it is hastened to heal with the aid of assistance.
The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized is sharp, according to the form that has preceded above, and it is this one with which the back is cauterized is olive-shaped, according to its preceding form.
Thirty-Second Chapter.
On Caustics for the Feet and Legs.
When the feet are apostemated in hydrophobia and filled with stagnant water, then let there be made a cautery on the feet above the knee joint, but not too much water, and lift up your hand with the cautery and do not turn it; and next, lift up your hand and do not return to it, for the stagnant water resists.
This is the form of the cautery: And next, make two cauteries on both legs, and in each leg, let there be made a cautery at the extremity with a sharp cutting cautery. And let the cauteries be according to the length of the leg: one on the upper part and the other below the middle location of the leg; and two cauteries on each leg.
And leave the wound open without cure for a long time, so that some water may drain from it.
And next, cure with those causes which we have said.
Thirty-Third Chapter.
On Caustics for the Abdomen.
When the abdomen is troubled by cold and humidity, causing the virtues of digestion and retention to be debilitated in the stomach and intestines, and it is not cured with the methods of cure and does not succeed, and sometimes the patient suffers a caustic display of virtue, then let there be made a cautery on that place with a large cautery above the stomach, according to what has preceded in the chapter on cauterization of the stomach, with the circle cautery and four small cauteries in the circuit of the navel, with a sharp cutting cautery; and with a cautery on the flank, or two cauteries.
And if the humors are exuberant and the patient can tolerate it, then let there be made a cautery on that place above the navel and above the intestines, and strongly adjust two cauteries over the stomach and near the inguinal regions, for this is perfect cure of which you will not err.
Thirty-Fourth Chapter.
On Caustics for Old Hemorrhoids.
When in nature there are old hemorrhoids or one of gross humors that is cold and damp or corrupted humors, and they are cured with water as we have said in the division and do not succeed with your cure, then let there be made three cauteries on the pus left behind at the lower part of the small triangle-shaped vertebrae, and a cautery above the navel that falls between two bones.
And if you notice that the stomach of that person is chilled and the food of that person is not digested, and the face of that person is often apostemated, then let there be made a cautery on that place above the stomach with a large cautery according to what has preceded; and one cautery on the foot, and another cautery on the melaena of that person with a sharp cutting cautery, and leave the cautery open for some time, and next cure it until it is healed.
Thirty-Fifth Chapter.
On Caustics for Atheria, Properly Speaking, the Abscess of Which Should be Drained.
When you drain an abscess, then ignite the cautery that is similar to a ray. Next, insert that ignited thing into the abscess that has been drained, and finally lift up your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows.
And make it once or twice, for if the abscesses are many, then let there be made a cautery on each of them according to what we have recounted, and next cure those with water that agrees with their conformation until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on someone, it is more likely to be beneficial.
Thirty-Sixth Chapter.
On Caustics for Fistulas That Are Formed in the Natural Parts of the Body.
When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, let it be healed with a cautery.
Therefore, when someone has a fistula in the natural parts of the body that is old and corroded, filled with pus and corrupted humors, and thus it is more worthy to cure it with a subtle tent, and next know the quantity of the depth of it with the previously mentioned tent.
Next, ignite the cautery that is similar to a ray. And next, put that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity of how far in the tent has gone.
And repeat the cautery on that place until those corrupted bodies are thoroughly burned once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
And take care not to burn the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes into the bladder or the intestines, then take care of all those places; and do not make it so unless the fistula is in a fleshy location that is not penetrating.
And next, cure that place until it is healed.
And if the place is sealed, and the matters are drained from it, and remains so for a long time, then know that it has been fully cured.
And if the matters are not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or in the front of it, where corruption occurs, or flows out from those causes whose memory will be recalled in its place.
Thirty-Seventh Chapter.
On Caustics for the Tonsils.
When in the tonsils there is pain due to cold or excessive ventilation, and by this the patient's throat is exhausted, then it is necessary that a cautery be made on each tonsil with a sharp cutting cautery of which the memory precedes.
And strongly cuterize with a second small one, so that three lined cauteries will come forth, and thus they will be more beneficial.
Thirty-Eighth Chapter.
On Caustics for the Bladder.
When there is debilitation and softening in the bladder due to cold and dampness such that the patient cannot retain urine, then let there be made a cautery on the lower part of the bladder, where the hair begins at the navel, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the number of knots in the bone; and cauterize that place with a cautery on the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And let it be a sharp cutting cautery according to what has been processed.
Thirty-Ninth Chapter.
On Caustics for the Womb.
When there is cold and dampness in the womb, and by this conception is prevented, and the menses are corrupted, and the prompting of them is delayed, and it occurs that pain comes from the hinder part of them, then let the place be cauterized with three cauteries in the circuit of the navel, just as we have said in the chapter on the bladder; and one cautery on the lower part of the back, or two, and let the cautery be sharp cutting.
Fortieth Chapter.
On Caustics for Dislocation of the Hip.
When dampness and moisture are overflowing in the part of the hip, and causes of inflammation are formed in that place, and the sign of it is that the leg is prolonged over the other when compared between them. And the location of the dislocation is found in the part where the thigh meets the body.
Then let it be necessary to cauterize the patient on the part of the hip with a circular cautery similar to a ring, as you have marked with a tent in the circuit of that part just as it is revolved, and so that the part falls in the middle location of the circle.
And let the cautery be of the same form as the one that preceded in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then let it be necessary to make three cauteries with a large olive-shaped cautery.
And let the cautery be made according to the quantity of the subtlety of the entire membrane; and next, cure that place until it is healed.
Forty-First Chapter.
On Caustics for the Sciatic Vein.
When pain comes to the part of the hip and its cause is cold and dampness, the patient is cured with water as we have said, but it does not succeed, and this is old-fashioned, then let it be necessary that you purify the patient's gross humors with foul pills or artificial pills or similar ones; and next, cauterize that place.
And the method of the cautery in this case is according to two methods: either a cautery with burning medicines or a cautery with fire.
And next, follow two scientific methods, of which one is that you cauterize that place on the part of the flank with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and make good depth in them. And let the space between each cautery be the quantity of the thickness of the said one, whether it is an olive-shaped or a large one.
And sometimes make the cautery on the middle location above the head of the hip, so that there are four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with the circle of which the form precedes in the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip, so that it be a containing circle and burn the subtlety of the entire membrane.
And this is the method of cautery for sciatica when pain is attached to the hip and not extended into the joint.
And if it is extended into the joint, then let there be made two cauteries on the joint over the location where the patient feels the pain that is the source of the suffering; and one cautery on the femur for four digits a little above the hip.
And if the cautery is sharp-cutting, and let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the subtlety of the membrane.
And if the patient complains that the pain is extended to the location near the tips of the toes, then let there be made a cautery here where they complain with a cautery for three points or four or more if needed.
And if the patient complains that there is pain left behind from the donor's back to the joint, then let there be made a cautery here with one sharp-cutting cautery.
And take care in all cautery that you do not leave the cautery to burn nerves or large arteries, and that because of this it will be harmful to your patient with bad consequences.
And I have already seen one and another of those which you will cauterize on the femur and finally in the cauterization, and the inflamed hot focus inside until the tumor reaches the end, and the fire perforates and corrupts all the foot. And next, a violent solution of the belly, and thus death.
And if the pain is in two parts together, then cauterize each one according to this method.
And thus the wise men say in the cauterization of the hip: make it similar to a ring of iron, the circuit of which is half a palm; and let it be as deep as the orifice of a date pit or a little less.
And inside that ring is another third one; and let the space between them be the quantity of the knots in the bone; and let those rings cover two parts; and let their length be one knot or two knots, and make in those margins an iron frame decently dressed around the rings; and this is the form of it:
And next, be ignited in the fire until it becomes red and gives sparks, and next, be placed on the part of the hip, the patient lying on their side. And then cauterize that place with three circular cauteries in one go.
And next, leave that place for three days; and next, apply a poultice to it with border and leave the wound open for many days; and next, cure that place with medicines until it is healed.
Thus says Albucasis: "Oh, sons, we have used this type of cautery rarely because of the fear of observing it, and therefore few have found those who observe over it."
But from the best cauteries to him who suffered them, and finds that place of his.
But the cautery with medicines that adheres is what you should make two circles having an armpit perforated in which the handle of the iron gate will be; and let the length of the wall in the middle of its being two knots or as many as those.
And if the space between them is the quantity of the thickness of the said one; and let them be above and below, and let them contain themselves between them according to this form:
And next, place it on the part of the hip where the patient is lying on their side, and compress your hand on the part of the hip; and next, take hot water and pour it between two circles, and let its quality be like small fire gradually, and keep that for an hour, and let the patient suffer the mordication and adjustment until the mordication ceases.
And next, lift your hand with the instrument and wash away the hot water from all of the hip with lukewarm water.
And next, leave that place for three days and apply a border to it until the blackness of the adjustment is restored, and leave it so for some days, and then the patient will be purified; this is the final remedy.
And next, cure that place with medicines until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended into the joint or the femur, make it so that it contains water according to how it is made in the hip similarly.
And this is the method of hot water, and you have already written it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe of alkali and of unextinguished cause, one part from each hip, and mix them together and pause in a new cauldron of which the remaining part is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into it.
And pause the bottom of one cauldron in another cauldron, and pour over that alkali and living cause with lukewarm water which absorbs them for one finger's breadth, and then compress them with your own hand for good compression, and leave the cauldron to descend from it hot water into the remaining part of the cauldron.
And next, adjust all that water, and pour it over another living cause and another alkali, renewed ones, because that water is of strong fiery quality, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in the cauterization of other members, for this operation is of fire.
And some medicines are mixed with others which are used for cauterization of the hip, such as tithymal and myrrh and alkali and powdered coral, so that they may be mixed.
And Galen recounts the story of a man from ancient times who performed an operation and cure for pain in the hip and sciatic vein, and magnified how great it was to have achieved that, and said that no other cure was needed, and that it was healed once and for all just as he had recommended, because very few people understand that.
And it is that he should be pressed with certain green herbs, and if not found to be green, a fresh fig should be taken; and much should be mixed with a little gray and placed on the hip where the pain is, or in the joint, or in the femur, and tied.
And let it be left for the quantity of three hours or for as long as the patient can endure the adjustment.
And next, take it and put it in water, and then when the body of him is refreshed, put that in the sun, for the pain ceases and he is healed.
And know that it is not necessary to use cautery with these medicines unless there is a proper evacuation of the body.
But already Soranus says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized through a goat's wound, it will be beneficial to him; and let the cautery be made according to this method: take wool and soak it in ancient oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and the heel.
And next, take dried goat's skin and soak it in smoke through fire until it becomes carbonized; and let it be placed on the wool and left until it is stretched. And next, iterate this, and do not cease doing this until the sensation of the mordication reaches the hip and relieves the pain.
And this method of cautery is called the "cauterization of goats".
Chapter XLII.
On the Cauterization of Pain in Two Places.
At times pain is in both places due to multiple causes, such as by bruising or percussion or excessive evacuation, and similar causes, by the infusion of moist and humid matter.
And let the cautery be made in this single species which is caused by the effusion of moist matter.
Therefore, it is necessary to evacuate the patient with bitter pills and similar ones that are made on both places where the pain is, three lines according to the latitude of the patient, plus or minus one cauterization or more, depending on the quantity that is seen as tolerable by the patient and its virtue.
And let it be made a cautery with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four pointed cauteries in the middle of the hip according to this form:
Chapter XLIII.
On the Cauterization at the Commencement of Gout.
Many times this illness attacks small children; and the sign of its commencement in children is that it occurs on their stretching or straining, and the elevation and movement of their elbow.
And then you will find it in the last vertebra of the spine and the knots of the patient that already begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
And therefore when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that place with a cautery that is a circle according to this form: that takes the cautery on all sides of the vertebra equally.
And if you wish, cauterize in the circle of the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines. And let there be proper points between them.
And next, cure the place until it is healed with this method that we have said.
But be aware that cautery should not be administered in gout caused by a spasm of nerves.
Chapter XLIV.
On the Cauterization of Gout and Pain in Joints.
When pains in the joints are caused by humid humors that are enclosed in each member of the body, then when pains come on the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this condition properly "podagra".
And therefore, since gout caused by humid humors is cured by a method of cure and the pains are not restored, then let those pains be removed by cautery.
And that you should cauterize it properly with evacuation in the circle of the joint of the foot, using many cauteries.
And let it be an olive-shaped cautery, the form of which is as follows:
And if necessary, make points on the fascia of the foot, then use a pointed cautery. And if the pains rise into the knuckles or other joints, and many times it happens, then let it be cauterized on each knuckle with three or four cauteries of all parts, using this olive-shaped cautery.
And if many cauteries are necessary, then let it be cauterized and do not apply too much pressure with your hand on the cautery before, just so that you touch the subtlety of the membrane.
And if the pains rise into the knuckle and hip, then administer the cautery which we have said in our chapter.
And if the pains are only in the most part of it and is called "suagra", then prick on the circle of the fibers as they turn, pricking two lines.
And if there remains pain in the said places, then prick on the circle of the fibers over each knot and over the crease of the hand.
And if the pains rise to the joints or muscles in a few days, then let it be cauterized on all parts of the assistants.
And do not evacuate the patient with good regimen and reception of medicines, for if there is made a good regimen and flux is evacuated with this cautery, it will be healed, may God help.
Chapter XLV.
On the Cauterization of Wounds.
When a wound occurs in the groin and says that it is swollen before the navel, and this is where it begins to approach, then it is necessary for you to tell the patient to leave his diet alone on that day and to use gentle remedies so that the wound may come out of the belly.
And next, follow the patient with your hands on his back over his hip, and command him to keep his arm straight until the opening is made or the skin appears or the navel shows.
And next, return to that place with the said lines and signal a rupture over the bone of the pelvis with a sign similar to the middle of a circle on the divided parts of the chest.
And next, ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
until it becomes moderately red and emits sparks. And next, reduce the navel or the skin to its natural shape, and next place your hand on the spot so that the navel does not shrink.
And you have already put between the joints of the patient and left one joint, another serving on his thighs, and another on his feet, which has its own hands.
And next, place the cautery on that sign with your hand holding the cautery straight, and on that, until you reach the bone of the pelvis to the middle of the duodenum; and repeat it in another way if you have not achieved it in the first way into the bone.
And observe carefully the sign of the navel at the time of your cautery, that you do not burn that navel for fear that on the patient it may bring death or great harm.
And know that when you apply the cautery do not touch the bone, nor confirm your operation.
And it is necessary that the cautery of children be subtle according to their great and small size.
And next, cure the place of the cautery for three days with a border until the scar of fire is restored.
And next, cure that place with other remedies until it is healed.
And the patient lies on his back for 40 days until the wound and the sore are sealed.
And it is necessary that you provide the patient with nourishment according to the length of time of their cure, which stretches their belly, and that the navel does not shrink outside of the effort to heal.
And next, when you wish to take away after 40 days, then administer it decently done, and keep that for another 40 days.
And it is diminished by labor and replenishment of food and drink, and of loud voices, for when one uses this regimen of entire healing, it will be healed.
And you will say the cure of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and you wish not to be neglected, then cauterize the rupture with this cautery round about according to its quantity, and let it be that which is exhaled from the membrane as if it were the third part of it; and next, cure that place with what we have said, and do not adjust.
And already some first ones have said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, plus the sign in it:
and a paused line that goes along the latitude in the side above the rupture, and another line above it; and then place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Chapter XLVI.
On the Cauterization of Twist.
When a wound occurs in some members due to bruising or percussion and the pain persists for a long time and does not submit to cure with medicines, then it is necessary that you cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And let the cautery be of the entire member according to its greatness and smallness, virtue and debility, location of twist and pain of it.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, good; and if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for it is customary with those pains that they are punctured of member to that member which approaches it, in order that you may achieve those with a cautery until the patient is healed.
Chapter XLVII.
On the Cauterization of Leprosy.
Some lepers are sometimes cured with a cautery by great divine intervention, and especially if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of humors and melancholy.
And therefore, when you want to cauterize that patient, consider if the leprosy is common and has been cured with what we have said in the division and not delayed, nor stayed, and fear for the patient that corruption will comprehend all his body and all its complexity, then cauterize it over the head with eight cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and another behind the forehead; on both temples; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
And finally, place your hand with the cautery a little bit into the bone to make a small impression, and from there displace the scabs, so that the exhalation of great vapors is alleviated; and cauterize on the mouth according to what has been prescribed.
And if the leprosy is already spread out on the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with those cauteries which we have said in the head; and also cauterize on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on both nostrils, and two on two vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one on the vertebrae near the coccyx, and one on the coccyx, and two on each armpit, and two on each elbow, and two on each knee, and one on each ankle, and two on the tendons of each foot; and cauterize it on all the joints of the said arms and legs, and on each heel of the feet, and on the fibers of the thighs.
And guard yourself from the nerves that are over the sole, lest you burn them.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the pelvis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the hip.
And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more they are beneficial and confirmative; and know that the patient has no pain in the cautery, just like they do with others, because the body of him is already stupified.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be great or small according to the members and joints, as directed by the species of the instruments.
And next, cure the cautery with flour of errors mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
On the Cauterization of Stupor.
When some member is stupified or drowsy and is cured with medicines, oils, and emplasters, but does not heal, then you should cauterize that stupified member with cauteries according to its greatness or smallness.
And let your cautery go into the thickness of the membrane a little bit. And next, cure it with a gentle remedy until it is healed.
And sometimes it is cauterized some stupor which occurs in the arms and legs, and on the vertebrae of the back, and the sensation of the nerves which move that member is restored, and the stupor is restored.
But do not presume on this unless you are wise in the anatomy of the members and the exit of nerves throughout the entire moving body.
Chapter XLIX.
On the Cauterization of Whites that are Morphia.
When whites are ancient and do not submit to any of the remedies of medicine, then you should cauterize on that with a pre-owned cautery for a little bit according to the quantity of the membrane's specificity until the whiteness and color of it are restored, and the color is changed.
And next, cure it with flour of errors and lentils mixed with red oil and leaves of arnoglossa, and with dove's blood or with raven's blood, each part is one quarter and all are mixed, and next, wrap a cloth around the place and put it on until it is healed.
Chapter L.
On the Cauterization of Cramp.
When cramps begin and you wish to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery in the circle of it as it turns.
And they said that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle location; but to me it is not seen this way, because I fear it may be ulcerated, and I have already seen this some times.
And it is better to be cauterized in the circle of it with a circle as we have said, or with many cauteries.
Chapter LI.
On the Cauterization of Adulteration.
When some adulteration is delayed in its maturation, and it so happens that this is due to superfluity causing it, or the state of the patient, which is old in decrepitude, with little blood, or by time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of adulteration; then cauterize in the circle of it with many small punctate cauteries; and next, release that which will fasten in its maturation.
But if you wish to perforate it with a cautery, then ignite the cautery of which this is the form: and place that in the middle location of the adulteration until it penetrates the membrane.
And if the cautery is placed in that location which is farther away, because the body of the arm is alleviated; and next, cure it until it is healed.
Chapter LII.
On the Cauterization of Corrosion.
Corrosion is corruption wandering in the member, which corrodes it as if consuming dry wood with fire.
Therefore, if you find that corrosion in a place where it can withstand the cautery with fire, then ignite the pointed cauteries, many small ones, and great ones according to what is convenient in that place where the corrosion is.
And next, cauterize it completely on all sides until you eradicate all corruption and there remains no cause of it.
And next, release it for three days, and pause on the cauterized spots with a cloth sprinkled with oil mixed until all scabs are eradicated and all corruption.
And next, cure it with flesh-producing remedies.
But if after three days the flesh grows healthy in which there is no corruption, good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains in the corrupted places.
And corrosion is medicated with some repeated applications of acute medicine, because that is a remedy for a place of cautery. But however, cautery with fire is of greater divine assistance.
And I already said the cure for it with acute medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you will need it.
Chapter LIII.
On the Cauterization of Warts and other Similar Things.
Many times it happens that there is a disease in the leftover parts of the foot which is called a wart, and it is a great, hidden cause which weighs down the foot; and cauterization on those is done in two ways, either with fire or with hot water.
But cautery with fire is when you ignite the concealed cauteri resembling a wheel of punishment, which is made of iron according to the quantity which contains the wart on all sides, and it has subtle edges.
And next, pause that which is ignited on the wart, and next, move your hand with the cautery in the circle of the wart until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the wart. And next, release that for three days until the wart begins to fall off. And next, apply that with wild marjoram leaves mixed with salt, and leave the poultice on for one night, because it will be eradicated from its roots.
And next, cure that place with flesh-producing remedies until it is healed.
And if it does not convert, and many times it happens in the surface of the body, mainly on the arms and legs, then it is necessary that you administer to those cauteries with water; and this is done by taking a hollow reed or iron rod or wheel of punishment, and placing it on the wart; next, put a small amount of hot water into the hollow reed, and hold your hand, and move that with compression of your hand all over, and press the edge of the reed onto the root of the wart, and allow the hot water to flow through the preon of the root of the wart; and wait for the patient a little while the stinging of the hot water for an hour, and then remove it, because the wart with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus do with those, and then proceed to the other until you come upon all of them in their place on the body.
And next, cure those with flesh-producing remedies which are the roots of the warts being eradicated.
Chapter LIV.
On the Cauterization of Tremors.
When a tremor occurs due to constriction of the nerves or fever caused by constriction, or for another similar reason, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cautery; and also on the feet, and on the stomach, with an olive oil cautery.
And the tremor of it subsides and hastens the recovery of the constriction-caused illness.
Chapter LV.
On the Cauterization of Accidental Whites in the Body.
When in the body there are accidental whites which are pustules that tear open and are formed from gross corrupt matter; therefore, it is necessary at first to appear as if so, that is, to be cauterized on the entire head of the fistula with a subtle cautery made from mirt wood, the tip of which has been extended by fire; or with a long, curved cautery; or with a lentecular cautery.
And sometimes it is necessary to cauterize again at the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; and do not believe, for it is disrupted by those excesses, and is cured from those.
But however, it is necessary that this be done appropriately with evacuation through phlebotomy.
Chapter LVI.
On the Cauterization of Accidental Bleeding from an Incision by Archer's Tool.
Many times there occurs bleeding from an incision by Archer's tool, which is caused by the wound that follows, or by the incision of apostemes or cauteries on a member, and similar things, and it is difficult to stop that.
Therefore, when bleeding occurs as above, then you should take a cloth with your hand to the place of the Archer's tool, and apply it to that spot, strengthening it many times until the bleeding stops and does not recur.
And next, pause the olive oil cauteries, both small and great, in number, and breathe upon them until they are thoroughly ignited.
And next, take from those one small or one great according to the location and wound in which the artery is broken, on that vein, hastening more than you have stopped the bleeding with your said remedy, and apply the cautery until it is cauterized and restrained that blood.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you stop the said remedy and withdraw the cautery, then take another cautery, carefully prepared among those which are ready in the fire, and do not cease to do this until the bleeding is restrained.
And take care that you do not burn the nerves which are here, and that other evils come upon the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, then it is not possible in those to restrain the bleeding, and especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four ways: or with a cautery as we have said before, or with extraction when it is not extracted, because when it is extracted, the extremities of it are burned and the bleeding is restrained, or that it be tied with a thread or with ligament by strong constriction, or that medicines be applied to it which have the virtue of restraining the bleeding; and they should be strengthened with poultices and constriction decent.
But he who administers restraint by means of ligament and constriction with cloths or by position of constrictive causes and similar things does not cure until late.
But if this occurs in some way and the doctor is not present nor medicine, then act with pause of the said indication on the orifice of that vein just as we have said, and understand to the great constriction of it until the bleeding stops from the upper part of the wound, and on the Archer's tool let it not be reformed; and above the Archer's tool, sprinkle water cold of great freshness until the blood is congealed and thickened; and further consider what cautery or medicine is necessary.
On Incision, Perforation, Ventoses, and Phlebotomy, and Wounds and their Similar Things.
We have already said in the first chapter all illnesses in which cautery with fire is convenient and with medicine concomitant, and the occasions and causes of them, and the instruments necessary for those with the forms of the cauteries; and we have arranged the chapters on the subordination of the head to the feet.
And I shall proceed in this chapter in that manner, so that it may be understood by him who seeks this, and thus on what he has asked.
And before I begin this, it is necessary, son, that you learn that in this chapter, it is for fear of what is in the first chapter on cautery.
And therefore it is necessary, because in the operation which is in this chapter, many times evacuation occurs, which is with blood, and to which life is bound, that there be great caution, for the sprinkling of the vein or incision on an apostema or warning of exsistura or purgation of the wound or extraction of a sagetum or incision of a peyra, and their similar things. And from all those is accompanied fear and trembling, and in most of them death.
And I warn you that this should not befall you, for sometimes the case is that you must use the ways of men with many manners of illnesses. And from among them are some that flee with their own illness and it is light for them to die, and thus because of the vehemence of what they find in their illness, and because of the length of their illness, and with the illness is fear which means death.
And from among them is one that gives you his own breath and speech, you expecting health with him, and his own illness is deadly.
And therefore it is not necessary that you consent to what comes to you from which this manner is; and your caution be greater than covetousness and rapacity; and do not presume any cause on that except for aprop certain science which verifies that coming to you, and through which the praise of success will come.
And use in the cure of all your illnesses prognosis and indication of that which is converted into health, for in that is help to you on acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
Oh, sons, God in you inspires His understanding and does not withhold from you direction and protection, for this is in His hand.
And I have arranged this chapter distinct by chapters according to what preceded in the chapter on cauteries, from the cure of the head to the feet, so that it may be alleviated for you that which you ask about this and that of which you have need.
Chapter I.
On the Cure of Water which is contained in the Head of Children.
Know that this illness often occurs in children at the time of birth, and when the midwife strengthens the child's head with her hands.
And sometimes it occurs due to a hidden cause which is unknown.
But I have never seen this illness except in children; and all those whom I have seen died from it, and therefore it is my duty to write about it.
And I have seen that a child's head was filled with water, and his head was always magnificently swelled to the point where it could not contain itself anymore due to the greatness of its own head, and more so than the humidity increased until mortal fire.
And this humidity is either added between the vertebrae and the bone, or added behind the bone over the cranium.
Therefore, the operation in that case is to make an incision on the mid-point of the head with a fissure in the latitude, and the length of the fissure should be about two inches so that the humidity flows through it, and this is the form of the spatula.
And therefore, if the humidity is more augmented and the apostema is greater, then two incisions are made in that manner:
And if the humidity is behind the bone, the sign of it is that you should push open the commissures of the head from all sides and the water is squeezed out when you compress it with your hand at the parts inside, and there will be no harm to you. It is necessary that you make an incision on the mid-point of the head with three fissures in this manner:
And properly apply the incision to extract all the humidity; and properly strengthen the fissures with cloths and poultices; and properly immerse it in hot water and oil on the fifth day, and properly loosen the ligament and cure the wound with tentatives and applications, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And there is another manner of incision, which takes into account the magnitude of the apostema and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in the anterior part, or in the right side, or in the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the apostema appears and the accumulation of water, and do so as best you can.
And be careful not to cut the artery, and beware of bleeding from it, for if you do, the patient will die from that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity.
Chapter III.
When old men have cataracts or wounds in their eyes or feet, and it is long-standing, and you do not rely on medicine for its cure, then the last resort in this case is to make an incision on those two arteries.
And therefore, when you want to incise those which the patient's head is affected, and properly freshen the location with an asperous cloth so that the arteries appear, and properly strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and properly consider where the vein is pulsing; and the places of each one on top of the places which are near the ears are depressed, and so much so that they only show in certain men.
And properly sign on the artery with a tentative touch, and properly incise each one with the spatula of each part above the incision, which goes through to the bone, and this is so in the latitude of the head.
And if you wish, insert the spatula below the artery and cut it at the points of the incision on the upper parts.
And the length of the incision should be about two digits adjusted, for when some vein is incised the blood flows out with a pulsatile egress, which jumps forth frequently.
But if the artery does not appear at the incision, then it is necessary that you measure from the ear the quantity of space of three digits, and properly sign with a tentative touch, and go into the bone.
And what flows out in blood should be about one ounce. and it flows out little by little, more or less, and all this is according to the quantity which appears of the virtue of the patient and of the accumulation of the artery.
And properly consider the wound, and therefore if there remains on the bone some cause of the cranium, then incise it thus so that no apostema is caused.
And properly strengthen the wound with poultices and ligatures of linen cloth, and properly cure it with applications until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the Extraction of the Arteries which are in the Temples.
When some ancient or long-standing emigration occurs in the temples, due to humidities and qualities of the lacertae, or an old and vehement inflammation similar to those, and it is medicated by the manners of cure of medicine, but this does not suffice, then we have recourse to extracting the arteries in the temples, or cauterizing them as we have shown.
And the manner of the operation and extraction is that the patient reveals the skin on which they are located in the temples; and understand to see the artery appearing in the temple, which is shown to you by its pulsation, and is hidden except in a few men due to vehemence of heat.
And if it is hidden from you, then strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and properly freshen the location with an asperous cloth or evaporate the location with hot water until the artery appears manifestly to you. And then take the spatula of which this is the form: And then take the spatula and cut the vertebra with it in such a way that you reach the artery; and properly get to the point where you extract that from the upper parts until you extract it from the vertebra and uncover those tunics which are beneath it, on all sides.
But if the artery is subtle, then envelop it with the extremity of the onychium, and properly incise one part according to the quantity by which the extremities are prolonged and contracted, and there will be no bleeding flow, for if they are not incised, the blood will not rise at all.
And properly evacuate one ounce of blood. to three ounces.
And if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you divide it into two parts with a faithful double fold of cedema or with cords to length, and do not allow putrefaction before the consolidation of the wound and the bleeding flow.
And properly incise the superfluity which is between two ligaments; and do this in that hour or almost another.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cauterizer into the bone and with a cauterizer cutlar until the extremities are incised, and remain in that place of this mixed work.
And it is a better work if the patient has fever or is of scorched complexion; for cauterization is one of those causes that help to dry up the humidity, and therefore it is better in this case.
And it is necessary to properly extract the arteries which fill the place of old cotton, and be paused over the powder decently made, and be cured with dry medicines that make the flesh appear and with some application until it is healed.
And if while you are working another time bleeding occurs from the artery, then you should apply yourself to restrain that blood, or with a cauterizer, or what fills the place of cotton, and strengthen your hand until the blood is restrained. And if any cause of those is not present to you, then pause your hand over the place until the blood is congealed, and apply the place with hot water of vehement temperature so that the sharpness repose, and be strengthened according to what is necessary.
And that which is easier in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cauterizer having two coats, since you have marked the two places with a tentative touch, and then each one, almost in silence, comes to the bone and cuts the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities is elongated, for they are not consolidated entirely by this cauterization.
And this is the form of the cauterizer:
and the sharpness of the two coats is exemplary. But however, if the sharpness is less than two coats, it is better, for if they are as sharp as two coats near each other, and do not cut through the flesh with velocity.
Therefore, when there is some thickness, it is held to be a burning of the focus in those and the flesh is removed gradually.
And this work is better than all works and easier.
And the space which is between two coats is the quantity of the thickness of the digit.
Chapter Four.
On the Cure of Eyes with Sharp and Acid Tears.
When there are acid tears and the eyes of those veins which are above the forehead of the head protrude, and no medicine brings relief in this case, and the face of the patient becomes red and feels like a wandering procession like ants, and the eyes of that person are exhausted, humidified to such an extent that their eyelids are constricted, and the eyelids are scalded by the sharpness of the tears; those who practiced medicine in ancient times mixed up this cure with a poultice for this operation, and called it "spassa".
And it is that you command the patient to pluck out the hairs which are on his forehead, and properly incise three openings equally distant from each other according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is two digits: one incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the lacertae which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
And beware of incising the arteries which are in two layers, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space between each incision is the quantity of three digits adjusted.
And if you have a piece of sponge well-applied or dry cloths with which to absorb the blood.
And then take the spatula of two sharp extremities, of which this is the form of the incision: which is from the part of the temples to the second incision. Excise the entire cord that is between two incisions on the cranium which is above the bone, and properly do this by the incision migrating into the second incision. And properly stretch the spatula and insert into the first incision another time with a cutlar, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And pause the blade of that cutlar so that it cuts through the flesh attached to the cord, and the blade of it is sharp enough to penetrate into the bone, and push it into that until it reaches the migratory incision, and remove with that all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes.
But continue the incision up to where the cord appears, and properly do this in the migratory incision into another incision.
And since a quantity of blood flows out, express the places where the clots of blood have formed.
And properly pause in each incision a cloth of old cotton, and pause over those powders mixed with wine, oil, and vinegar, and apply that which does not cause putrid apostema.
And on the third day, loosen the ligature and administer a great application of hot water or tea, and properly cure with applications of balsam, rose oil, and other remedies until the wounds are healed.
Chapter V.
On the Cure of Lachrymose Tears by Cauterization and Application to the Eyes Descending from the Parts Behind the Head.
When certain veins of cauterization are sharp and continuous, and the patient's eyes are exhausted small, and their regard for them is weakened, and the eyelids ulcerated and shedding their hairs, and in the forehead of the head there is a sharp pain leading to subsequent exhaustion, then it becomes clear through these accidents that the matters and cauterizations come from many veins of the parts behind proceeding.
And the best cure in these cases is this: that you command the patient to uncover his forehead, and properly incise a fissure in the middle of the forehead, a little bit for latitude (and start with the incision of the left temple into the right temple; and be incised into the bone; and extend your hand from the lacertae of the temples which are opposite the mastoid process), until the bone is uncovered.
Absorb all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and properly fill between the two lips of the incision with old cotton or cloths that are used to bind. And properly apply above the powders mixed with wine and oil in order that there may not be putrid apostema.
And when you see that the apostema is diminished, then it is necessary to apply heat to the bone until it begins to appear flesh; and properly cure with an exsicative regimen which will make the flesh appear, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony mixture, and make a poultice out of it, and administer it to these wounds in the natural course of the flesh.
Chapter VI.
On the Cure of That Which Catarrhizes in the Ears.
The whole cause that catarrhizes in the ears is one of four species, because it is either mineral pyrrhea or a similar cause like iron and copper, or it comes from plants like cypress or fava, or it is a fluidal cause like water and wine mixed with their similarities, or some animal.
And therefore, when pyrrhea catarrhizes in the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not adjust or believe in the ear, and pause the ear at the sun, and if it times the pyrrhea, then it is necessary to distill into that some cause of violet oil or saffron, and properly administer the extraction from there, and make the stornutation according to conditions, and stop the nose before the event of stornutation. And properly pause in the canal of the ear with some cloths of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the parts above, because many times it is forgotten due to these causes.
And if it is not gotten, then you should administer an extraction of the ear with the instrument called epicyclic gestures, subtle in form:
And if it is forgotten with gestures, then it is well; and otherwise, you should administer the extraction of the ear with a subtle onyx of slight duplication.
And therefore, if it is not forgotten because of that, you should make a needle of iron and insert the extremity of the needle into the canal of the ear and close around the needle with wax and softened oil in order that only the needle remains. And properly extract with your hand a forceful traction, for many times as we have recounted.
But if it is not forgotten in this manner, then you should take from the illuminated hall or from the prepared vessel with which the birds are taken a small quantity, and place that on the extremity of the ray, and properly envelop over that with a decently placed cloth. And properly insert it into the canal of the ear with ease, and properly dry out the ear from its humidity.
And therefore, if it is not forgotten among all the causes which we have recounted, then you should beware of cutting it before it leads to putrid apostema or spasms.
And the method of cutting it is that you first cleanse the patient's saphenous vein and extract the blood according to the virtue of the matter, and properly make it cease between your fingers and convert the ear into the parts above, and finish with a small incision in the root of the ear, opposite the grey matter of the brain. And the incision should be of lunar shape until it reaches the pyrrhea, and when the pyrrhea is darkened, stop that if you can with appropriate instruments; and properly close the incision at that hour with speed, and cure that until it is healed.
And if the cause lies in the ear is one of those grubs that you think and are inflamed, then you should administer the cure and extraction from there; but if it does not obey your will, then you should take a subtle spatula according to this form: and administer with that the abscession of that grub which is caught in the ear.
And do not make a mistake when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and pause it in many cloths, and properly extract from those with onyxes or subtle gestures, or by incision as we have said, because it is relieved the extraction from there.
But in the water which has entered the ear, it is necessary that the patient uses stornutation according to conditions at first, and fills his own ear with some old cotton, and waits above that ear where the water is, and if forgotten, well; but otherwise, you should take many sharp needles and lions according to the length of the digit, heat those in the fire a little, and have the patient insert one of those into the canal of their own ear and wait for a short time until another needle strikes another needle which is inside the ear. Therefore, do not cease with pyrrhea until all the water is forgotten.
Therefore, do not cease with pyrrhea until all the water is forgotten. And already the water will be forgotten in this way that you take from paper or parchment, i.e. and place one end of it into the ear and extend the other end with fire until the middle part is consumed.
And properly place another parchment and do this many times until all the water is forgotten, and extract it with a needle as above is said of the pyrrhetic extractor.
But in the extraction of beast that enters into that ear, if it is small-sized, just as much and so on, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large-sized one which appears to the sense of smell, then you should administer the extraction from there with gestures and onyxes, and the cause of it is easier than all the other causes that catarrhize in the ear.
But in the extraction of worm generated in the ear, when you cure it with what we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and do not confirm your cure, then you should look at the ear towards the sun.
And therefore, if any cause of worms appears here, then you should extract it with gestures or subtle onyxes; but if no cause appears, then you should take a needle that is straight and wide, the form of which is as follows: And insert the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity which the patient can bear; and properly suck with it a strong sucking, and do this many times, until all the worms are forgotten.
But if it does not obey your will, then you should stop and close the circuit of the needle with wax as we have said; and administer distillations which the ancients have already tried in the cure of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
And it is your effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, the form of which is as follows: And make that of silver or of iron, straight down, with a small hole, and on the top.
And therefore, it is as if you were to fill that which is in the concavity of the needle with what is necessary here. And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it around the extremity of the needle decently, and properly place oil in the concavity of the instrument, or juice from some herb, or what you want from these medicines in the needle - and that is in the ear -, and properly insert the ray with a decent cloth above and express with your hand that which is compressed temperately until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil dripping out.
And what is inserted into the ear has already been heated with fire a little. And beware that the cause which you will dilute in the ear is not too hot, for the medicines of the ear do not tolerate this.
Chapter VII.
On the Cure of Ear Stoppage.
Some times, some children and even some men experience ear stoppage due to a blow or a wound in that area; and this ear stoppage sometimes occurs at the forehead of the ear which does not follow the sense, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
And that which occurs at the forehead of the ear, which does not comprehend the sense, is in the most difficult disposition for hard-to-cure.
And in that which comprehends the sense, it is necessary that you pause the patient's ear to the sun and look at it. And therefore, if apparent oppression occurs, open that with a subtle spatula of which this is the form:
If the extremity of it is in the ear where there is a small latitude, one part being sharp and the other not; and the spatula has two lion-like claws on either side, so that it does not cause harm to the ear.
And therefore, if the ear stoppage is due to flesh born in the ear or at the forehead of it, then you should take that with subtle onyxes and cut through that with violent facility until all the flesh is removed.
And if the ear stoppage is in the forehead of the ear, then you should take a subtle iron ray and heat it with fire a little, and properly place that in the forehead of the ear.
And therefore, if you have felt oppression with what the patient has found with facility, through the weight of hearing, force the oppression of it with facility; and beware that you do not harm the nerves of the ear.
And properly place in the ear a cloth of linen according to the quantity of the width of the hole which you have wrapped with Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some oil and dip that into water and powderize it over there, and use it; and if the ear is already apostemated, then you must extract the pus and substitute it with another substance which you will wrap in wax made with rose oil, so that the apostema becomes cool; and properly cure that until it is healed.
But if bleeding occurs, then you should submerge a sponge or cloth in hot water and place it on the ear, and use another cure that restricts the flow of blood, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
On the Cure of Athazils Which Cause Blinding to the Eyelids.
Athazils which cause blinding to the eyelids of men sometimes are humid, and at other times they are dry.
Therefore, it is necessary that you take those with tenhalls or onyxes and cut them with the spatula of its own roots, and properly place it over the places according to their nature.
But if pain with bleeding comes, then you should cauterize those with a subtle lunar cautery.
And the best cautery is to apply it to the incisions and many times they return when there remains some cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are consumed and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment of Grandissia Which Comes to the Eyelids of Men.
Many times it occurs in the eyelids of men some cause which is akin to grandessia in its strength and hardness, and because of this grandessia is called.
And it is an aggregation of great humidity above and below the eyelid.
Therefore, the operation in them is that you should consider whether the grandessia proceeds from there where it appears on the eyelid and is spread to all parts; and the cause of it is light.
Therefore, find above it with an incision by latitude, and properly search for it from all parts with facility until it evaporates, and properly suspend it with onyxes and abscess it.
And if the figure is large, then you should adjust it with a suture; and cure that until it is healed.
And if it is small, then you will not suffer evil from that, because the ointment of it restores that and incorporates.
And if the grandessia is declining to the outer parts of the eyelid, then you should remove the surface outward, and properly ease the eyelid and suspend the grandessia with onyxes, unless you desire an incision, and press it from all parts; and if the eyelid by incision is lengthened, this is not done in any cause.
And properly make the incision, wash the eye with salt water; and cure the place with that which incorporates until it is healed.
Chapter X.
On the Cure of Axirnah in the Eyelid above the Eye.
Axirnah is a greyish substance which is generated in the tunic of the eyelid above, and most commonly affects children, aggravates their eyes and causes great pain to them; and they cannot gaze at the brightness of the sun because of it, as tears are shed upon them.
And for this reason, you should wipe their faces with a cloth every time, and on their faces they sleep; and thus to the eyelids of theirs below, the upper lids are humid, which already has been covered by inflammation, and there is imminent danger of apparent suppuration in the eye; and when you press the place with those words you said, you will bring forth suppuration within them.
And some manner of operation is in him who the patient places his head on the top, and properly places a cloth on it and makes a calque, and makes from it a circle according to the quantity which contains arthernach from all parts, and properly places that above that and presses with those words said of all so that suppuration may be aggregated in the middle of the circle, and properly finds himself in the midst of that humidity with a spatula incised with an incision by latitude, and the incision is not greater than the incision made in flaubotomia.
But in the forehead it is necessary that you cut the cord whole until you reach suppuration, for in the most desperate dispositions, suppuration proceeds through incision according to the form of white graying.
Therefore, extract that with cloths which you have wrapped between the said ties to the outer parts and roll back and forth with your right hand and left hand until it is dispersed.
And beware that you do not adjust the incision because with the spatula you will not reach the eye and it will be lost.
But if no suppuration appears to you at the beginning of the incision, but rather that you adjust the incision a little with facility so that it may proceed with suppuration; and properly extract that as we have said; and properly submerge cloths in water, vinegar, and poultice and apply them over the place and strengthen those with powders.
And thus, some that are salty, pause it in the concavity of the incision because this is what remains of that humidity.
And properly cure that until it is healed.
But if there is a painful abscess in the place, then properly cure that with soft poultices until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
On the Manners of Testing the Eye.
When in the eyelids of men there are born natural and ancient folds, then those do not belong to the eye and cause to appear mannerisms of illnesses such as constant tears and softening of eyelids and skin until that becomes a cause of destruction of the eye which is called testing the eye, and it is cured in four manners: either by cauterization with fire; or by acute medicine according to what is said before in the chapter on cauterization; or made by atactination through incision and suture; or by canals as you will say.
And therefore, it is necessary that you place the patient's head in the top; properly convert the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is converted, then it is well; and if not, insert a needle into that which has faith on the part most distant from the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate the faithful one above, and this will be - near the edge of the eyelid where there are no hairs - next to the hairs, and pull out the needle towards the upper parts with the eyelid, and convert it with the ray.
And properly find yourself at the outer part of the eyelid below the hairs, with a spatula incised by latitude into the lacrimal major towards the lacrimal minor; and properly extract the needle and pause beneath the eyelid with small powder or cloth, and properly send your hand over the eyelid with caution, and it will be as if it were a figure of a myrtle leaf.
But it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, for this is diversified in men, for some of them require that a great quantity of the eyelid be incised according to the quantity by which the eyelid is softened.
And properly find yourself with the spatula on the two lines which you have marked, and begin from the lacrimal major towards the lacrimal minor. And if your incision is near the natural hairs like it is the greatest part of the king.
And properly place the onyx in one of the two angles of the cord, and properly excise that whole, and properly adjust with a suture the two lips with a gullet or fine wool, and wash away the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous from the threads to the upper lids with some causes observing, if you wish to do so; otherwise, do not cure.
And properly loosen the suture of the threads in three or four days, and properly cure that.
And if you wish, leave the wound without suture and cure that with something that dries and constrains, for the eyelid is lifted from the sealing of the wound and the accumulation of pus; but suture is better. And thus, those who are wise will not tax you.
But in this case, there is solicitude about the patient, and it is of good operation, and not in vain.
And there is another manner in taxing, and it is that you mark on the eyelid a figure like a myrtle leaf, and properly lift the eyelid with three separate and gathered threads according to this form:
But if it is not possible to take three threads, and this is not equivalent, then you should take a needle with thread and put that in the middle of the figure, and insert another thread on the lacrimal major, and the second thread on the lacrimal minor, and adjust between the said ties the threads with equality, and properly, with those, lift your hand with equal elevation, lift all the cord above which is marked as we have recounted.
And properly adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and cure that until it is healed.
But if there is an abscess from your incision or your wound, settle that abscess with cerote and similar powder, and with gentle touches.
And sometimes the eyelid becomes converted to its own hairs, then it is necessary that you use in that what we have said about incision; but suture in any case is more artificial.
Atactination by canals is according to this form: and it is that you convert the eyelid and cut out the figure which is below according to what I have recounted; and properly by art, make two canals or two fine tubes from which the length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width is smaller than the width of the spatula. And you have already incised at the ends of each part, where you have the threads.
And properly add each one with subtlety above that which is superfluous from the eyelid of the eye, and constrict the canals of each part with a strong stricture, and leave it for some days, for the cord will die and be separated and will sink in until it falls by itself.
But if it is delayed, then properly break the threads with tornoras, and properly cure the wound until it is healed.
Therefore, when it is solidified, the eyelid is lifted and the hairs do not prick.
And this is the form of two canals which you will make according to this form: and it has the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter XII.
On the Lifting of Pricking Hairs in the Eye with a Needle when the Hair is Hard.
When the hairs are unnatural, hard and rough and prickly to the eyes, then the operation in that case is that you take a fine needle and pause it on that thread of fine and subtle wool, and properly adjust the ends of it and notice all things in a manner quite subtle. And be the length of the threads of the quantity of one palm.
And properly you compose another fine thread below it in brief, and knot the ends of that one if you wish.
And properly place the patient's head in the top and be next to the sun so that your work is declared, for it is a subtle and small operation.
And properly insert the needle into the root of the adjusted hair which has required engineering, and make it penetrate into the eyelid hastening until you extract that above the natural hair.
And properly pull out the hair above and insert it into its place, and be the hairs one or two or three, but not more.
And properly pull out your hand with that until the hair is outside and in its place in the eyelid with the natural hair.
But if it is attracted to the eyelid and not removed the hair, then you will pull out the eyelid from the parts below with the thread which you have composed in that, until it is removed from above.
And look at that with the vision of the eye, because then you will remove the eyelid and the thread, and all the hair and skin around the eye, and leave the clamps for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows well on top of it.
And if the hair is too short, then you will adjust one long hair from the natural hairs, and it will be lifted with that, or let it grow until it becomes approximately as long as the space between them, and then you will lift that.
Chapter XIII.
On the Cure of Echacration which appears on the Eyelid above.
When it appears on the eye echacration, and it is contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted in its own direction, or to the right or left side, due to bad consolidation of wound or scarring or cauterization, and it is called leporina, and this echacration is either natural or accidental, and is caused by consolidation of wound or scarring or cauterization, or by resemblance to their maladies.
The manner of the operation in this case is that you will cut through that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and pause in it where there is a piece of cloth between them, and tie those together until they are healed.
And it is not necessary that you use a cure for this from the causes which dry up and constrict; for if you do so, it will return to echacration even worse than at any time without fire.
Use in that from causes which soften as is fenugreek, and infuse with water in which are cooked high and scented leaves of it, or gentle aquilon, which is liquefied with some of the oils, and immerse the piece in it, and cure with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you pierce through all the way that is not consolidated according to the form that was at the beginning.
And this operation which we have described is nothing but some correction of echacration that does not return to the form of the place as it was before.
Chapter XIV.
On the Cure of Echacration which is made in the Eyelid below.
This echacration which is made in the Eyelid below, which is truly called vertaderament echacration; and it is of some natural, other accidental.
But accidental is made by wound or by scarring or by cauterization or by other similar things.
And the way of the operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
And properly extend the flesh to the parts above with the needle and cut it with the needle, and incise with a spatula wide. And therefore, if the figure of the eyelid returns as it should be, then it is good; and if not, take the ray and pause it in the split figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and close the two fissures on the left side of the eyelid below.
And be the ends of the two fissures at two angles of the incision which you have made so that they converge, and be the angle of their union such that when they come together, a figure is formed from theirs.
And this figure is Greek letter: lambda ().
And properly remove the flesh that much as is the length of the eyelid below, which is the thickness of it.
And properly adjust the separated parts and sew them with wool thread; and properly cure those with what we have said of softening medicines and cauls until it is healed.
And if echacration develops through fissure or suture or cauterization, then it is necessary that you cut with a flat incision on the hairs of the eyelid as was previously said. And properly separate with a caulus between two lips, according to what we have said.
In the sum of the sermon on the cure of echacration when it is above or below, that runs in the operation, according to what was prepared for the form of echacration, and that is in the form of various movements.
And the skilled artisan has always prepared engineering in any manner possible to it so that it may return the figure to its natural form or almost that, and this patient according to what is suitable for it from the operation and instruments in the greatest dispositions.
Chapter XV.
On the Adhesion of the Eyelid to the Conjunctiva or Cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in some men, it is as if the eyelid were solidified above the album of the eye, and prohibited from the facility of movement and its natural works, therefore it is necessary that you insert the extremity of the ray below the eyelid, and lift it up or stretch it with an uncial.
And properly you incise the adhesion with a spatula that is not sharp in its inscriptions, having obtuse a little bit so that the patient is not troubled during the operation, and remove the spatula that does not scratch the eye with its sharpness.
And be your incision such that it excoriates that adhesion with ease, so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
And properly you put in the eye salty water with which you wash; or distillate it from zest dissolved in water.
And properly separate between the eyelid and the eye with a caulus of linen, and pause over the eye wool infused in album of oil, and properly use for four days causes consolidative until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the Incision of the Nail and Eminence of Flesh of the Lacrimal.
Know that the nail is according to two manners, for either it is nervous, and is similar to a hard and subtle ciphac; or it is non-nervous, similar to white congealed humidity, which when iron touches it, or is forced to take with an ounce, it is abscinded and the ounce is not placed in it.
And both species do not begin except from the lacrimal major, until it gradually covers the vision and prohibits light and movement of the eye.
But the manner of working in this incision is that the patient puts their head in its place, and properly opens the eyes of it, and lifts the eyelid with your hand, and properly collects the nail with an ounce or two of duplication and stretches it to the upper parts. And properly take a needle and insert into that a piece of horse or ox or cow hair, or something similar, or a strong thread, and duplicate the end of the needle little by little and put it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie it to the nail; and stretch it to the upper parts, and excise on the side of the nail which is opposite the pupil. And thus you follow that with hair until the end of it.
And properly you incise the remainder in the root of the lacrimal with a spatula or small forceps, and let the natural flesh of the lacrimal be seen so that through the incision of it there is no continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail is extended or tied with an ounce or thread, as we have said, and properly it is excised with a spatula like this:
And beware that with the spatula you do not touch the tunic of the cornea and that there is a rupture in it, and that the pupil be perforated.
And properly the incision gets in the eye a little bit of salted or made from sinew, and let it stay there until another day; and properly cure that with what is needed until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put the needle in it, nor is the ounce tied to that, then many times this species of nail is cured with medicines, and is healed thus as you and recounted in the division.
And if you want to incise it, then you will open the eye of the patient and take a spatula with a subtle edge, lion-like in sharpness, according to this form: with subtlety. And if at times it is rarefied and is confused and taken in its root, then distill from your hour into the eye made of sinew or with rough silk or with salted, and anoint the eye until another day.
And properly iterate over that operation until all that is of it is removed, except that the contrary aposteme be in the eye, because then you will leave it, and cure at first the aposteme until it is healed.
And properly iterate your operation over that with reason until it is healed.
The emminence of the lacrimal flesh, if noted in the eye with great inconvenience, be suspended with an ounce; and incise it from that part, and do not finish the incision so that you do not excite a flow of tears.
And properly distill into the lacrimal rough silk and made from sinew, until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the Incision of Algae and the Water that is born from Adjusted Flesh in the Eye.
Some times in the eyes of some people is born red flesh, and it is over-paused until it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches above the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids to the outer parts and is assembled like a rose of balustrade.
But the operation in this case is that the patient puts their head in its place; and properly opens the eyes of it and collects all that red flesh with suitable ounces, and take that with a forceps or with a basket; and properly incise the flesh at first until everything is finished with the encisor, and beware of the eye that you do not scratch it with your operation.
And be your incision with which you cut those or with spatula which we have recounted in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps with which it is gathered according to what will come as the form of it approaches this chapter.
Therefore, when your incision is completed and all that red flesh is removed, then fill the eye with salted, or distill into it a reddish powder and similar to that of corrosive medicines, and pause over the eye outside covered with album of oil until you are assured of the contrary aposteme.
And if there remains some cause of algae and is seized by a contrary aposteme, and you fear the contrary aposteme, then leave the eye and cure that aposteme with what brings that aposteme, and properly iterate over that with operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the adjusted flesh which occurs in the eye of this species.
But however you must know that you should alienate all cure of the eye from its natural or accidental course, and work with iron, and not put your hand on any of these operations until you see that member is sufficient for that operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On the Collection of Scales in the Eye.
Scales that come red and are thickened over the eye and prevent it from performing its function, and reveal the eye with length of days.
Therefore it is necessary at first that you consider whether the eye in which there are scales is strong and in it there is no other disease than scales, then you collect those scales.
And it is that you command the patient to put their head in its place, and properly suspend those veins with one ounce or two according to your prudence; and let that ounce be of subtle duplication, according to this form:
or two ounces gradually in one mass, according to this form:
And properly are collected those veins with subtle forces, with subtlety, and wash away the blood hour by hour, until you see those veins to be removed from the eye and turned around.
And beware that you do not scratch the eye with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is at midday before the sun, and be very firm in your operation so that you do not incise anything but those veins.
And when you have completed, then you distill into the eye green or red powder so that with its sharpness it corrodes the water that is removed from the scales.
But if it is not possible for you to collect all at that hour, then you anoint all with the water that brings relief to the eye, and leave it for some days until the pain of the eye is assuaged and is assured of the contrary aposteme.
And properly iterate over that according to the same manner, until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Chapter XIX.
On the Reduction of Deformities at the Nose.
When you cure deformities with cauterization or with acute medicine, as it is preceded by the narration of it and not healed, then do not make an opening in it but rather open over the aposteme of the maturity of it, and extract all the humidity that is in it and pour it into the bone.
And therefore when the bone is uncovered and corruption or blackness appears in it, then you scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is named the "aspre cap", and is made of iron, and has a red head like that which is made pointed by the punctation of lime or alkali, with subtle punctation (such as is in the following form).
And pause that over the rotten part of the bone, and properly revolve it between the two said, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is clean.
And this will be done some times, and properly restore the place with drying and astringent causes.
Therefore, if the place is consolidated and good flesh has grown in it, and the body of the pus has been excised and remains for 40 days, and is not renewed or apostemated, nor does any accident occur there, then you will know that it is healed.
And if not, then there is no opening in it but rather to reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you uncover the second bone with iron or acute medicine, and when it is uncovered, then you take thread according to this form:
The extremity of the iron is triangular, and its shaft is first reduced to the extremity thus, as it were.
And properly pause that over the bone, and be that proper to the lacrimal; and stretch out your hand a little from the eye, and properly revolve your hand with the thread until it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the patient by finding the way to come out as you pull your hand.
Therefore, then restore the place with astringent and drying medicines, just as it will be healed.
Therefore, when the flesh and the place are restored, then the material that flowed to the outer parts returns to the nose, therefore it is lighter on the patient.
Chapter XX.
On the Reduction of the Eminence of the Eye.
When the eye is swollen to its total extent and does not cause any harm or diminution in the surrounding tissue, then you should loosen the patient, and properly follow, and properly pause breathing exercises in the neck without scarification and suckle for good succussion; and properly pause on the eye a liniment made of aloes, and sarcocolla, and strengthen the plaster over the eye with many powders.
And the manner of the powders is that you take cloths of lion's wool many times, and each cloth be doubled into four folds; and make from those.
And properly place those one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye needs. And properly strengthen on those with a cloth of strong and tight structure; and iterate the suction with succussion without scarification; and properly stop the suction and leave the eye straight for the day and night.
But if meanwhile the ligament is relaxed, then it is necessary that it be very tight.
And properly stop the ligament for the day and night, just as we have said.
And if the eye is already reduced, good; and otherwise, then iterate the plaster with powders, constriction, and suction until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the Incision of the Eminence of the Tunica Uvea.
When there is disruption in the tunica uvea, and it is prominent and proceeds beyond the eyelids just like a grain of millet, and its shape resembles that of a man, and you want to incise it, then the operation on it is as we have recounted, which you will introduce the needle into the root of the uvea from the part left above, and properly place another needle in the double thread part of the lacrimal, and make that penetrate and leave the first needle according to its disposition; and properly incise the location of the double thread and lift it with that part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen that motion.
And properly extract the needle and pause on the eye with lanolin infused in oil of olive, and leave it until the thread is tied to the uvula.
And properly cure the eye with that which comforts it, until the wound is healed.
And sometimes gather from all parts with a circle of cloth around the eye, and properly be pierced by a subtle spatula that comes to the front of the eye, and flow the humors albugineous, and descend the eye and enter soon.
And properly strengthen until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the Cure of Alconatis.
This disease which is called alconati is nothing but pus that is adjusted in the eye resembling water descending and not being that.
But the manner of working in it is that you make the patient sit on the prepared and right seat, and properly take their head in your hands from two parts and press it until you see the pus coming to the left side, and properly dry it and not let it descend, and stop the flow of light, and the patient will see the causes thus as they are.
And if it does not descend downward, you will know that it is water.
But if it is not prepared for the descent of the pus with what we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and properly take a subtle spatula and find that spot on the panniculus cernent a small part of the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunic of the cornea in the crown (in the location where it is visible), until the pus is forgotten.
Therefore, when it is forgotten, then you distill into the eye water cooled in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And properly cured with other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On the Cure of Water Descending from the Eye.
We have already said the species of water in the division and which is suitable for piercing with a sermon declaring it, therefore that one according to health.
Then you should make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and tie their eye tightly with a string.
And properly pause with your left hand near the eyelid of their eye on which the water is flowing from the left eye; or with your right hand if the right eye is affected.
And properly with your right hand take alumina if the left eye is affected; or with your left hand if the right eye is affected.
And properly place the extremity of alumina near the crown at the thickness of the ray in the album of the eye from the smaller lacrimal part, and properly press alumina with virtue and revolve your hand with it.
And properly penetrate into the album of the eye and feel that alumina has already reached the seen cause.
And it is necessary that the measure of the path of alumina to the front be the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the darkness, and it is the crown of the eye; because you will see with that pupil through the vision of the eye by the clarity of the tunic of the cornea.
And properly place alumina in the location where the water is, and properly draw it down one time towards another, and thus if the water descends soon, then you will see the patient's eye on which their vision is clouded so much, and alumina in their eye.
And properly pause for a little while; then if the water has descended, you will put that other time before alumina is dropped.
And then when it is dried and does not descend, you will extract alumina with ease, and revolve your hand with it little by little, and properly dissolve a small amount of clear salt of gemstone in that water and wash the eye inside; and properly pause outside the eye, or stop it, or infuse lanolin in red oil and album of olive, and bind with that the patient's eye.
But we do not have those things of our time to pause on which is mixed with album of olive.
And if the patient does not obey your alumina in the instrument of the eye due to its hardness - because it is some of those men whose eyes are very hard -, then you should take the spatula which is called alberid, and this is its form:
And then pierce with that spatula the conjuncture, and do not leave your hand in the hole, but rather make a way for alumina to reach the subtle location.
And properly introduce alumina according to what we have said.
And complete the complement of your work, and prepare the patient for sleep with a gentle decent made in which they will sleep on their own back in a dark room, and prohibit all movements.
And pause in the nature of it so that its nature is aligned, and not move their head to the right or left at all.
And be the ligature according to its disposition within three days.
And properly remove that from the dark room and exhale their foul vision, and make them see some causes, and properly return the ligature within seven days.
And it is not necessary to do that in the hour of curations or soon after infusion. They had told me that I should alienate this for such a reason, because the water flows more lightly and with great vehemence due to excessive regard.
But if it occurs with caution of aposteme, then you should remove the eye before the 7th day, and correct that with water which releases aposteme.
Then you should absolve the vision of him and pause on his face near the mouth by which it is regulated that he remain in the dark room for a few days, existing in the darkest.
And properly be taken out of that dark place gradually and converted back into their causes.
And know that in each case there is no excuse for the disciple to see some things, and then you should be bold over the operation.
And it has been revealed to us of some of those who are in the Artach, and some said that fire is made in the Ayrac, mighty pierced by which the water is sucked out.
But however, I have not seen anything like that in our land which has been perfected with water, nor is it written in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this may be new.
And these are the forms of the species of magicians, for which it is over those who ignore these:
And they are made of earth or of iron properly, and they are the extremities of them with this subtlety triangular, the pointed end just as it is the form.
Chapter XXIV.
On the Cure of Fresh Meat in the Nose.
When in the nose there are born various fleshy things adjusted from which some cause is assembled to scorpion's weight or to polypous flesh; and this disease is called polypus because it is similar to that polypous flesh represented. And from it is born cancerous meat, puffed up and of a dark color; and from it is born lion's flesh not of dark color.
Therefore, in that which is of this lion's flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, you should make the patient sit between your hands and place them under the sun, and anoint their nostrils with it, and put once upon those meats. And properly extract that from the outside parts, and properly incise it with what you have comprehended of those with a sharp spatula from one part until you know that all the flesh is removed; for if any cause remains in him by which ablation is possible, then you should ratify this with one of the subtle instruments with ease, until no cause remains. But if he bleeds or an aposteme occurs with caution, then you should pause the flow of blood; or it is one of the malignant apostemes, then you should cauterize and burn that which must be ablated and all cavities removed.
And properly be cut in the nose with the incision, where you will apply water or vinegar. But if the nose is open and from it proceeds humidity into the palate, then you should know that it is already healed.
But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you should know that inwardly there is fresh meat in the pustules of the nose bones to which ablation has not been accomplished.
Therefore, it is necessary that you introduce the thread of faith into him who has some coarseness, and nourish in him good thoughts, and pause between each thought the quantity of the said or minute, and engender the disease and enter one extremity of the thread into the nose with the ray or with another cause which is possible to it.
And since this will be done, let the patient's odorament attract into that which pervades the canals of the nose, and be situated on their gullet, for many times similar actions make children laugh at school, and it is a light cause to him who wants to do so.
And properly pause the two extremities of the thread, one extremity that goes out on the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and properly administer a tightening of flesh with the knots that are in the thread, and do this until you know that the flesh is already bound by the knots of the thread.
And properly extract the thread, and pause in the nose about an inch from the abstraction of blood, and do this for three days or more until the scab is completely consumed by all that remains of the flesh.
And properly in the end of the cause, pause in the nose with a leaden cannula for several days until it is healed.
But if you run out of cure that exists, use this one.
And this is the form of the instrument for the head-purger maker with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
And make this of silver or earth, which is similar to a small lamp open, like a small shell, and the mouth similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed cannula like a reed, and the cannula of the instrument for the head-purger maker be flat, open; to which is attached at the end, with which you will hold that when you cauterize in oil or water that you want from the juices and susceptible causes.
Chapter XXV.
On the Foul Odors in the Extremities of the Nose.
Many times foul odors are born in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and increased in several days until a moderate regard for it is reached.
And therefore you should incise that in the beginning of its appearance, and eradicate all that. And properly pause over the spot or cauterize or medicine which is present at the location of it.
But if its incision is delayed until it is magnified, then consider whether it is puffed up, hard, of dark color and little sensation; then do not touch that with iron because it is a cancerous aposteme; for many times the one who incises this aposteme endures great malice against him whom it has affected.
And if the aposteme is of lion's touch and not of dark color, and times when incision is possible in all that, then evacuate the patient and incise that without fear, and cure the spot with what exists and constrains into being healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On the Suture of the Nose and Lips and Ears when Continuity is dissolved by Wound or Similarities.
Know that when a solution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, few confer on that operation except in some men.
Therefore, when you encounter some cause of those, you should consider if it is a fresh wound with the patient's blood, and then you should adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and properly cure that until it is healed.
And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated, and each is made whole, then you should cut off each part of its visible cord until there is no blood. And properly adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen those, and upon those sprinkle blood of dragon and thrice-stamped, and pause over the powder one poultice of diaphanous day, or some other consolidating poultice, and leave that bound for two days or three, and then remove that and replace that poultice and leave that until the faithful ones are abscinded, and properly cure with scabbing into being healed.
But the method of suture is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as we have recounted in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with thread just like to your and make it known.
Chapter XXVII.
On the Extraction of those Causes which come in the two lips in the parts inward.
Many times it is necessary for some men to extract certain apostemes from the inward parts of their lips, which are hard and resemble grasshoppers, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore, you should convert the lips and wounds each of those hardenings in all parts, and properly fill the location with sagacious trifles until the blood is restrained, and then wash it with vinegar and cure the location with what exists and stipticitate into being healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the Incision of the Flesh Adjusted in the Gums.
Great many times there are swellings over the gum-adjusted flesh which the ancients called albulus; therefore, you should suspend that with once or twice as much as you hold it with the forficulae and incise that in its right place, and leave the serum to flow or the blood.
And properly pause over the location with sagacious trifles or other powders that are stiptic or excitatory.
And if the flesh returns, then you should incise it secondarily and cauterize it, for properly applying the cauterization will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
On the Reason of Teeth with Iron.
When in the surface of the teeth of the inward parts and of the forepart and between the gums are adjusted rough, sharp, and some times are blackened and are made citrines or greenish until they corrode through the gum and are made the teeth loose.
And therefore, you should make the patient sit between your hands and pause the head in your seat, and extract the teeth in which those roughnesses and causes appear like sand until there is no cause left in them, and this will be done to remove the blackness and citrinity and the other things so that they are purified.
And therefore, if this is the beginning of the reason, good; and if not, then you should iterate the reason over those for another day and the second and the third until it comes to the last statement in what you want.
And know that teeth have needed many resorptions of diverse forms and figures according to how it is prepared for your operation. And therefore, because the resorptions with which the tooth is removed from the inward part are another of the resorptions with which it is rasped between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of resorptions should be prepared by you as soon as possible.
Chapter XXX.
On the Eradication of Teeth.
Therefore, you should cure the tooth of its pain with all ease and leisure in all eradication of it, for there is no cause that can withstand the time when it is eradicated, for it is subtle substance into which it excuses itself in the eradication of it.
But therefore, when the patient is ready to have that tooth eradicated, you should firmly certify which tooth is the painful one, for many times the pain deceives the patient and causes them to think it is in a healthy tooth, and you eradicate that and properly the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is eradicated, for we have already seen this by the operation of barberries.
Therefore, as you are certified which tooth is the painful one, and since you know well, then it is necessary that you scarify in the circuit of the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth to the gum of all parts, and then properly apply that with those said tools or with subtle forceps at the beginning little by little until that concieves.
And then properly apply in it forceful holds with great pressure for good speaking or strong eruption, and pause the head of the patient between two denials that you hold well so as not to harm them, and then properly extract the tooth according to rectitude in manner that does not break it, nor give greater pain to the patient.
And therefore, if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place it so that it is completely free from all parts with facility and effort the removal of it just as it was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is worn or corroded, then it is necessary that you complete with a cloth the wear and strengthen it with the subtlety of a ray at the extremity so that it is not torn in the hour of your constriction upon it, as you hold it.
And it is necessary that you work exactly with scarification in the circuit of all parts of the gum and guard your strength so as not to break it and leave a part of it, and return upon the patient for the malice that may be greater than the first pain.
And beware that you do not do as some ignorant barbers do in their foolishness and audacity towards the eradication of their patients, without administering what we have recounted; for many times they bring upon men great illnesses which are more difficult to be torn apart, and the roots of their teeth all or some of them, or that you extract it with certain bones from the jawbone, as many times we have testified.
And then properly wash the mouth with vinegar, hot or cold, and salt.
And if there is flux of blood in this way, just as many times there are, then you should mix some quantity of egg white and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that egg white does not congeal, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and subtle tenacula with which the tooth is extracted at the beginning is that of a long extremity, short handle, and thick, in order that they may not be doubled when you must work with them.
And they should be like times of thick handle, so that when you strain with them, they will not be doubled, but short extremities.
And they should be made of Indian iron, with descent-shaped handles, and in the handles of those there are teeth which some fit into others and strain by construction, strong and powerful, and sometimes the handles of those are in the shape of a bird's beak, called ciconia, so it is sturdy and has strong constriction.
Chapter XXXI.
On the Eradication of Teeth and Extraction of Bones from Broken Mandibles.
When you must eradicate the tooth that is broken for some reason, then it is necessary that you pause over the location with a border for one day or two until the location is mollified; and then properly insert algidest or tenacula the extremities of which are assembled in the shape of a bird's beak called ciconia or guanta, the form of the forceps:
The extremities of theirs are made inwardly like a file or an almond.
And if you do not obey your eye with these forceps or tenacula, then it is necessary that you scrape over the root and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument which has no name, but is a small lever whose form is this:
And it should be of short extremity, thick and small, and not be enveloped so that it will not be broken.
Therefore, if by this the root is forgotten, good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extremity in which there is some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is that it is triangular and has a more subtle extremity.
And already you have helped with this instrument having two rams, the form of which is as follows: and with other instruments which precede in the extraction of teeth; for soon it is made with this instrument which is assembled like once great, and this is the form:
of the triangular extremity, twisted or short, which has some thickness, and not be enveloped so that it will not be broken.
And you should know that the instruments of teeth are many and similar to other instruments.
But the artificers wise and subtle in their art, find for themselves according to this what the operation means and various diseases; for they are of the diseases to which the ancients did not prescribe nor provide proper instruments, by the forms of diverse species.
But if the bone of the mandible or of other bones in the mouth is broken, or if it is bent, then it is necessary to be very careful over that place where it is convenient for instruments and forceps which we have said in the extraction of tooth roots, and help yourself with the gesture of which this is the form:
And it should be in that place some thickness, little by little, and be strung or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone of all is forgotten; and then properly restore the location with medicines suitable to this.
But if there is a small bend in the bone, then extract that from that bend and its blackness, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter XXXII.
On the Cure of Teeth that are Higher than the Others.
When teeth are higher than their natural form and more so in women, especially in venerable old ladies, therefore it is necessary that you consider: if one tooth is very close to another tooth, and it is not possible for them to be joined or tied together, then extract that; but if it is annexed to another tooth, then you should incise it with this instrument whose form is this; it is similar to a boar's tusk, and is made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp extremity.
And it should be your incision with which you will incise that in several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and so that it is not confused with another tooth.
And if it is an exalted tooth exposed to erosion, then extract that with a file of Indian iron whose form is this:
And it should be all of Indian iron and the edge slightly curved; and it should have many small points, like a file with which needles are made, and with which the tooth is filed little by little in many days with ease, so that no other tooth is confused and corrupted. And then properly line it up at the end, and extract it with certain rasors.
And if it is a tooth whose part is broken and irritates the tongue, then you should file it down until the sharpness of that fracture is gone and smoothed out, and be filled so that the tongue does not irritate nor corrupt speech.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the Restoration of Damaged Teeth with Gold or Silver Filling.
When accidents occur to the teeth in front of concussion and removal by percussion or by chance, and the patient cannot withstand the pressure that is required, and you have treated it with stiptic medicines, and your treatment has not been effective, then for this reason, so that they do not decay, you should strengthen those which are strong with gold filling and not silver, because silver becomes green and soon bends, but gold never changes.
And the filling should be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the recipe is that you take the filling and take twice as much of it between two healthy teeth, and properly that you increase with two tortuosities of the filling between two damaged ones, or if one or several, until the fabric reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then properly iterate the process to the part from which you began, and strengthen your art with ease and wisdom until it is not damaged.
And then properly tighten the filling so that it does not escape from the roots of the teeth.
And then properly insert the excess extremities of the filling with forceps or tweezers, and add them to each location with gesture, and convert them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged one, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue. And then properly leave it as straight as Roman.
But if it is loose or broken, strengthen it or those with another filling in such a manner for all its time.
And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, just as these are linked:
And when one returns or two are placed in their locations, and they are reborn just as we have recounted, and remain.
And only good craftsmen and wise ones can do this.
And sometimes it is suitable for some cause of cow bones, and it is made from them just like the form of a tooth, and it is placed in a location where the tooth falls out, and it is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves that one for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the Cutting of the Ligament which is found in the Tongue and prevents Speech.
This ligament which sometimes appears behind the tongue or is natural to it, or accidental and occurs by injury which has already been consolidated.
And the operation in it is that you open the mouth of the patient, and find the existing tongue cap; elevate the tongue, and then properly cut that ligament nerve according to its latitude until the tongue is freed from its recency.
But if there is some hardness or denudation in it, and this is due to the consolidation of an injury, then you should use a knife and cut it along its latitude until you have severed the ligament and dissolved the knot.
And beware that there is not a fissure made in the forehead of the flesh, lest you cut too deeply and bring forth a flow of blood.
And then properly wash the vestige of the incision with lukewarm water or cold water, and then properly pause beside the tongue to relax it; thus is the means by which the patient will keep their tongue relaxed every night, lest another knot be formed.
But if bleeding occurs, pause over the spot with a cloth pressed; but if the blood flows, then extract it with a cauterizing tool made of lint which is suitable for this. And then properly treat that with other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
On the Extraction of a Ranula behind the Tongue.
Sometimes behind the tongue, an apostema forms like a little tumor that prohibits the tongue from its natural operation; and very soon it is magnified to the point of filling the mouth.
And the operation in this case is that you open the patient's mouth with the sun shining in front and observe the apostema.
And if you see it has a dark or blackish color, hard and rough, to which the patient shows no sensitivity, then do not touch it because it is gangrenous.
And if it is inclined towards whiteness, with moisture, then you should put your finger in there, and cut it off with a subtle spatula, and cut it all around; and if blood flows at the time of your operation, then you should pause above the pressed cloth, so it is a compress, until the bleeding is stemmed.
And then return to your work until you have completed the task in that place, until it is washed with lukewarm water and salt; and cure it with another treatment, similar to this one, until it is healed.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the Extraction of Apostemes from Two Ears and that which is nothing in the Gullet, and other Apostemes.
When it occurs in the gullet, then are the glands which are assembled together, those which protrude outside and are named two ears, those which when you cure them with the treatment we have said in the division and they do not heal, then you should consider if the apostema is hard, of dark color, of little sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch it with iron because of the flow of blood; rather leave it until it is matured, and then either you will extract it or it will break off by itself.
And if it is of white color, rough, and the root of it is subtle, then that which is necessary is to be cut.
And the operation in this case is that you consider, before your operation, if the apostema has already rested its shape like it is complete or if it has diminished by some diminution; and then have the patient sit before the sun, with his head in its natural position, and open his mouth, and the servant takes hold of the tongue between his own most prominent finger and thumb with a noble instrument whose form is this:
And it should be made of silver or copper, and be subtle like a knife.
Then as you take hold of that tongue and the apostema is shown to you, and cut above it the thin veil, then take once and fix that in its place, and pull that out to the outer parts as far as you can. Or another way is to take some cause of the tunics, and then properly cut it with an instrument whose form is this:
Or another way is to take some cause of the tunics, and then properly cut it with an instrument whose form is this: and is assembled like forceps, but the extremities of it are curved, so that the orifice of each of those is in the end of the other, very sharp, made of Indian iron well enveloped.
But if this instrument is not present to you, then cut it with a spatula whose form is this: And be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And once you have cut one notch, cut the other one in the same manner of cutting, and then properly wash the patient's mouth with lukewarm water.
But if bleeding occurs, wash the mouth with decoction of scorsone of mulberry or myrtle leaves and similar to those of stiptic causes until the flow of blood is stemmed, and then properly cure that until it is healed.
And sometimes you may find other apostemes in the gullet besides those two ears, and cut them according to what I have said in the incision of two notches alike.
And I once treated a woman with an apostema that was born in her gullet, which apostema tended to be dark in color, of little sensation, which had already closed the gullet and was preventing her from breathing freely; she was not allowed to eat or drink water, and she was already close to death if only I had not intervened for a day or two.
And the apostema had grown so much that it had filled two rooms in order to pass through two passages.
So I carefully cut through and stopped in one of them, and pulled that out, and along with it was a large portion, and then I properly cut into the other passage, and properly opened her mouth, and compressed her tongue, and then I put the onus into that apostema.
And then I properly cut out a large portion of it, and there was not much bleeding from it except for a little blood. So the gullet of that woman is absolutely healed, and she began to drink water immediately, and then I prescribed food, so you did not stop cutting into that apostema many times for a long time, and subsequent apostema occurred in place of that one, which was cut open until it was prolonged.
So I made it and cauterized the gullet of her, so that there was no additional suffering; and then I walked away and did not know what God had done for me through that.
Chapter XXXVII.
On the Incision of a Hovel when it is Apostemed.
When the catarrh settles in the hovel, and it is apostemed and is long, then it is named perpendicular; and if it is on the left side large and rounded, and then it is called a boil.
But when it is cured with the water we have said in the division, and your cure does not agree with that, and only sometimes the apostema is left behind and is subtle, then you should cut into what is added on, which is rounded; and if it is at that length, and is bloody, of dark color or black, and shows no sensation to the patient, then you should take care to make the incision of it, because in that there is fear for the patient.
And when you cut into it according to the manner that I have said about its whiteness and length, so that you make the patient's mouth open and take hold of her tongue with an instrument whose form is as follows, and then put the onus in the new one, and pull it down and cut it with one of the two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two notches.
And it is necessary that you do not cut too much, but only as much as is adjusted to the natural term without addition, for if you cut too much, you will damage their speech.
And then use the instrument that we have recommended in the incision of two notches, and cure it until it is healed.
But if the patient is frightened by the incision, it is necessary to use the instrument in the cauterization of it without fear, and the manner of cauterization is only with sharp water, and that you stop the patient's head in its natural position, and then press her tongue with the instrument which we have said, and then take from the water which we have said in the chapter on cauterization, and apply it to the living cause, and pause there not thick or subtle, and fill the concavity of the instrument whose form is this:
So that the extremity of it is in the concavity where the medicine is paused just like the concavity of a spoon, and pause the instrument with the medicine on the vulva, and the patient will gaze upon her own latz so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of that one flows inwardly through the intrinsic medicine, so that none of those causes will descend onto the gullet of it and harm it.
And then properly take your time and medicine, and express that on the uvula for a space of about an hour until you see that it is blackened and soothed by the bite of the medicine.
And if you want, take cotton and wrap it around the extremity of the ray, and immerse the cotton in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cotton into a canal above until the cotton adheres to that canal, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and then leave it be for about three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and then properly cauterize again in the circuit of the uvula with cotton enveloped in border, and clean it thoroughly with that which is in the circuit of it from the medicine, and be washed with lukewarm water, and be cured with anointing, and afterwards with soothing until it is healed.
And this kind of cure is even more saved than incision and even longer in fear.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with this method which is even more subtle than cauterization and incision, namely by subfumigation in this manner: take calament, myrrh, origan, rue, Arabic gum, camomile, and similar herbs, and mix all those causes or some of them together into a bath, and immerse it in lukewarm water, and boil; and the bath should be well stirred with decent stirring, and there should be a channel in the middle of the bath on which is placed an instrument made of copper or iron according to this manner.
And then insert the extremity into the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the uvula on the quantity, so that the uvula is somewhat obscured.
And then repeat this process many times until it is dry, and take care not to make this cure at the beginning of the onset of apostemes, for too much would settle in the aposteme, and you should not do that, but rather declare the aposteme of it carefully.
But if this instrument is not present to you, then take a cane and shape the extremity of it into a bundle of hay, in order that the mouth of the patient be blocked, for the closure of hay prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the Extraction of Spines and what adheres in the Gullet and other Causes.
Many times things adhere in the gullet or spine of the intestines or some other cause.
Then it is necessary to extract what appears from those things, over which the sight falls, since you take hold of the tongue with an instrument before the sun, in order that it may be declared to you what is in the gullet.
And what does not appear and is hidden from you in the gullet, it is necessary to make the patient vomit before food is digested in the stomach, for then the associated cause of the gullet will be forgotten through vomiting; or that the patient takes a dose of soap or radish or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of sea sponge and tie it tightly with thread, and then have the patient swallow it, so that when it reaches the place where the spines are and is extracted, then they will be forgotten. And take an eel and tie it tightly with thread, and then place it inside and slowly extract it; or take a pipe and slowly insert it and then pull it out.
But if they are not forgotten by those causes which we have said, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
And be thicker than a ray by a little, and in the extremity of it be concavity which you insert into the patient's gullet with ease.
And it will make the patient's head lifted up towards heaven, and take care that the touching of the bone of the gullet does not end in evil or with a blow that breaks the bone or spine, or that he puts his hand on it.
But however, that patient which inserts it is mine, by his knowledge of the place of the associated cause and draws it down below, and pulls out his hand with the instrument in his direction, all according to the quantity prepared by me so that it may be forgotten.
Chapter XXXIX.
On the Extraction of Blood and Foul Matter attached to the Gullet.
When blood and foul matter are medicated with the water which we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and not agreed, consider then that it is in the gullet of the patient at sunrise, since you have compressed his tongue with an instrument which we have recommended to you.
So if you find the blood and foul matter, extract it with a small spoon or with subtle gestures decently.
And if it is not possible to extract it with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the gullet of the patient, and then pause in the concavity of the cannula an ignited iron, and do this many times (until the blood and foul matter are dead and come out of the gullet) and abstain from giving water to the patient all day.
And then take a vial full of lukewarm water, and open the patient's mouth with that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not let any cause come forth from that and spoil the water for an hour afterwards by his own hand, because the blood and foul matter will soon as it feels the water catch.
But if it is not forgotten according to what we have recommended, then subfumigate the patient with cinnamon or with asafoetida by means of the instrument which we have recommended in the subfumigation of the uvula.
Do this, and so it will come to pass.
And there is another manner of operation in the subfumigation of that, which is that you take a bath with ignited charcoal and cover it with a cloth in the middle of which is a channel, and the extremity of the instrument is inserted into that channel; and then proceed to subfumigate; and have the patient hold his mouth at the end of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the subfumigation is not forgotten until you know that the subfumigation has reached the blood and foul matter, for the blood and foul matter will soon fall.
And if it does not catch, then you iterate the subfumigation many times, and abstain from giving water to the patient, and make him eat salty causes and alls, and do not allow him to drink water, and thus it is necessary that with this regimen be forgotten.
And this is the form of the instrument with which blood and foul matter are extracted from the gullet when it is visible; and it is similar to forceps such as those used in surgery, except that it has some curvature: which is inserted into the gullet, and the extremity of it is similar to the beak of a heron, which is grasped, in which there is a sharpness like lime, so that when you compress any cause, it does not let go.
Chapter XL.
In which is the summary of the sermon in warning against apostemes and in section of their treatment.
The apostemes are many species, of many manners, according to the remembrance of them, each in this book.
And so diverse in perforation and section of them through two manners, of which one is by the species of apostemes itself; and thus we comprehend from the humidities.
And the second manner is proper to the places in which accidents occur in the body, for the aposteme that occurs in the head is another from the aposteme that occurs in the anus; and the aposteme that occurs in the fleshy part is another from the aposteme that occurs at a joint; and each of them has its own judgment by operation.
And more apostemes are some which do not need to be perforated, but rather through natural maturation of the pus in those or completion of their own accord.
And other apostemes are those which need to be pierced when they are crossed, and have not matured according to their own completion, just like apostemes that are proper to joints. For the aposteme that comes near a joint is prolonged within until it reaches what is in its circuit, and soon corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so causing contraction of that member; or is an aposteme proper to a main limb, and if you delay piercing it until it becomes mature in relation to the main limb; or is near the anus, therefore pierce it unripe. And do not need to pierce it when it is ripe, but rather only the one that is proper to the anus, so that it does not putrefy the contents of it and be stretched out to the outside of the anus, and become a fistula, or that it becomes in its own term what is not healed. But you must know the hour of piercing the aposteme, and that is when it is ripe.
And know that it is ripe when there is the cessation of pain and the cessation of fever, and the decrease in sweating and pulse rate, and the keenness of the head of the aposteme, and other signs.
And know that piercing should take place in the most remote location of the aposteme, and from where there is coming the cure for the swelling.
And piercing should be done by the length of the flesh or body part, if the apostemes are in the parts of the arms or legs, and in places where there are lacertae (small bones), cords of nerves, arches; and finally, in all equal places where there is no reflection; for in those that are reflected, use piercing according to that member.
But when the aposteme is in a fleshy part, then it is better that you wait for the perforation of it until there is confirmation of its digestion according to completion, as we have said; for if you pierce it before that, it will prolong the body's decay and many foul-smelling things, and soon the lips of it will be hardened and its depth will increase.
But some apostemes should be pierced according to the latitude of the flesh or body part as necessity demands, or according to what the member itself requires.
And it is necessary to administer a small piercing for small apostemes, and a large piercing and broad or many sections according to the diversity of the size of the apostemes.
And there are others among the apostemes in which it is necessary to curve and incline the code (meaning of the word "code" is unclear), when it is made thus that it lies still, just like those that occur in tropes of double abscesses and boils.
And among those are some that are incised with section having three angles; and of those is one in which it is incised like the figure of a mint leaf, just like the apostemes of the gonorrheals.
And among those are some in which a round section and a lunar section are administered, and similar to those.
But that one which does not have such a head as their superficial apostemes, needs to be pierced with a superficial or flat piercing alone.
And it is necessary when the aposteme is large and has collected much pus, that you pierce it and do not hesitate to extract all the pus in that hour; having extracted one part of it, and then plug the aposteme into another day, and then extract a larger part, and then do this many times according to gradation until it is forgotten.
And most especially if the patient is a young person of fresh virtue, or a woman in childbirth, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, for the animal spirit many times is resolved with the evacuation of pus, and soon the patient will die, and you must open them.
So guard this chapter with great caution, and only administer the piercing in which you pierce these apostemes when you have thoroughly cleansed the wounds and considered whether the wound of the aposteme is small or a flat section; then you should administer some lint or old cloth to it. And if the aposteme is large and the fissures of the perforation are many, then you must pause in each channel until they come together.
And if in the aposteme there is abscission of a part of the code or you have concavated it in the circuit, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cloth or a thread of woven cloth, just like when you have torn away cloths or rags, and let its moisture dry; and strengthen it by the third day; and then process it and cure it with what is needed for the encasements until it is healed.
But if bleeding occurs in the hour of your operation, then you must apply lukewarm water and vinegar to those places where you have wrapped a cloth around it, and pause over the location of the blood flow many times.
But if the bleeding persists, then it is necessary that you administer a regimen and cure, and powder the ones which I have recommended in many places of this our book and division.
But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the aposteme is a place of many nerves, then it is necessary that you apply poultices in warm wine and oil cautiously, and pause them on those locations.
And if it is in the summer, and the locations are fleshy, then it is necessary that you apply poultices wrapped in water and oil or in wine and oil, and let them be cool until the third day, as we have said, and then it is necessary to remove the aposteme and cleanse it and administer the cure for what belongs to it until it is healed.
And thus this is what is necessary for the understanding of the cure of apostemes universally, but according to the method of distinction that I have said about every aposteme in which way it is the path of its cure by chapters individually.
Chapter XLI.
On the Section of Apostemes that come in the Code of the Head.
In the code of the head, there are small apostemes, and species of nodes that contain tunics which are according to their facts; and the species of them are many.
And among those are pungent ones, and of those some that contain moisture similar to lime. And among those are ones that contain moisture similar to powder, and like their own kind; and of those some that are lapis-like, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as you must not let the extraction of those cause contrariety to the archery.
And the operation in section of those is that you press them with an instrument whose shape is similar to this one, which is called "entromes", until you know what it contains.
Therefore, if that which is contained is moisture, then you must divide it with a section according to its length, by making a superficial section in this form:
And begins at the section of the line .B. to the line .G. Therefore, when the moisture is evacuated, you must excoriate that part which contains that moisture, and not leave any cause from it, for many times it returns if there remains any cause from it.
And then submerge the cloth in an Egyptian ointment, if present, and otherwise in water and salt; and fill it with that the wound and leave it for another day, for by this method everything that remains of that skin will be consumed.
And then iterate over that cloth with an Egyptian ointment again and a third time if needed, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that skin; then cure the wound with an ointment until it is healed.
And if the aposteme contains fatty nodes, then you must incise it according to this form: with a section having the shape of a cross, and cut it on one side between two lips of the section and scrape out all that part, and exert your virtue in extracting the tunic which contains that.
But if your archery causes contrariety, then do what I have previously recounted first.
And similarly do in the lapis-like aposteme of section and cure according to what we have said; and section on lapis-like aposteme is less heavy, because it has little blood and little moisture.
And some times there are cases of these apostemes which are in the head of certain men, with whom there is no moisture; the cause being that you incised over an aposteme on the head of an old woman and extracted it just like a deaf, harsh, white abscess, which could not be torn away, and if any blow struck it, would wound it.
But in other apostemes that occur on the head, this is not this chapter, just like the apostemes that come to the heads of children and ears, but the section of these all is a superficial section.
And pause the piercing at the lower part of those, so that it may be alleviated the body of the pus in the lower parts.
And then cure those with what belongs to their cure.
Chapter XLII.
On the Section of Scrofulas which occur in the Neck.
Many times these apostemes occur in the neck and axillaries and armpits; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and many which are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is contained within its own tunic, just like in the nodes and apostemes of the head, as we have recounted.
And the species of these scrofulas are many, for some are lapis-like, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant which do not yield to cure.
Therefore, in that one which you find to have good disposition in the Tocament, of which the color is manifest and corresponds to the color of the code, and is spread out over all parts, and not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the archery, and is not swollen, it is necessary that you incise that with a superficial section from above to below along the line .G. to the line .B., and scrape out that part, and extend two lips of the code with one or many cuts if needed, just as we have said in the apostemes of the head, and extract that little by little.
And it is more cautious not to incise the vein or nerve.
And it is more cautious not to incise the vein or nerve. And if your spatula is not quite sharp, do not adjust it to your hand and incise, or that will trouble the patient, and you will incise something that is not necessary to incise; for if you incise a vein or artery and prohibit your operation, then pause in the wound, beset with vermillion or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and strengthen the wound, and leave it until the acuity of the aposteme subsides and the wound becomes softened and begins to be purged. When the blood is evacuated.
Therefore, return to your operation until you have completed it.
And then inquire with the sign you said indicates if there is any remaining cause of other small scrofulas, therefore incise those and cleanse those.
And if it is in the root of a large scrofula, then you must not incise that scrofula from its root. It is better to leave it alone, and tie it with a doubled thread strong enough that it will not cause any harm.
And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and then cure that.
And if you incise that scrofula entirely, then it is necessary that you adjust the two lips of the wound and suture them as soon as possible so that there is no remaining superfluity.
But if you find that there is remaining superfluity due to the greatness of the scrofula, then it is necessary that you understand how to incise its root, and extract it and administer a suture and do as said.
And that of the scrofulas which contain moisture, pierce it with a superficial piercing here where you see the location of its maturation, and pause in the piercing at the part of the body where the pus is below, just as we have said.
And then administer the piercing, with poultices and ointments similar to those, so that it may be consumed what remains of the corruption. And then when you see the wound already cleansed, you must cure it with an ointment of generative flesh until it is healed.
Chapter XLIII.
On the Section of the Pilholt of the Aposteme which occurs in the Gullery.
The ancients called this section "Epilholt", and we have not seen anyone in our land who has done that.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
But in men who have esquinence, it is necessary to avoid the extraction of the epilholt, because through this it will not be done with benefit, for all the veins and major parts of the patient are here.
But in those who have apostemes in the mouth or gullet or both ears, when the disease is not in the hair, it is necessary to use the section of epilholt to avoid the destruction which is caused by perforation.
Therefore, when we wish to do this, it is necessary that we incise the epilholt below three circles of the epilholt, or four with a small section by latitude in that which is between two circles for quantity, so that the section is in cartilage, not in bone, and this place is suitable for section, because it is deprived of flesh and the vessels of blood from there are blocked.
And if the doctor is timid, then it is necessary that he extend the cord of the gullet with one cut, and then make an incision in the cord so that it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any cause.
And then incise the ciplach according to what we have recounted; and it is signified over the section of the canal by the flame which is from that very eye, mixed with water that is broken and separated, and through the abscission of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, when the hour is restored in which the perforation is feared, add two lips to the cord of the wound, and suture it alone, except for the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make the flesh grow back, until it is healed.
And thus Albucasis says that the summary of the sermon which we have recounted is an exposition only to see that some of those apostemes have filled up the gullet of the patient, and the patient has come near death, and his tongue has withered away, and some are about to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the location of the wound through some respiration, and be saved from death.
And for that reason I command to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease is consumed; and it takes three days; and then I command to close the wound, and cure it so that it may be healed.
And what I have seen through my eyes is that a servant took a spatula and inserted it into his own gullet and incised a part of the windpipe, and you were called to the cure of him, and he began to moan in that way as one who is dying, and uncovered the wound and bled the blood which was issuing from the wound little by little.
Therefore you were confessed that he had not incised a vein nor jugular, and the breath was coming from the wound, and cured it until it was healed.
And the servant did not suffer any harm, except for some difficulty in his voice, and after some days he returned to his better disposition.
And now I say to you that there is no fear in the section of the epilholt.
Chapter XLIV.
On the Section regarding the Aposteme which occurs in the Gullet outside, and is called Hernia of the Gullet.
This aposteme named hernia of the gullet is a great aposteme according to the color of the body, and it occurs more often in women.
And it is according to two manners, either natural or accidental.
And in the natural one there is no hope of curing it.
And the accidental one is according to two manners of which one is similar to grassy nodes, and the other manner is similar to an aposteme made by constriction of an artery, and in that one there is fear. And it is not necessary to make presumption at all except in the one that is small. And then proceed with that and investigate it according to the said, and if you find it similar to grassy nodes, and it is not suspended from any of the veins, then you must incise it just like the nodes, and extract it with water that contains the skin and bursa; and otherwise, then examine everything about its being, and then cure the location where there is need for cure until it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
On the Section of the Species of Nodes.
Of the nodes, there are many species and I have already said all their species in the division.
And it is necessary that you recount thus the difference between node and excrescence, so as to dispel doubt.
Therefore you say that with excrescence there is warmth and fever and violent pains until the ebullition of the superfluity is subsided; and it is completed putrefaction which then ceases the fever, pain, and heat.
But with node there is no warmth or fever or pain, and it contains a cartilaginous bone which is its own proper sac.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its commencement is like a cheese and it is made thus as a vacuum, whether major or minor, and they are according to two species, either grassy and containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, according to what I said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the cure of a node, it is necessary that you expose it and inquire into its beginning with an instrument which is called intro-mes, according to what will be found in the chapter that is appropriate to this.
And this is the manner of inquiring into apostemes and all nodes, which is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the most humid location which you find in the apostema, and you will revolve those digits around that little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the cord.
And then finally your hand will be according to the measure of the greatness of the apostema, and then you will extract the intro-mes and consider what is situated in the footprint of it.
And if the moisture is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you must incise it with a superficial section, according to what I said in other apostemes.
And if there is no moisture from the footprint of the intro-mes, then you will know that it is grass.
And dry upon it with a section having the form of a cross, according to this form: just as I have taught you, and suspend it with an incision, and excise the cord of all parts with facility, and save the skin or sac, if possible, over that and extract that pus from the node.
But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and often times it happens thus, and then you must extract it with forceps until there remains no cause from it.
For if there remains no cause from it, either too much or too little, the node will return according to its nature.
And if you find that some small part remains from it, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and pause over that which contains the aposteme cautiously, and cure that otherwise until it is healed.
And if it is a great node, then you must suture the two lips of it and cure that with water which congeals.
But if the pulsating vein is opposite to it, or non-pulsating, then you must compress and bind the location of three threads that are vitriol-like, and leave it thus straight for two or three days until the wound is cleansed and the ebullition of blood subsides; and then return to incise what remains of the node.
Chapter XLVI.
On the Forms of the Instruments Necessary in Section and Perforation.
Of those which are the forms of intro-mes, and there are three species, that some are great, and of these is a medium-sized one, and of these is a small one.
The form of great intro-mes is this:
The form of small intro-mes is this:
They are made of iron, with a rounded extremity and decently curved, in order that the instrument may be introduced into the apostemes.
And these are the forms of instruments, and they are named "albered", and one of them is called "berid".
And there are three species, which are great, medium-sized, and small.
The form of great instrument is this:
The form of medium-sized instrument is this:
The form of small instrument is this:
And these forms are suitable for those apostemes, excrescences, and fistulas, as well as buboes, so that among them there are some related to bones and other causes.
And these are made of redwood, thick woods, and lemons, just like great needles with which the seams are sewn, and they are fashioned from citron wood, or oak, or iron, or silver. And the best ones are when they are made of citron wood.
And they are made of black lead instruments, which are adapted to those that are full of fistulas in the confluence of the vessels, where there are reflections that are reflected in their lightness and those reflections.
And there are three species, which are some that are long, and the others medium-sized, and the others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the constriction of it.
Form of great instrument of lead:
Form of medium-sized instrument of lead:
Form of small instrument of lead:
The forms of the needles are of many species, which are some that are simple, with only one curvature, and there are three species: great, small, and medium-sized.
And among them are sharp needles, and there are three species.
And among them are needles with two curvatures, and there are three species.
And among them are needles with three curvatures, and there are three species.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Form of a small simple needle, this:
Form of a great needle with two curvatures: Form of a medium-sized needle with two curvatures: Form of a small needle with two curvatures:
Form of a great needle with three curvatures:
Form of a medium-sized needle with three curvatures:
And these are the forms of scalpels with which the nodes and apostemes are cut and excised, and there are three species, which are great, medium-sized, and small.
Form of a great scalpel:
Form of a medium-sized scalpel:
Form of a small scalpel:
The extremities of those instruments with which the section is made are sharp and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not paused in such a way that it may be done gently in the excision of nodes to avoid cutting into a vein or nerve, and for this reason the patient will be healed and will have tranquility little by little as the apostema is excised.
And these are the forms of forceps, and there are three species: great, medium-sized, and small, just like veins.
They are made of citron wood and resemble a ray with which some kind of alcohol is made.
And it is in the left extremity that there is a small puncture marked with a spatula hidden and on that side it runs to the parts outside and inside when you want, just as you see.
The forms of spatulae, which are hidden between the fingers when performing the perforation of apostemes and do not perceive the maladies, and there are three species: great, medium-sized, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of absorbent forceps with which the flow of blood is stopped, and there are three species: great, medium-sized, and small; these forms are:
They are made of citron wood, rounded with some length, and are subtle.
And it is necessary that you have these species of absorbent forceps, great, medium-sized, and small, so that with them you can stop the flow of blood quickly in necessity, and then when it is not medicine.
However, you do not use those absorbent forceps to stop blood in every part of the body, nor do you use them except in fleshy areas, such as in the groins and thighs, and in the armpits, and similar to their own fleshy areas moistened by moisture.
And sometimes they are made of those instruments, other small ones resembling scissors according to this form; by which the blood is stopped when it is done through phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Chapter XLVII.
On the cure of men's breasts which are similar to women's.
Sometimes the breasts of some men become inflated as they begin to be fat, and then they are swollen like women's breasts, and full of apostemes, far away.
And for him who has this problem, you must incise those with a lunar section according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, and then excise the entire swelling, and then fill the wound with a medicated substance, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with a suture, and cure him until he is healed.
But if the breast declines to its natural shape and is softened by its magnitude, just like it does in women, then you must cut it into two halves along its peak, with two sections resembling a lunar figure, each one contained within the other until the end of each one, so that the major line contains the minor one according to this form from the line of B to the line of G. And then excise the cord which is between the two lips of the wound, and stop the swelling, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders, which are necessary for the cure until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision of that which needs to be cut due to the patient's anxiety and blood flow, then it is necessary to fill the wound with a piece of submerged cloth soaked in corrosive medicine and leave it until the corroded part that remains of the grayish color is gone, and then cure him until he is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
On the perforation of apostemes that come from below the navel.
Those apostemes that come from below the navel are of the species of scrofulas, which are hard and contain a sack.
And some of those contain moisture; and those that contain moisture must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all the liquid that is in the apostema has been evacuated, then you must fill it with a piece of clean cloth and leave it until the next day.
And then the cloth should be left to dry and be cured with a suitable ointment, until he is healed.
And if the apostema is of the species of nodes or scrofulas, then you must cut into it just as we have said in the section on scrofulas, equally.
And if the wound is extended in such a way that it would make a poultice, then you must apply a cauterization to it just as we have said before.
Chapter XLIX.
On the section of apostemes that occur through artery or vein.
When an artery is ruptured, and the cord that is consolidated above it is broken, then many times an aposteme occurs. The signs by which it can be known that inflammation and aposteme are due to the artery or vein: for when the aposteme is due to an artery it is long aggregated in the front of the body; and when you press the aposteme with those fingers mentioned above, you will feel a stridor.
And that which is due to a vein is rounded on the surface of the body.
And the section on this aposteme is erroneous, and especially in those that are below the elbows, and in the armpits, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very great, therefore its cure with iron should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities or at the head, should be avoided.
But on that which is due to its own inflation of the artery's orifice, you must cut into the cord with a section in the long direction; and then draw out the section with forceps and bring it against the artery, and deliver the tunics until it is uncovered.
And then insert the needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and strengthen the artery with two threads in two places,  which causes you to see the eyesight of two arteries that are in the temples.
And then push the spot which is between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood that is in it comes out and the aposteme is dissolved.
And then administer cure in which pus is generated until the ligaments break down; and then cure that with suitable ointments according to this, until he is healed.
And if it is an aposteme due to the section of a vein, then you must hold with your hand as much of the aposteme and the cord as is possible, and then insert the needle below the spot which you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that single fold until you extract that from the other side, and then tie off the aposteme with two ligaments as I have said to you about the ligament of the grapevine between two parts at two extremities of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread will break, then insert a double thread with that needle below all the aposteme as the first incision of the needle, and strengthen those threads in four places.
And then cut the aposteme in the middle of it so that when it is situated as it is, you must incise the surplus of the cord, and leave what remains tied.
And then pause over the powder which you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with certain powders and ointments until he is healed.
Chapter 1 of the Aposteme that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Just as the aposteme occurs in arteries and veins, and similarly the aposteme occurs in nerves when it is caused by percussion or excessive strain, and for similar reasons.
And it is made in the most part of it in the places of the assistants or of the tarsus, or in all places where the joints are strained.
And it is a great aposteme, and it is like the color of another body, and it is in the places where the nerves are disposed to their own accord, and when it is stretched with vehemence, one feels in oneself as if the patient were in a state of stupor.
And it is not an aposteme aggregated in the front of the body, and therefore it is left behind, and it is strained to all parts and does not go to the parts before nor behind.
Therefore, of those that are in the joints, it is not necessary to be treated with iron, for it would quickly produce contraction.
But that which is in the head or on the forehead should be cut open with a spatula. But if it is a small aposteme, then take that which is on the forehead and cut it off with forceps.
And if it is large, then you must suspend that which is on the forehead with forceps, and excise it, and then stop the bleeding; and adjust the wound with a suture, and cure that until he is healed.
Chapter LI.
On the section of the aposteme which occurs in the navel region, similar to that which occurs at the belly.
I will describe to some men many times what I have observed in the bellies of those and in other parts of their bodies, which are called fungals by similarity to those with fungi, whose root is subtle and its head is large; and already the lips of those are converted, and it is one of those that is small, and it is one of those that is very magnificent.
And I have already seen one, and in its belly were two theils which resembled fungi more than anything else, and there was no difference between them as to their whiteness, of very fine root.
And already the lips of those were inverted and were tearing apart, and moisture was flowing from it all the time.
Therefore, I incised them and cut them into a piece that weighed 18 pounds. and the other one was about 12 pounds.
And the operation in the incision of theirs is that you consider whether the patient is humid, and the color of the theil is white, humid, with a fine root; then you cut it open with a spatula, and let it be in your presence over the fire, for many times the section of it will expel much blood; and if you see the blood flow, cauterize that.
And if the patient is poor and timid, guard yourself from cutting with iron; but take a thread of lead freshly made and strengthen it on that theil, in the manner which we have described; and leave it for two days.
And then adjust it in the stricture of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the lead thread greatly on that theil, until it is cut off and falls away from its own weight.
But if the theil is of coarse root, then in its incision there is some cause for fear and dread, and most especially when it is in the belly.
But possible is that you cut off the majority of it, and then cauterize that so that it will not return.
And then cure that until the wound is healed.
And guard yourself that you do not presume to cut off a theil which is of dark color, with little sensation, and without regard, for that is absolutely cancerous.
And I will come back with a reminder of cancer just like this.
Chapter LII.
On the cure of the swelling at the navel.
The swelling at the navel is caused by many factors; or by fissures of the skin which is above the belly, and it is seen on that spot or bud according to the manner in which it develops in other ruptures; or by blood which flows from a vein or artery according to what has been said before, or by coarctation of the ventricles in that place.
But if it is due to a fissure of the skin and by bursting forth of the bud, then the color of the aposteme is similar to the color of the body; and there is no pain, and it appears in diverse situations. And if it is due to the bursting forth of the bud, then the situation of that is like what we have recounted, with a more violent diversity; and when you press that with the threads mentioned above, it becomes hidden, and then returns; and soon after it is on the surface, and it is very magnificent in its descent into the bath and violent labor.
But if due to moisture, then it is not hidden when you press with your hand, nor is it constrained or crepitated.
And if it is due to blood, then accompanied by these signs, the aposteme will decline into blackness.
But if it is due to flesh nothing, then it is a great and large and hard aposteme, and it is formed according to a quantity.
But if it is due to coarctation, then the touch of it is cold.
And the operation in this case is that you consider whether the swelling at the navel is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or coarctation; and then you must be prohibited from curing it, because in that there is fear and dread, just as I have taught you in the chapter where I described the apostemes due to arteries and veins.
And if the swelling at the navel is due to the bud or the skin, then you must command the patient to hold his breath and be standing upright; and then send someone to examine the entire circumference of the navel, and then command him to stand between your arms over his own shoulders, and then circulate around the navel with a spatula flat in the circuit of the location which you have indicated by the examination; and then extend most of the aposteme to the upper parts with a great force or with a cord, and then tie it in the circuit with a strong thread or with a cord, and do so decently.
And then draw the middle of the aposteme, which is extended over the ligament, and insert the said thread into that indicated spot and seek the bud; and if you have not found nor watched by the ligament, then you extract the abscess and impel the bud towards the internal parts of the belly.
And if you have found the skin, then take that with a thread; and cut off the surplus of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then you must circle around that way, and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong threads, and insert the two needles into the circuit which you have made around the aposteme in a cross-like manner, so that they will penetrate; and then strengthen the aposteme in four parts on the needles.
And if you wish, stop the needles and leave the spot until the stretched flesh falls away by itself; or cut off that which is subtle and can be removed, and then cure that with water as needed until it is healed.
And if the swelling of the navel is due to flesh nothing in that place or by moisture, then you must conquer the aposteme as we have said and extract the blood or moisture which you find there, and then cure that with water as needed and consolidate the spot.
Chapter LIII.
On the Cure of Cancer.
We have already said in the division, about the species of cancer and how it is cured with medicines, and what is to be avoided in curing it with iron so that it will not become ulcerated; and we have also said that cancer is generated through excessive and reckless treatment of the wound.
And the ancients said that some times cancer is in a place where it is possible to eradicate it, just like a crab which is on the nipples or in the armpits and their likenesses of limbs, and mostly when it begins small.
But when it is old and great, you must not attempt to operate on it, because I have never seen nor heard of anyone being able to cure it once it has reached that stage.
And the operation in this case is when it is located as we have said, that you precede and leave the patient and purge him of black bile several times, and then sign him, if a manifest fullness has been found.
And then prepare the patient with preparation in which it is located for operation, and prohibit the use of thread-like fibers that are needed for that; and concave all parts with a good probe so that there remains no cause for the roots of it. And let the blood flow, and do not cut it slightly, and express the places, and wash away the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument that is at your disposal among the instruments.
But if you encounter a great deal of thick blood in the incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize it until the flow of blood is stopped, and then cure it with another remedy until it is healed.
Chapter LIV.
On the Cure of Hydroceles.
We have already recounted, in the division, about the species of hydroceles due to water, and their signs, as well as the cure for it with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is only the species of hydrocele alone, and it is not approached by iron to the species of tympanic sac or the species of hydropathy, for this is mortal.
And when you have already medicated this species of hydrocele tympanic sac with medicines and your medication does not bring relief, then consider whether the patient has been debilitated or if he is suffering from another illness, just like one who is in his throat or chest and similar to those, then beware that you do not treat it with iron, for fear is over this.
But if you find the patient to be of excessive virtue and in this case there is no other illness besides hydrocele alone, and not an infant or an old person, then the method of operation for it is that you lift the patient between your arms, and minister to him properly by expressing his belly with his own hand, filling the water at the end of the pentilh, and then take a sharp instrument in this form:
be two sharp parts long, with a sharp extremity just like an instrument; but however it should be in there some briefness little by little, so that in the operation on that one does not pass into the bud and then lead that.
And then consider if the generation of hydrocele is from one of the budels, because then you must with the section take away from the navel by three of these parts to the partitions left behind, on the right side of it over the pentilh.
But if the generation of hydrocele is due to illness of the liver, then your section should be on the left side of the navel for three digits.
And if the generation of it is due to yellow bile, then your section should be on the right side.
And it is not good that your section should be on the side where the patient wishes to lie, so that the superfluous parts do not flow to that location freely.
And then pierce through the instrument all the way to the bone, and then insert it into that section, and lift your hand with the spatula between the bone and the siphac, and you excise that; and if the quantity is one fingernail or thereabouts.
And then pierce through the skin until you reach the spot where the spatula will be, and it is the place of water. And then extract that and insert an instrument with this shape: and it is similar to a silver needle; it is made of silver or of iron or of bronze lion-like, at which in the lower part of it there is a small hole, and on both sides of it there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and fashioned is the end of it incised according to the manner of a feather, just like this:
And on the superior extremity of it is a guard, because when the instrument reaches the water, then that will at once fall upon the instrument, so that evacuates from the water in this middle quantity, for if you evacuate more than what is necessary in this hour, soon afterwards the patient may die by resolution of his animal spirit, or else you will cause harm to him, approaching death.
But evacuate from it according to the quantity of the virtue of it and according to what signifies to you the dispositions of the patient's pulse, virtue, and goodness.
And then extract the instrument, and retain the water which is caused because it is retained by the bone which retains the hole that is on the skin of which I have recounted to you that one should pierce through it in this manner.
And then iterate the instrument to the next day if you find the patient tolerating this, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days on fear, and beware of error until there remains only a little water.
But if you fear for the patient and leave a great quantity of water, then cure it with burial in warm sand, and moisten with vinegar, and let it bask in the sun for a long time; and cure it with desiccative medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the yellow bile and liver near the extraction of water, according to what I have recounted in this that is preceded.
Chapter LV.
On the Cure of Children Who Are Born with Bladder Passages Not Opened.
Sometimes one of the children is born with the bladder passage not opened, or the head of his mixture is not perforated (or it is a narrow opening that is not in its place).
Therefore, one must cauterize with the perforation of it as soon as it is born with a sharp instrument made subtle in this form:
And then pause in the opening and insert a small leaden pin and tie it, and leave it for three days or four.
And when he wants to urinate be relieved and hurne; and then return that.
And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the spot will not allow it to close.
But that of which the opening is narrow should be treated with a leaden pin, as we have said, for many days until it is widened.
But those in which the opening is not in its place are led to this, because of them, that which is born and the tail is deviated from the end of the head, so that it cannot urinate into the lower parts, until it lifts up the head with its own hand to the upper parts; and it is not a generation, for that reason, because the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a very bad illness.
And the method of operation in this case is that the patient be placed on his back, and then extend the head of the urethra with your left hand with a vehement extraction, and incise the tip of the head of the urethra at the location of the perineum with a sharp instrument, just like a feather, or as you would cut out some part, so that the middle of it becomes similar to the head of the urethra and the opening falls into the middle location according to what is necessary.
And beware that in your operation of blood flow, because many times this happens; and pause there until the bleeding has ceased, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LVI.
On the Ablation of which occurs on the Prepuce at the head of the Urethra and Corrosion and Blackening and Adherence of the Prepuce to the head of the Urethra.
Many times this ablation occurs on the urethra and it is an excessive flesh swelling.
And one of these is malignant, and the other is non-malignant.
Non-malignant, you must suspend with a thin thread and cut it off so that all of it is gone; and then pause above the wound submerged in Egyptian gall; and then cure it with divine ointment until it is healed.
And if the ablation is malignant, of dark color, then you must administer caustic agents near the incision and the root of it.
But if the ablation is in the prepuce of the head of the urethra that has not been circumcised, and one part of it is inside the prepuce and the other part is outside, then you must excise the ablation which is inside to the beginning until it is consolidated; and then you cure that which is outside, because when you cure both together with the prepuce, there is no guarantee that it will not be torn.
And it also happens in the genitalia and the prepuce blackening and corrosion; therefore you must conquer all that which is already denigrated and that which already wants to corrupt or has corrupted; and then line on top of it with a liquid substance made with honey, which is mixed with flour of almond shells and thrice-distilled and crushed errors.
And then cure that with the other remedy until it is healed.
But if there is excessive bleeding, then administer lunar caustic according to this form:
because the caustic agent is useful in two dispositions together, that is, in bleeding and in a wound when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the urethra is corrupted and destroyed completely in an hour, then you must insert into the meat of the prepuce a leaden tube, so that the patient may urinate through it.
In the adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the urethra (and this adhesion does not occur except in one who has an uncircumcised prepuce, and above it no circumcision is performed; and when adhesion occurs due to a wound or abscess) you must excise with a blunt instrument until the bond is dissolved and the head of the urethra is completely freed from all parts.
And if it is difficult to excise those precisely, then you must excise with a blunt instrument some cause of the head of the urethra and the prepuce, and thus it is that when the prepuce is subtle, it is pierced by its subtlety a little bit.
And then separate between the prepuce and the head of the urethra with a thread of fine silk, which has been moistened in cold water so that they do not stick together again.
And then it should be cured with wine and stiptics until it is consolidated.
Chapter LVII.
On the Purification of Children and the Cure of that which occurs in them after Circumcision.
Circumcision is not the solution to continuity as are other wounds: but however since it is our operation and our will, and its purpose is properly in children, it is necessary that we assign to it the best operation and way that is easier and more conducive to health.
Therefore I say that the ancients did not write about circumcision in any of their books, because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired through experience, which cause is that you have found that most of the artists and barbers use circumcisal and purification with a razor and torores; and they use thread with needle and incision with the nail.
And I have already prohibited all these methods and did not find better purification with forceps, thread with needle that in purification as the nail, because many times the cord above has escaped, because the cord of the prepuce has two tunics, and the remaining tone is below, and soon it will be forced to another incision and certain pain. And the purification made by the alphecats, which is digital, that is used by the barber-surgeons, is not certain of the incision of the extremity of the male member, because it soon enters into the groove of it.
But in the operation with a nail, iron soon interferes and corrupts your operation. And the cord of the child is short by nature, and many times it happens in such a way that there is no need for purification, and I have seen this.
But the purification made with forceps and thread with needle, I have discovered by experience to be of great benefit, because the forceps are of proportionate incision, therefore the sharpness that is above is just like the sharpness that is below; and thus when you press your hand so proportionately two sharpnesses, and cut accordingly in one stroke; and it is made a compression of the thread with a figure containing the cord of the urethra from all parts, with which there will be no error at all.
And the method of the first operation is that you make the child lie down and be quiet, if it's one of those who understands a little; do not let anyone else touch the thread except for you, and that you leave it there until the next day.
And then make him joyful in all that manner which is possible to you, according to what he receives his intelligence. And then make him sit between your hands most carefully prepared, and not at all uncertain; and hide the forceps in your hand or let them be under your foot, so that the child does not see those or anyone else of the instruments.
And then put your hand into the urethra of him and blow into the cord, and pull that out until the head of the urethra is reached, and then purify that which is attached to it in a scabrous manner.
The form of the forceps for purification, this is the form:
Let the outer tips be not cutting and the inner ones be cutting, so that there is no exit for the tip of the claw, and let the length of both sharpnesses be as long as the length of two handles equal in size.
But the error in purification is because soon the internal cord is entirely cut or a part of it is incised.
So you must stretch that of your hour with your finger in front of the abscessed place and cut it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then take it out with a thread and cut it.
But if three days have passed and the abscess remains below the urethra, then you must allow it to drain slowly until the abscess is completely opened, and cut out that part with ease, and cut according to what is prepared for you.
And beware of the head of the urethra, lest it not be harmed by this.
And then cure that with the water which consolidates the wound, and with the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it is cut with the cord according to measure, and follows the parts above, then this will not hurt you.
And then cure that with the water which we have said, until it is healed.
Chapter LVIII.
On the Cure of Retained Urine in the Bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by oppression made by pain or by blood clotted, or by pressure or by congestion, and it resembles those cases that we have mentioned earlier about the methods of cure in the division.
And if it is not dissolved with what we have said, then the cause is very strong and affects the patient, then you must administer an extraction of him with an instrument which is called syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and have a fine needle, like a goose quill, with a subtle point at the end.
And the method of extracting urine with this is that you take the doubled thread and tie it in the extremity of the needle or quill for good sewing; and then insert the extremities of the thread into the lower part of the syringe, and cut with forceps if there is any superfluous cause of the wool, but instead put it into the canula with vehemence. And then fill the syringe with border and album of white of egg.
And then make the patient sit on a stool, and envelop his bladder with olive oil, egg whites, and warm water.
And then insert the syringe with ease until it reaches the root of the urethra; and then double the urethra above the pubic part; and then push the syringe into that; and then push it in until it reaches the bladder, and it will cause the patient to be relieved from the cause and not made so according to this order, but rather it will go through a tortuous path.
And then stretch the thread with the wool little by little, because the urine is soaking the wool.
And then remove that and use it for urinary cure, and use the syringe, do not cease to do this and use the syringe until the bladder is evacuated and the patient gains relief.
Chapter LIX.
On the Quality of Cathartics for the Bladder with Clamp and Similar Instruments which are in Accord with This.
When ulceration or abscess occurs in the bladder, or blood is clotted in it, or pressure is blocked, and you want to make water and medicines distill in it, then use an instrument called clampcedra, and this is its form: It should be a tube of silver or copper, with a narrow opening at one end and a wide mouth at the other.
But in the extremity of it there is a stopper, which is closed. And on that there are three holes: two on one side and sometimes three.
In the beginning it has a concave part, where water is poured in, and it should be according to the quantity that oppresses it, except for addition, until when some cause is drawn out by it of the humors, it is drawn out, and when it is expelled long, the water should be drawn out, just as the clampcedra does with which naptha is poured in the battles of war at sea.
Therefore, when you want to procure humors in the bladder, insert the extremity of the clampcedra into the humidity, and draw out with it the water that is poured in above, because the humidity is drawn in through the cavity of the clampcedra.
And then insert the extremity of the clampcedra into the urethra according to what we have recommended in the syringe; and then draw out the humidity with water that is drawn out, because that humidity comes into the bladder soon, and the patient will be relieved.
The form of the subtle catheter by which the bladder is catheterized, and this is its form:
And it should be made of silver or lead, with the tip being similar to a small feather, and having a fine point on the end.
And then take the bladder and pause in it the humidity that you want to catheterize in the bladder, and tie it between two with a strong ligature made of double thread, and warm up that humidity over the fire.
And then insert the extremity of the catheter into the urethra.
And then stretch your hand over the bladder with the humidity and with stretching descend until the patient is relieved, as that humidity has already reached the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder present, then take a piece of parchment and make from it a circle; and perforate that all around its entire circumference; and then insert a strong thread into those holes, so that they are turned; and then add the circle as if it were also a natural part, so that you pause in that which you want from the humors, oils, and waters.
And then tie that to the instrument and make it as you have made with the bladder, and express yourself with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Chapter LX.
On the Extraction of Pain.
We have already mentioned in the division the species of pain and its cure with medicines, and the difference between pain generated in the lungs and pain generated in the bladder, and the signs of that.
And we have mentioned the pain in which surgical operation with hand and section is necessary.
And the pain generated in the bladder properly is that which is located in the bladder.
And you should narrate this with clear exposition and abbreviation.
So I say that the pain generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and one of its signs is that the urine that flows out of the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in that sandy color; and the patient feels a strong urge to urinate, and many times has to go, and then is relieved; and with this you will find the anus in the shape of those things.
And it is easier to cure children of that until they have reached the age of 14 years old; and it is difficult to cure in the elderly. But in young people it is milder because they are between those.
And from that of which the pain is greater and the cure is easier; And if it is little, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary at first to purify the patient with a catheter which extracts all the discharge that is in their sacs; for that discharge sometimes prevents the entrance of the pain and makes inquiry into it.
And then take the patient and place them on their back and support and guide them with gentle movements so that the pain descends to the bottom of the bladder or jumps from one place to another.
And then make the patient sit between your prepared hands and let go of all their things, so that the bladder is made to decline towards the lower parts.
And then carefully observe this and all that follows outside.
Therefore, if you feel the pain in space, then immediately sit down with section on it.
And if you don't feel any sensation at all from your touch, then it is necessary that you moisten with oil the tip of your left hand, if the patient is a child, or the middle finger if they are a young adult, and insert it into their anus. And observe the pain until you feel it in the tip of your left hand. And convert that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on it with your left hand and expel it to the outer parts outside of the location where you are sectioning.
And command the minister to press on the bladder with their right hand; and command another minister to extend the legs upwards with their left hand, and with their other hand to relax the cord which is below the legs, in the part of the location where the sectioning is taking place.
And then insert the spatula which is incident from this and its form is as follows: And then divide it with the spatula in that place which is between the anus and the legs, not in the middle location, but rather towards the left side of the cleft; and let the section be on that pain and the tip of your left hand be in the anus, and let it be a transverse section, so that the section outside is wide and inwardly narrow according to the quantity that has been released from the pain and possible to do so, and not greater, for fear that the tip of your left hand which is in the anus will grasp the pain of the section and forget its deficiency.
And know that from this pain there is some to which you should be careful and gentle, for the extraction of it is made difficult by this.
And from that pain there comes a stone like a grain, and it is rounded, and it is made for easier extraction.
Therefore, if it is this type to which you should be careful and gentle, adjust it into the crevice.
And if not so, then it is necessary that you gently press on it or strongly grasp on it with decent gestures, the extremity of which should be as a file with which you press on the pain, and do not escape from it; or that you insert there a subtle instrument with curved extremity.
But if you cannot grasp it, then you must enlarge the hole a little, and if you see a flow of blood, cut through it with strength using vitriol dissolved in water.
But if the pain is more than one, then at first you must push your hand into the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it over there; and then push in a little bit again; and similarly do so if there are many more than two.
And if the pain is very great, then ignorance is that you insert it with a large section, for you will cause one of two things to happen to the patient: either they will die or they will suffer from continuous urination, as a result of which the location will not be fully consolidated.
But administer expulsion from there until it is forgotten, or engineer in the fracture of it with forceps until that thing is expelled into vessels.
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with juice of aloe and blood of dragon, and strengthen that. And pause over that cloth soaked in oil and vinegar, or in rose oil and cold water, so that the abscess may be caused to yield.
And then resupply the patient with their own bed, and do not release them for three days.
And when that has been released, envelop the location with water and much oil, and then cure it with divine ointment and diabolical ointment until it is healed.
But if in the wound there occurs an abscess that is caustic and corrosive, and from it resembles as if the blood is frozen in the bladder with congelation, and by this the urine is forbidden (and this is known through the excretion of blood with urine), then therefore insert your left hand into the wound and extract that blood, for if you remain, it will provoke the bladder to corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and with opposition to all species, according to what is necessary for the cure until it is healed.
And always during the entire course of the cure, you must carefully observe and adjust the medicines that are applied to the location.
And if the pain is small and is in the urethra, and it is stuck in there, and urination is prohibited, then you must cure that with what I recommended earlier before you reach section, for many times this cure is accused of causing section; and now you have tried that, and it is not working, and so you take a perforator made of iron, the form of which is as follows:
with a triangular extremity, pointed, fitted into a wooden handle.
And then take the thread and tie it to that urethra below the pain, so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the urethra, piercing with ease until the perforator comes to that pain. And then rotate the perforator with your hand in that pain little by little, and you pierce through it until you make a hole on the other side, so that the urine is soon absorbed.
And then press your hand on that which is remaining from the pain of the part outside of the urethra, because it is torn and forgotten with urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this cure is not available to you for some reason that prevents it, then tie a thread below the pain and another thread above the pain. And then insert yourself over the pain in that urethra between two ligatures. And then extract it. And then release the ligature and purify the congealed blood that is formed in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie the thread below the pain, except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other thread above, so that when the thread is released next to the excrescence of the pain, the cord returns to its place and closes the wound.
And therefore it is necessary for you when you tie the thread above to elevate the cord to the upper parts or to return to your complement and close the wound as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
On the Extraction of Pain from Women.
Pain in women is rarely generated.
But if pain occurs in some of them, then it is difficult to cure it and is forbidden by many methods.
One of their ways is that the woman herself is a virgin.
And the second one is that you do not find a woman who knows that she conceals herself from revealing whether she has been married or not.
The third one is that you do not find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation with hand.
And the fourth one is that the location of the section on pain in women is distant from the location of the pain, so you need a deep section and in that there is fear.
But if necessity demands it from you to this, then it is necessary that you take a woman who is well known and little is hidden.
But if you are deprived of that, then seek out one who is quiet and subtle, or present a matronal woman well known in the nature of women, or a woman who has divided herself from the art.
Then present her and command her to do all that you will tell her, from the inquiry about the pain at the beginning; which cause is that she looks to see if the woman is a virgin, then it is necessary that you put your finger into her anus and seek out the pain.
Then if she finds it, cut it below your finger, and then command her to insert herself over that.
But if she is not a virgin, then command the matron to insert her finger into the patient's anus and inquire about the pain, because she should place her left hand on the bladder and compress it with good compression.
Then if she finds it, it is necessary that gradually compresses it from the bottom of the bladder to the upper parts with the summit of her virtue until it reaches the root of the wound.
And then insert yourself over that, making an application of the middle of the anus to the root of the wound from some part or other, and make the pain in that part, and let your finger not be removed from the pain cut below.
And the section should be small at first; and then insert the ray over that section, and if you feel the pain, then adjust in section according to the quantity which you know will cause the pain to be released from there.
And know that the types of pain are many: for some are small and great, and hard and rough, and long and rounded, and have folds.
Therefore you know how many species there are of it by this which I signify about that which I will.
And if you see a flow of blood, adjust it with vitriol dissolved and let it be there for an hour until the blood is absorbed, and then return to your operation until the pain is forgotten.
And prepare with you the instruments which I said in the extraction of pain in men, so that you may be aided by them in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery which is inserted, then you pause powder on the location and strengthen it with powders and strictures in descending order, and do not iterate this; and leave the pain and do not extract it, for fear that the patient will soon die. And then cure the wound.
And when the sharpness of the blood has ceased after some days, and the location is healed, then you return to your operation until the pain is forgotten.
Chapter LXII.
On the Sectioning of Hernia Accouche.
Hernia aquosa is nothing but an aggregation of moisture in the white cicatrix which is below the cord of the genitals containing the humors, and it is called cicatrix.
And some times it is in the proper panniculus which nature has prepared in the part of the humors, until it becomes another humor; and it is the cord of the genital between the white cicatrix which we have said, and it is not this but rather a tumor.
And the generation of this hernia is due to debility which occurs in the genitals, because it pours out this matter into those parts, and some times it happens through a blow made on the genitals.
And this moisture is of many colors, because its color either declines to citrine or to blood red, or to green, or it is blackish and fat, or white and watery, and that is the most common one.
And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is are these: because if it is in the white cicatrix which we have said, then the abscess is rounded and declining a little towards length, just like the figure of a humor, and appears the genital, for the moisture contains all that part.
And if the humidity is in the proper panniculus, then the abscess is rounded with a part of the humor and by this one estimates that it is another humor.
And if the humidity is between the cord of the genitals and the white cicatrix, then a tumor forms below the center.
And when you want to know the color of the humidity, then you observe the color of the humidity in the abscess with the instrument which precedes its shape; and according to what is found in the vestige of the instrument, judge from that what is inside it.
Then when we come to the cure with iron, it is necessary that we command the patient to be flebotomized if this is possible for you, and sometimes fill his body with blood.
And then be resupinated over your back on some cause, and pause below you many cloths.
And then sit you on the left side of him, and command the matron to follow on the right side of him, which stretches her finger to one of two sides to the cord of the genitals and to the part of the miracle of the belly.
And then take a spatula and cut the cord of the genitals in the middle location along its length, almost to the pubic line.
And make the section according to right and equal distance from the line that divides the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white cicatrix encompassing.
And excise that, and observe, and take care to avoid inserting it; and your excision by which you excise it in parts as if suspended in the more subtle and scrutinize the excision according to the quantity possible for you.
And then pierce the white cicatrix full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
And then separate between two lips of the section with uncis, and extend the cicatrix to the upper parts; and do not touch the cord of the genitals encompassing, and insert the cicatrix in that manner which is possible for you. And insert that with its totality or in pieces, and more subtly the left side, because if you do not scrutinize the insertion of it exquisitely, there is no surety that the water will not return.
But if the humor proceeds from that outside of its cord in the time of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the cicatrix, return inside it, and then adjust the two lips of the cord of the genitals with sutures, and then cure it just like other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the humor corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you cut out the vessels which are sore to the suspensori, and extract the humor, and then cure it with what we have said.
But if the water is accumulated in two parts separately, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore insert that part according to what you did in the other equally; and if it seems to be one operation to you, then you do it.
And then wash the blood away, and insert into the sections lana submerged in oil or rosy oil; and pause outside another lana which you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and spread it over two genitals and the belly of wonder; and pause above folded cloths and powders, and tie those together with a thread which is according to this form:
and then be pressed two cloths and be filled with lana carmenated according to this likeness; and be made the extremities at which is sewn cotton or wet lana, and be added with stricture in the girdle of the breeches, and one of the extremities takes from the crotch to the hip, and the second takes from the part of the pubic line, and two extremities above two wounds below and two other extremities above two armpits, and all extremity be adjusted in the girdle of the breeches.
And sometimes this hernia is medicated artificially with cauterization in place of sectioning with iron; and it's that you take cauterizing cutlery subtle and that you insert into that the cord of the genitals, and ignite according to what we have recommended until the white cicatrix containing the water is revealed, and then you take cauterizer according to this form: And it's assembled in Greek letters.
And then pierce through that cicatrix, and ignite until all the humidity is evaporated.
And then extend the cicatrix with uncis, and excise with uncis, and excise with cauterizing cutlery subtly ignited; and insert that according to what is possible for you until you eradicate all of it; and take care not to let the humor be touched by the fire.
And you know that this operation is more saved and longer-lasting than the flow of blood, and better than an operation with sectioning.
But if you experience opposition, abscess or cautery in the hour of sectioning or in the hour of cauterization, or bleeding, then it is necessary that you cure what opposition does to you according to what is said, with the care which is suitable for him.
But if the patient is faint and does not hope for a second operation due to his horribleness, then administer perforation according to what we have recommended here; and it is when you are certified by this that you should know, according to what we have said about the significations, that that hernia is watery.
Then it is necessary that you make the patient sleep over some elevated surface, and then pierce the abscess in the lowest part of him with a spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
And be the perforation wide enough so that it drains all the water.
And then pause over the spot with cotton and tie it off and leave it, so that the remaining water drains out. And then cure that until the wound is healed.
But if opposition occurs in the drainage of water at that hour you pierce it: and this is not done except for this reason, because the white panniculus in the orifice of the wound makes opposition and prohibits the exit of the water, then it is necessary that you put into the wound a probe or instrument with which the water is extracted from the drops, the form of which is preceded; or adjust in the opposite of the wound a small piece.
And you know that the water returns, and it is gathered for about two months or so; and when it is accumulated, then it should be pierced in the same manner as before, because the patient will thus pass their days.
Chapter LXIII.
On the Sectioning of Fleshy Hernia and its Cure.
Know that in the sectioning of this hernia there is fear of losing through pernicious dispositions; for which I have seen the departure of life and being saved by that better one.
And you are reminded of the operation in that and the species of abscesses.
So I say that the abscesses arise in the bodies of those whose genitals are constricted and it is made so by many causes: or because of acute and sharp superfluousness which is poured into the genitals, or because of a blow.
And it's the color of the abscess according to the color of the body, and not found in him pain, and it's a grave abscess.
And very often it is abscessed lapificated, of which the color is dark, and there is no sensation in him.
And sometimes it is caused by constriction of the arteries, and by inflation of those veins just as one remembers, or by inflammation of the veins.
But that which is caused by constriction of arteries is known by the dispersal of the abscess when you compress it with those said ties; and it does not need to be touched.
But that which is caused by inflammation of veins is not dispersed from him for any reason, even with compression using those said ties.
And it is possible that on this species a section be made and on the other fleshy parts; and it's that you insert the cord of the genitals, and then stretch out the humor to the upper parts, and extract that from the white cicatrix, and deliver the suspensori of the vessels, and tie them up, and insert the suspensori more than you deliver that of all the part of the humor.
So if the humor is already consolidated in those fleshy parts, then it is necessary that you extract the humor and insert it.
And if there is adhesion due to some cause of the cicatrix, or between that which is between the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all that adhesion and insert it with a round insertion.
But if it is a natural formation of flesh in the location of the adhesion which is behind, then it is necessary that you insert all that is of him, and extract the humor just as we have said.
So when your operation is complete, then fill the wound with lanolin infused in rosy oil and vinegar; and then cure that with another care until it is healed.
Chapter LXIV.
On the Cure of Hernia which is caused by Vitis.
Vitis is an abscess wrapped in some sort of enveloping substance resembling a sprout with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult movements, exercise, and walking for the patient.
And in the cure of this disease it is due to fear of that which is preceded by memory.
However, it is necessary that we say operation in that according to what the first ones did.
And I say that it is necessary to make the patient sleep on an elevated surface; and then compress the suspensori of the testicles to the lower parts; and then tie off the cord of the genitals with those said ties and vessels which are proved to be attached to the finger; and have another minister, you, and stretch them out with a vehement extension.
And then insert with a spatula, sharp and straight, through the right side of the vessels, until the vessels are uncovered.
And then excise all around in that manner as we have said, and in extracting the arteries which are in the temples.
And then put an needle with a double thread in those places where the life force resides, and tie it off at one end of the locations where it happens to be, and tie it off again at the other end of them. And then insert those in the middle location by a straight section according to the length of the body, and extract that which is accumulated from the foul and corrupted humors.
And then cure the wound with a care that is suitable for other wounds in which you wish to be born, and where the vessels which nourish one of two genitals are not obstructed, because it is not bad for this reason.
But if life force occurs to all the vessels, then it is necessary that either the testicles be extracted or that the testicles are so constricted with the vessels that they become deprived of all nourishment through the obstruction of the vessels, and thus be sterilized, or that it becomes so constricted that it does not have a good connection with them.
Chapter LXV.
On the Cure of Intestinal Hernia.
The advent of this hernia is due to a section that ends in the cicatrix extended over the belly on the side of the armpits of the wonder of the belly, so that leaving the intestines of that rupture to some of the intestines.
And this rupture is either of the cicatrix or of excision from it, and occurs in two species because of many causes: or percussion, or by sound, or by noise, or by elevation of some grave cause, or by similar reasons.
And the sign of this, when it is due to extension of the cicatrix, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess equal in size between the two preones because the cicatrix compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it is when it is due to sectioning of the cicatrix, for at first it causes sudden and vehement pain; and it is an abscess that appears differently from what was expected, with the cord apparently torn apart, and this is because of the intestine's protrusion, and the body of it going outside the cicatrix.
And sometimes it is forgotten with the intestine's membrane, and this is called intestinal hernia Zirbal.
And sometimes it is made with ventosity, and sometimes it protrudes in the intestinal fissure, and here it is retained, and this is also a great suffering for the patient, and sometimes it causes bad and evil pain, and more so when it is pressed.
And in the cure of the species of this disease with iron, there is fear, because it is necessary to avoid the burning sensation in that.
And the manner of the operation for that is to command the patient to relax the intestine with his own hand at the parts outside of his conquest if he obeys his returnment, and then be bent over his back between your thighs, and raise his hips.
And then stretch the cord which binds the cord of the testicles to the parts above, and insert the cord of the testicles throughout the length; and then place it in two lips of the section uncis according to what is needed to bind the section with them.
And if the section is according to the quantity that it is possible for you to forget about the humor of that.
And then excise those cicatrix which are below the cord of the testicles, until the white cicatrix is uncovered from each part.
Then you should insert the tie said in this that secures the testicle, between the white cicatrix and the cord of the humor, which is below the cord of the humor, and between the second cicatrix and absolve with that adhesion that is in the part behind the humor.
And then take the cord of the testicles in your hand and insert it into the parts above, and with this extend the white cicatrix on both sides to the left and right, and raise the humor along with the cicatrix to the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the humor upwards and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with complete solution.
And search for those said ties, so that there be no cause of the intestine being wrapped in the white cicatrix. But if you find any cause, then you will compress that to the belly below.
And then insert in the part below the cord of the testicles by section, which allows blood and pus to flow just as we have recommended in this that we have said.
And then administer lanolin immersed in oil and pause on the wound; and administer the knot which we have recommended (and sometimes the white cicatrix is cauterized, which we have said to be inserted with caution against blood flow, because many times it occurs) and leave the knot until it falls by itself.
But if the burning sensation of it is delayed, then water cooled down should be applied, and pause over that until it falls according to what we have said.
And then cure the wound with another care for wounds until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI.
On Hernia Ventosa.
In this hernia, it has not been seen that anyone has been cured with iron treatment.
And the first ones said that it is done in this way as we have recommended for the hernia that is on the skin; which is that you tie the vessels close to the section over that with facility of the patient; and then cut in the middle location around the abscess with water that covers that, until the vessels fall.
And cure the wound according to what we have said, until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
On the Disproportion that is made in the Armpits.
Sometimes a rupture occurs in the armpits just as we have said, and protrudes the location.
And there is no cause for the genitals to receive any intestine into the genitalia; and if there is, it is little; and returns back in all hours.
But if the time is prolonged with that, there is a fissure formed in the cicatrix until it descends into the cicatrix; and this occurs because of the extension of the cicatrix which is in the armpits just as we have said, which cause is that the cicatrix is stretched and thus softened, and the location becomes abscessed and protrudes.
And the cure for this is by cauterization just as it was preceded in the narration of this.
And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this manner: and it is that the patient lies on his back between your thighs, and then cut the location of the rupture of the abscesses protruding through section by latitude according to the quantity of three days.
And then strengthen the white cicatrix that is below the cord until it is uncovered.
And then take the ray and pause it on the protruding location of the cicatrix, and press it against the belly.
And then cut the two protruding locations on the extremity of the ray of the cicatrix, and adjust with a suture one to the other.
And then extract the extremity of the ray, and do not insert the cicatrix completely, nor extend the humor, nor any other cause just as you can know from the cure of intestinal hernia.
And then cure that with the cure of wounds, and as you insert the threads, purify that and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for the cicatrix is contracted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
And cauterization is better in this location, for it is more conducive to health.
Chapter LXVIII.
On Softening of the Cord of the Testicles.
Many times the cord of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh that is between it is softened, and it is fitting for its regulation.
Then it is necessary for the one who is treating this that he make the patient lie down on his back, and insert all the cord which is softened onto the natural cord; and then adjust two lips with the suture.
And if you wish, cut in the beginning the surplus of the softened cord with three or four cauterizations and a firm suture.
And then insert between the sutures; and then cure through the cure of other wounds until it is healed and the threads fall.
Chapter LXIX.
On Castration.
Know that castration in our law is forbidden, but because it has been entrusted to me to recall it in this book; and the remembrance of it is only necessary for two ways, one of which is for the sake of knowing the science of the doctor when he is entrusted with it, so that he knows the cure of what occurs; and the other way is that we have many times had need of castration of other animals for our uses through those animals, such as mares, oxen, pigs, and similar to those animals.
And so I say that castration is done in two ways: or by emasculation, or by incision through section.
But in the one that is done by emasculation, the way of the operation is that we make the animal lie down in cool water until its genitalia are softened and relaxed and hang. And then take those with your hand until they are resolved and do not appear to be left behind the handling.
But in castration done by incision and section, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
And then tie the suspenders and cut on each side with one section until two sections process.
And then cut those more than what you will have excoriated. And do not leave any cause on the cicatrix, but only the subtle cicatrix which is above the veins.
And this manner of castration is better which is done by emasculation, for emasculation leaves no cause in the testicles so that the animal does not desire to copulate.
And then cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LXX.
On The Cure of Hermaphrodism.
Hermaphrodism in men is according to two ways: one is when it appears as a space in the cord of testicles, in that which is between two testicles and figures like a female, with breasts.
And sometimes it appears as urine flows from the cord of the testicles.
But in women, it is a species: and it is that the clitoris of the woman on the pubis is like two testicles of a man a little from the outside, just as the penis of a man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three species: of two of men and one of women. And it is necessary that you insert those adjusted flesh into what expels the pressure of that, and then cure those with the cure of other wounds.
And in the second species of men from which urine flows that is in the cord of the testicles, there is no cure or operation for it.
Chapter XXI.
On Linting and Eminent Flesh due to Causes of Women.
Linting is very little adjusted to natural causes until it is stretched and made legible; and sometimes it is magnified in some women to the extent that it spreads like in men and penetrates into the act of copulation.
Therefore, you must take the surplus of linting with your hand or a stick and insert it.
And do not stop inserting, especially in the rectum of the reason, so that blood does not flow.
And then cure that with the cure of wounds until it is healed.
But born flesh is flesh that grows in the horror of the mother until it fills that, and very little is left at the outer parts according to the appearance of a hare (and therefore we will call this "diseased flesh"); therefore, you must insert it just like inserting linting, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXII.
On The Cure of Leucorrhea.
Leucorrhea is when the clitoris of a woman is not pierced or is slightly perforated. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to illness that has preceded, and it is caused either by flesh not well-adjusted or by a subtle cicatrix or thickening.
And it is caused either in the womb of the mother, or in the sides of it, or in the uppermost part of it, or in the lowest part of it, and prohibits coition and engagement and childbearing, and very little permits menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is made by observing the pulse of the patient, if the obstruction is apparent, then apply; but if it is not apparent, wait until you find it with the fingers or with the ray.
But if the obstruction is due to a subtle cicatrix and is attached to both lips, then you must cut and disrupt that.
And it is that you pause on the two lips of powder, and then pause the fingers to indicate both the masses together.
And the woman should lie on her back, her arms extended, and then stretch out both lips with force until that subtle cicatrix is broken and the obstruction is opened.
And then take lanolin and anoint it with oil and pause that on the location, and lie down at home for a day in order that the location may not be consolidated.
But if the cicatrix is thick and dense, then it is necessary that you insert that with a spatula or with a leaf of myrtle.
But if the obstruction is due to swelling, then suspend that with a stick, and insert it.
And be familiar with the medicines that cause blood to cease flowing without injury, such as aloe, and dragon's blood, and gentian, adjusted with album of hoar.
And then administer a leaden cannula wide enough to prevent the wound from becoming slightly consolidated.
And keep that for some days and administer lukewarm water.
And then be cured with the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes accidents occur in the natural birth of other flesh, and it is necessary that you insert according to this manner. But if it is due to purulent abscesses, then do not apply any contrarian treatment with iron in any manner to the abscesses that are in the mother.
Chapter LXXIII.
On The Cure of Hemorrhoids and Tumors that occur in the Clitoris of Women.
Hemorrhoids are an inflammation of the orifices of many veins, until from those veins blood flows continuously; and as hemorrhoids become old and are made thin.
And I have already said in the division of those species and their signs, and I will say which receive cure and which do not receive cure.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and tumors when they are in the womb of the mother and do not appear to the sense, then in those there is no cure made with iron.
But those which are in the orifice of the mother above which sensation is felt, are those that can be cured.
And it is necessary that you place the woman in a warm bath and then stretch out her thighs with forceps, or with rough cloth, and insert those into the roots.
And then powderize on those the flows of blood with one of the powders that do not cause injury, such as aloe and similar to those.
And then apply pressure to her feet for an hour, and then pause that in cold water.
And if the bleeding persists, then make her drink a decoction of Sumatra and scorched mulberries and gallnuts and similar things.
And then take wheat flour and mix it with honey, vinegar, and oil, and make an application on the back of her.
And if the blood is absorbed, it is good; and otherwise, make her adhere to two bellows, and to her nipples with scarification.
And then take lanolin and submerge that in the juice of colicander or in the juice of arnagloza or in the juice of guarravier with vinegar, and make it adhere to the location; and then cure the location with plasters until it is healed.
And cure that until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
On The Perforation of Accidental Incontinence in the Mother.
Many species of accidental abscesses occur in the mother, such as gangrene and abscesses that form through calcification, ulcers, and habituation, and herpetic eruptions, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and rough and hardened tumors and other abscesses. And I have already said these illnesses, their species and signs, and their cures in the division.
And it is necessary that you say in this treatise of abscess that occurs in the mother when it is one of those abscesses that causes sanity, and if you wish to know how the operation is done on it with iron.
Therefore it is necessary that you consider whether the pain of the abscess in its beginning is acute with percussion and flux and fever, and if it enroges and if sensation is felt over it, then do not cut into it with perforation, but cure it with water that helps on maturation until the acuity of the accidents ceases.
And then it is necessary that you make the woman lie down on a bed with two pillows; and recline over her back and adjust her feet to the part most below of the belly, and her arms be expanded, and pause her hands behind her nails, and tie each one with a thread to water in due order.
And then the midwife should follow the right path and administer the instrument with which the orifice of the mother is opened, in the form that will come to be as those causes are done.
And then it is necessary that when you wish to administer this instrument, you make it enter into the womb of the mother's belly, and what enters from the instrument not be more than the size of the mother's belly and lead the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the mother's belly, then it is necessary that you apply powder on the texture of the mother's belly so that it prevents the entry of any instrument into the mother's belly.
And then it is necessary that you apply the vertigo that runs in the instrument, above and below, and that the minister hold the instrument and turn the vertigo until the orifice of the mother's womb is open.
And when the excitation appears, and it is touched with the hand and is hot and moist, then it is necessary that you dry that with a spatula of lead.
And when the discharge is evacuated, then it is necessary that you apply to the wound a poultice submerged in red oil or green oil which has some stimulating properties; and pause the caustic in the section of the mother's womb.
And then pause before the mother and on the penthouse a clean lanolin submerged in water in which violets have been soaked.
And then be cured in two days with plasters that are suitable for it until it is healed.
And some times the mother is washed and the wound is cleansed in such a way that it is anointed with water and honey, and then applied to the plaster.
And if the wound is infected in the mother's womb, then it is necessary that you are prohibited from the cure of it with iron, having cured it with water as we have said in the division.
Chapter LXXV.
To teach midwives how to medicate living beings when they are sick according to a non-natural figure.
It is a necessary cause that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of natural childbirth by signs from it; and it is that when you see the woman expelling her parts below and desiring to smell the air, and above that she is inclined by what is on her part, and hastens the issue of the embryo, then know that this part is according to a natural figure, and it is the issue of life over its head, and the secondine suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord.
Therefore, when you see these signs, it is necessary that the womb of life is compressed so that the embryo may descend slightly because when they come onto its head, they will come out with the secondine, and it is cleansed from those superfluities by good cleansing.
But that which is another this part is non-natural and not to be trusted, because when the embryo is issued from its feet and the body of life is issued in front of its head and its feet, and one hand or at the foot. i., or is issued the head of life and one hand or at the belly of life, and very little is converted over its neck, and similar to the figures of life that are not trustworthy.
Therefore it is necessary cause for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and to beware of error and deception.
And you have shown all the figures of those things, and which art is in them because it is meant to be signified by this and has been placed upon that.
When the child is issued from its head by natural expulsion, and that is vehement upon the woman and is made to a difficult part, and times the virtue of life already weakened, then make her drink, or what women have it, and evaporate the clitoris with fenugreek seed and warm oil.
And then insert the midwife's finger between the said spatula and the cleft with the secondine, or cut that with her own nail until it runs with moisture. And press the belly of the woman until she brings forth the child.
But if it does not come out, then it is necessary that the woman be anointed with pimpernel and fenugreek mucilage with camomile.
And then command it to be compressed and make her sneeze with conditions; and tie her mouth and nose together for an hour, because the child will soon be forgotten.
And if the two hands of the child are forgotten at the beginning, then it is necessary that you reduce them with little facility little by little. But if it does not obey the instrument, then pause the woman on a bed and lift her feet up, and then conceive the bed upon the earth; and hold the woman so that she may not fall during the conception.
And if the hands are not returned and the child dies, then insert those and extract the remnants of the child or tie the body to the hand with cloth and extract that with equality, because it will soon be forgotten.
When the child is issued over its feet, then it is necessary that you impel those upwards, and then convert the child little by little, and then equalize it, and then take one foot of life and stretch them little by little.
But when they are issued into the hands, then command it to be expelled, and make it sneeze with conditions, because it will soon be forgotten if God so wills.
And if it is not forgotten by that which we have recounted, then return the child little by little into its place until pause that according to natural figure, because that will soon be forgotten with a lighter issue.
And if it is prohibited by all that we have recounted, then take pimpernel and dissolved gum, and pound everything in the mortar with good pounding, and then line up with water the clitoris of the woman, below the belly of life. And then make that cease in water, until it reaches the hypochondria.
And when the parts below of life are relaxed, then make it sub-fumigation with myrtle and sub-pause that upon it. And when the sub-fumigation has lasted for an hour, then make it cease upon a bed, and then make it sneeze and stretch its mouth, and lift it away from that, and press the lower part of the belly of life with gentle compression, because the child will soon be forgotten.
Issue of the child laterally, hanging one of its hands. It is to be reduced in the hand of life, but if you cannot reduce it, then elevate the woman and make her go.
And if she cannot go, then make her lie down on the light, and pound the hands of life with violent concussion, and then administer those which you have recounted to be made into mucilages.
And if the childbirth has come, then make her cease on a bed, and then study the reduction of the hand, and equalize the child according to natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command it to compress itself until it is forgotten.
Issue of the child with its hands spread out and the cloth of life at the two sides of its right shoulder. It is necessary that the midwife holds the hand of the child and then turns it little by little, and makes it equal with facility.
And when it is and as much as it has been equalized, then pause on the clitoris of life with that which we have recounted of oil and mucilages.
And then command it to be relaxed little by little, and when you have done this, then make her cease on a bed and command that she be inclined over the right side, and then command it to be compressed; and make her sneeze with conditions. Exit of the prepared fetus onto the right side.
When it is issued from the mother according to this manner, consider, and then insert the secondine with your own nail until it is evacuated of moisture.
And if the child is suspended over the face and neck of life, then insert that from the umbilicus, in order that it may not be retained and die.
And then push the child into the lower parts until it pauses as is necessary, and command the woman to compress herself several times, and it will soon be forgotten with a lighter issue, if God so wills.
Exit of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that triplets or quadruplets are sometimes born, and sometimes not, but this is strange and does not happen often. However, there are causes that are of nature, and they do not live.
And count those, whether they be multiplied or not, one secondine, and separate them by ciphac, distinguish those from the ligament in the umbilicus of each of those. And sometimes some are forgotten as if it were one child for a lighter natural issue, and some are issued as if we had recounted them.
And if some are difficult or troublesome to give birth and proceed according to that which we have said about the non-natural figures, then you care for them as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is subtle and does that which makes it easy and subtle, and with delay, and is ingenious according to all figure, as it is prepared in advance of the engendering leading to health.
Remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and those which are aborted.
Some weeks are formed in the womb as one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten, and you should verify that a woman aborts at six or ten months, which is caused by measurement of the glorious wise men.
And all this must be in the science of the midwife because very little is similar to that, and thus pause oneself at that with so much as is necessary.
Chapter LXXVI.
On the extraction of the child when it is dead.
When you care for the dead child according to what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not issued outside, and you are forced to use operation with forceps, then it is necessary that you consider whether the woman has healthy virtue and is not affected by any of the accidents by which loss is feared upon her.
Then it is necessary that the woman be elevated on a light over her back, and her head be inclined downwards, and her hands be lifted.
And the minister should hold that in two parts or tie it to the light, so that the body of life does not extend too far during the extraction of the fetus.
And then moisten the mouth of life with warm oil and mucilage of pimpernel and fenugreek and sesame.
And then the midwife takes her hand with those oils and mucilages, and inserts her hand with facility into the mother, and then searches for the right place where the fingers can be inserted into the fetus.
And finds a convenient place: then you consider if the fetus is prepared to descend onto its head, and then you insert your fingers into the eyes of life, or the neck, or the mouth, or the palate, or below the beard, or into the furrow of life, or into the places proper for the ribs, or below the hypochondria.
But if the descent is into the feet of life, then in the pentalion, or in the middle of the ribs.
And it is necessary that you take the finger with your right hand, and pause the curvature of life at that place which is between the fingers of your left hand, and insert your hand with facility and make the finger enter into one of those places which we have said, until it reaches the cause of the boy.
And then pause and make another finger enter into the apposition of life, or the third if necessary, in order that it may be attracted to equality, and not extend excessively according to its rightness alone.
And thus it is suitable for all parts, in order that the issue of life may be alleviated as it is done in toothed way for the eradication of life.
And it is necessary in that which is between them for the extension to be mollified; and if some part of life is retained, then it is necessary that the midwife take some of her fingers with oil and insert them expertly and revolve those things that are retained.
Therefore, if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then it is necessary that the fingers be permitted to enter the place which is more upper; and thus make it so until the entire fetus is forgotten.
But if the hand is issued before the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to the constriction of life, then it is necessary that a cloth be wrapped around it; and then extract it until it is completely forgotten, and insert it either in the juncture of the hand or in the armpit.
And thus it is necessary to do likewise with the other hand and both feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or there occurs constriction in the issue, or water is adjusted in the head of life, then it is necessary that you insert between the fingers a spatula with spines and split the head and extract the water, or that you discover that by means of an instrument which is called "alundat", the form of which will come from the forms of other instruments in the chapter which is appropriate to this.
And similarly do if the fetus is naturally large-headed: and then it is necessary that you insert that with an algemat, or take that with an alundat as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is issued and constricted at the furrow, then it must be split open until the humidity which is in the feet is poured out.
But if it is not complicated, nor obeys the issue, then you must insert the head at once according to what is possible for you.
And if the afterbirth is apostemated or is in life with dropsy, then it is necessary that you perforate it until the moisture which is in it flows out.
But if the fetus is on its feet, then the attraction of life is light and the direction of life to the mouth of the mother is light.
But if it is constricted at the belly and feet, then it is necessary that you extract that with cloth which you will wrap around your hand, and that you split the belly and feet until the water which is in them flows out.
But if the other members are stunted and the head returns, then insert your left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is swollen, then insert your hand into the prenomen of larynx, and seek out that head, and attract it with the fingers into the mouth of the mother, and then insert one or two fingers and draw life from those.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted by apostemated pus which occurs to one, then it is necessary that there be no trouble on life; instead it is necessary to administer effusion of humid and greasy causes. And administer poultices; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
And if the fetus is on its side, then it should be manipulated as possible; and administer the water which we have said in the living child.
And if this is not possible, then it should be inserted into a poultice and extracted.
And take care that you do not leave any cause behind the secondine.
And when you have completed all your operation, then administer the water which we have said for the cure of apostems that occur from the mother.
And if there occurs bleeding, then stop it with astringent waters and administer the other cure.
And I myself have seen a woman in the womb of whom there was a dead child, and on that very spot another fetus was conceived, and the other is dead. A swelling occurs in the navel area of this woman for a long time; and it becomes inflated until it is full of pus, and begins to suppurate.
And I was called to the cure of her, and treated her for a long time, but the wound did not consolidate.
Then I applied to it some strong adhesive plaisters of attraction, and extracted from it one bone, and after a few days, I extracted another bone; and I was greatly amazed, as in the womb there should not be bones.
And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead child.
Therefore I cleansed the wound, and extracted from it several bones, the woman existing in her milk-filled dispositions, and already living in such a manner for a long time, and then brought out a small amount of pus.
And I did not find anything strange, but rather because in this is science and aid to that which the physician artificer administers with his hand for healing.
Of the forms of instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of ventouse by which the mother is opened:
This is the form of strengthener in which are harnessed the forces, at which harnessing there are two ventouses at the two extremities of two feet. However, this ventouse must be more subtle and made from something like ebony or boxwood.
And the width of each piece is two fingers and a half, and the margin of each piece is one finger on both sides, and the length of each is one palm and a quarter; and in the middle of the two pieces are two adjustments that meet to form those pieces which are already fixed, with the length being about one palm and a little more, and the width of each is two fingers or a little more.
And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that they can be opened with those ventouses when you revolve the two prescribed ventouses.
Another similar form, more subtle and lighter:
It is made from ebony or boxwood wood, according to the shape of forceps. However, at the end of it there are two additions like times, and the length of those additions is one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the mother with those, then you should have her lie down on a light bed with her feet pendant, opening what is between her thighs. And then work with your hand and the instrument as you would with forceps, adjusting according to the quantity that you want of the appreciation of the mouth of the mother until it makes what you want.
The form of ventouse which the ancients called:
Form of impeller by which the fetus is driven:
Form of compressing which counteracts the great head:
And it is assembled to forceps which has teeth at the end, like times, and some times it is made long like forceps according to this form, like times, with teeth like reaping teeth into which one inserts and counteracts. Form of compressing a little:
Form of finger having a spine:
Form of finger having two spines:
Form of spatula having two extremities by which the head is cut off:
Form of two broad spatulas:
All those instruments are exercised, and when more species of these are multiplied and prepared, then the artisans should be the more skilled in their operation and the more numerous according to their quantity.
And do not work with those instruments whatever way you should, for the necessity of them is not excusable.
Of extraction from the secondine.
When the secondine is retained during delivery, then it is necessary to command the patient to retain her breath, and then make that person snore with conditions, and strengthen your hand over the mouth of him and over his nostrils, and if by this it has been brought forth, well be.
And if not, then take a cloth and perforate it in the covering of a hole and pause in that herb which opens the mouth of the mother, such as chamomile and rue and anise and camomile and scented Arabic and cinnamon. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the cloth, and then place that over the fire.
And then place a reed cane in the mouth of the mother, and hold it until the vapor comes to the concavity of the mother.
And then make that person snore as we have said, and the secondine will be expelled quickly.
But if this cure is not effective and the secondine remains, then you should command the midwife to submerge her left hand in warm oil or in a mixture of Altaic herbs, and then insert that into the womb and search for the secondine, and when you have found it, take it and stretch it out little by little. But if it is annexed in the womb of the mother, then insert your hand according to what we have recorded, and when you have found the secondine, extract it little by little according to rectitude, so that the mother does not faint from the violent attraction. Beforehand, it is necessary that it be permitted on both sides of the right and left with facility.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recounted the cure with snoring and medicinal application from the cloth with herbs.
But if it is not expelled with all the causes that we have recounted, then beware that you do not fetigues on that in iteration of abstraction, but rather it is necessary that what has issued from it to the mouth of the mother lies at the bed of the woman, and then cauterize that with enguent and tetrafarmaco; for that will make it rot away approximately some days and be dissolved and expelled.
But when it rots, it is elevated to bad odor at the head and stomach, and this leads to illness in the patient; and then it is necessary that sub-fumigations and conveniences be administered accordingly.
But some of the Ancients have already discovered sub-fumigation with Nazirite and dried figs.
Form of instrument by which the woman is sub-fumigated in order to retain menstruation and secondine:
It is made from birch or elm.
And it is placed with the subtle extremity in the womb and the broad extremity above the fire, and the sub-fumigation is placed on the arms of the fire.
And hold that in until the sub-fumigation is consumed and iterate another one.
Of the cure for the unbroken navel of the child.
Many children are born without perforation in their navels, which have become subtle and opaqued. Then the midwife should pierce with her finger that opaqued spot; and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula, and take care not to touch the lacet.
And then apply something on that lanolin infused in vinegar and oil; and then cure it with ointment until it is clean.
But if you fear that it may be opaque, then apply a reed cane into the wound for several days, and remove it when the child wants to pass.
And it often happens that the navel becomes opaque due to consolidation of the wound or aposteme; therefore it is necessary to consolidate that, and then cure it with the water and lead which we have said.
Of the cure for fistulas that were left behind.
The fistulas that are left behind in the departure, being lower in nodule and thicker, which are located near the anus or in the space of one side.
And it is a fistula or many.
And since that nodule is aged and runs with white watery fluid or subtle putrefaction, and sometimes some of these fistulas are penetrating.
And those that are penetrating are recognized by what is issued from them through ejection and flatulence; and sometimes the patient uses the ejection, and soon after it is issued red.
And some of those fistulas sometimes penetrate into the bladder and into the urethra of the penis; and some also penetrate into the junction of the bed and into the notch of the cleft.
And the way to know if a penetrating fistula is present or not is that you insert your finger into the anus and then subtly probe with an elm or iron instrument in the fistula when there is no obturating.
But if there is obturating in that, then you should insert into it a subtle probe made of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or hair in your finger.
And if you do not feel that at all or there is no process of emission or redness or flatulence, just as we have said, then you should know that it is not penetrating, and then apply yourself to the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the urethra of the penis, then the significance of it is issuing urine from that and prohibition of it to that place where medicine has been consolidated.
But if it is penetrating into the junction of the bed or into the bone and causing intense pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the probe enters here if there is no obturating into the bone, and causing intense pain in the circuit of departure; and that from it pus always appears; and that it does not heal with medicine, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the cure of those is tedious and troublesome work for the skilled doctors on which we have set our foot.
But in that which is not penetrating and not aged, healing with iron is expected according to what you have recounted to me, and this which I have already tried.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back and raises his legs up towards you, with the bed sloping towards his belly, and then insert a lead or elm probe into the fistula if there is obturating, until you know the location where the probe enters.
And if that patient feels pain around his navel, then it is necessary that you insert your finger into the navel.
And if you feel with your finger that the probe has already penetrated and is discovered to penetrate, or that which you feel between your finger and that siphac or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that, as there is no healing in that, just as we have said.
But however, some say that it can be healed in some men's hands.
And the medicine by which one hopes for relief in that is that you ignite a subtle cauterizer according to the size of the fistula, just as it has been said before, and then insert that ignited cauterizer into the fistula until it comes around the navel; and then iterate that two or three times until you know that all those adjusted flesh tissues that are like feathers from an owl's wing have become accustomed.
And then cure that with ointments wrapped in parchment until all those adjusted flesh tissues are completely healed; and then cure it with medicines which generate and consolidate flesh, and if it is healed, well be; and if not, then it will never be healed by any other treatment.
And if the probe enters and does not penetrate into that which is in the navel, but between that and the probe which is a mere speck of flesh or skin, and sometimes the fistula opens on the surface of the cord, then dry the cord from the beginning of the fistula, and you see it drying with the probe, and it is in the fistula until the drying reaches the location where the extremity of the probe comes to an end, and through the probe is liberated and cut.
And then clean those flesh tissues which are gathered like the feathers of an owl and do not remain any cause for those.
But if a flow of blood comes sometimes between you and your operation when you are cleaning those flesh tissues, then take the millstone that is and the pus is lighter instrument is cauterizing with fire or acute medicine, for cauterization with fire adjusts two good habits: it adapts to those adjusted flesh tissues, and abscises the blood excess of humidities.
And then cure that with ointments wrapped in parchment or in threefold cloth until the location gets braided, and then cure the wound with hard flesh ointment that generates and consolidates.
And those medicines in which there is purification and excess; when you are restored it is already healed and there is no fear of iteration.
But if the fistula has already entered into the perineum of the anus and is elongated from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and investigate with it.
And thus if the probe enters and is between you and it is like skin or flesh, and is predisposed to penetration, then there should be no operation in that place except according to the way of faith and hope.
The cause is to administer in that place one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry it up until you achieve the conquest of that place so that you can insert some and provide the proper cure; and do not process any more with drying, so that you do not insert the lacet containing the navel, and that the patient's wish is fulfilled in the ejection of his/her own will; or dry it up as we have said, or extend it slightly and remove the pus that dries up into the proper place at the anus, as we have said, or with a probe or another sharp instrument, and then cleanse those flesh tissues which are in the drying process until you can see the scarring; and then make an effort to restore the entire wound with drying, and if the opening above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the part of the anus, and it will be more difficult for the patient. And sometimes the fistula is ended according to this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is in the gluteal fold around the surface of the body with the cord and on the margin of the anus, then take the probe of perforated extremity, which is like a needle prepared for sewing according to this form:
and insert it into that faithful envelope of five or seven, or around those; and then insert the probe with faith into the fistula until you achieve the conquest of that place.
But if it is penetrating in the margin of the anus proper to the outside, then you extract the needle from that wound as you insert your finger into the navel; and pull out the extremity of the needle and adjust the two extremities together, and strengthen each one, and let it be for a day or two, and when you more deeply insert the needle in the flesh, strengthen it until those flesh tissues which are between the two extremities of the needle and that fall.
And then cure the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in some way that you are prepared for, but not too much in the perineum, because it is not your place to do so; and then proceed with it until it is healed.
The form of the spatula with which the fistula is cut: its curvature is quite sharp and the other part is non-sharp, so that you do not insert what is not necessary, just as one often does.
Of the suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows during the insertion of those.
Hemorrhoids are according to two manners, for either they are between the anus resembling carbon, or else those are like a bunch of raisins. And those are small and large, and the blood flows from them at times and is one, and many, and outside the anus, and in its extremities.
But however, those that are outside the anus are according to the months of little humidity, from which flows a yellowish water or a small amount of blood with continuous motion, and is according to the color of the skin.
And the cure for that which is outside the anus is to command the patient to settle down and to evacuate into the anus until it becomes clean and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you take up your knife or what you have with your nail, and then cut those in their roots.
But if the nails are not held in those due to moisture and softening of those, then take those with a rough cloth or a piece of cotton or a woolen rag, and extract those with your fingers, and then cut them and powderize some powders suitable for application at the site of cauterization; or cauterize those according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauterizing. And then cure those with another cure until they are healed.
And if the anus does not obey evacuation, then anoint the patient with an ointment in which there is small biting, and wash it with that water that is in the navel and that will slightly obey evacuation when the patient presses.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause of them is slight, and it is that you take those with your nail or with an instrument, and cut them, and then cure those with water as we have said until they are healed.
And that which you will use for the insertion, should be administered with suturing according to this manner: take a needle wrapped and insert it into the thread and then pull out the hemorrhoids from above, and make it penetrate into the root of the other part, and wrap the two extremities of the needle in the part farthest from the thread, and so laterally; and strengthen the hemorrhoid with strong stitching, and then remove the needle and thread.
And do this to all of them, and leave one and not close it, so that the superfluity of blood may flow from that.
And then pause over the anus with a cloth dipped in red oil or in cerote; and pause that over the anus and command the patient to rest. And then leave it alone until it forms a scab; and when it is formed, cure those with an ointment or with another cure until they are healed.
And when they are so old and no longer effective in that medicine, then you must take those with the point of spatula or with your nail until they become moist and the scab above is held back, which prevents consolidation; and then cure those until they are consolidated.
Then you must apply those with reason more fervent than the first one, until most blood flows and they are scoured; and then cure those until they are healed.
Know that hemorrhoids, this is the key, and not only notches red according to the color of the skin resembling a cap of clavicle, and it is done throughout the body and most especially in the parts below the hips and above the knees, and thus by these pains one must give consent.
And then it is necessary to cut that which is in the circuit of the key, and to be held with pincers or instruments, and to be eradicated from its root; and then cure that.
And if you wish, cauterize it according to what is preceded in its own chapter.
But a verruca is a small, hard, fistulous prominence on the surface of the body, and many times they appear in children's moles.
And the cure for it is that you stretch and cut it off, or that you strengthen it with a needle or cloth until it forms a scab. And if you wish, cauterize it according to what we have said, with fire or acute medicine.
But a furuncle is a small, fatty or fistulous prominence on the surface of the body that becomes inflamed and swollen around the anus, when the heat finds it, it becomes centred in it like the mordification of a formicula, and is formed around the body.
And the cure for it is that you take a needle of goose quill or of dove's feather, and make it strong, and pause it over the furuncle until it contains the circle of the needle in the parts of the body; and then turn your hand with the needle until you cut off what is in the circuit of the furuncle, and pause it on the perineum of the flesh, and that you eradicate the furuncle from its root.
And if you wish, make it so with an iron or steel needle according to this form:
The upper part of the needle should be drawn to subtlety, numb (it is not perforated), wrapped in such a way that on the said point it may be blunted and the revolution of that.
And if you wish, cauterize the furuncle according to what is said in the cauterization of athyli in the chapter on cauterizing.
On the Form of Instruments that are Administered to Give Ointment.
Sometimes it is made an ointment of silver or lead or of melted iron or malleted; and sometimes it is made from small and large instruments according to those to which they are administered, for that which is administered in the cure of little children is small; and of those whose buttocks are rough or inflamed, the ointments of those are small.
The Form of Great and Little Ointment:
The head of the needle above, in which the bag is tied, should be wide according to this manner; and there should be a distinction at the point where the bag is tied just as often.
And the extremity of it below, which is inserted into the anus, should be numb (not open) like a lion's, and should be drawn back to subtlety; and on one side of it there are two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole should be according to the thickness of the rays and slightly larger.
And the bag in which the medicines of animal bladder or sheep's fleece are placed, and the root of it should be a palm.
And it should be pierced by many holes just like it is revolved; and if the space between the holes is the thickness of the said digit.
And then insert the needle into those holes a strong thread of raw thread which is of ten threads, or surround them; and adjust the bag to that; and when the bag is placed on it, be tight at the head of the ointment between two distinguishable with strong constriction, and then anoint each hole: But the quality of anointing it is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and take care not to make it too hot or too cold.
And then the patient should be positioned on their back, with their knees raised and feet placed on the floor, with one foot resting on a pillow or cushion; and the attendant should take the bag and pour it into two holes and around with vehemence until everything that is in the ointment is evacuated into the bedpan; and then remove the ointment and the patient should lift their knees to the wall.
And if the medicine forces him to sleep, keep it as long as he can; and if he sleeps with it all night, it is more likely to have an effect.
But if you anoint him with the medicine for stomach ailments and he becomes worse, then you must iterate the ointment until he is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or apostemes in the anus, then you must use a gentle and lion-like ointment, one of those with which children are anointed.
On the Curing of Wounds.
And now I have said in the division of wound treatment what is suitable for the free, and I will also say the treatment of those with me and medicines according to the complement.
Therefore I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made and according to the place where the wounds are located.
And the causes by which many times wounds are made are just like accidental blows from a hammer, or incision with a sword or cote, or percussion with a lance, or with a club, or with an arrow, or similar to those of many causes.
But the wounds that are in the parts of the body are just like those which affect the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the thigh, and similar to those of the limbs.
And I recommend the treatment of some wounds because I pause rational thought and rule on other wounds.
And I begin with the wounds of the head, simple ones, because the memory of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and is not a fracture, then consider: if it was caused by accidental blow or similar, and already the scalp has been torn asunder to such an extent that there is great bleeding and danger of apostema, then you must take heed and bleed the cephalic vein forthwith, and do not delay; and extract from that wound as much blood as possible according to the quantity of its virtue, unless some other cause prohibits bleeding, especially if the blood that has flowed out of the wound is little.
And it should be a bleeding from the opposite side of the wounded part; and beware the patient ofpletion, and of wine, and of thick foods.
But if some cause prohibits from the beginning, then you should reduce the food and not approach meat or wine.
And pause over the wound, if an apostema is likely to occur, cut in with rose oil or wine in which it has been stipticated.
But if it is certain of an apostema, then pause over the wound, if it is recent with its own blood and the air has not changed that powder which I recommend to be applied little by little.
And if the air has already changed it, then pause over some ointment until it is healed.
But if the wound is large or is caused by incision of a sword and similar things, and the lips of it are not adjusted for poultices, then adjust those with suture according to what I recommend in the suture of theirs.
But if the wound is already opened up to the bone and skin, and there is no retention of it except for a small suspender, then incise it and immediately cure the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its natural place, and command the patient to be fed on foods that have gruel: caps and forms like theirs, until it is composed.
And if you find in the flesh putrefaction and it does not adhere to the bone, then you must incise all that is rotten and cut it away, and immediately cure what remains.
But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which bleeding can occur, and it is not separated by medicines, then you must inquire about the artery, and if you find it uncut, you must cut it with a spatula, or tie it; and if necessity requires that what we have said does not come together, then you must cauterize until the blood is stopped.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is slight; thus you must powderize over those this powder, because it will consolidate before the air changes those.
And the method of the powder is this: take oil of saffron one part, blood of dragon one part, and no-extinct cause three parts; mix all together and crush well, and fill the wound with it, and compress it with good constriction until it adheres to that part, and coagulate it with the blood.
And then strengthen that above with powders and loosen it, and do not remove it while it remains in this state, because the medicine is not eradicated from it until it is healed.
And sometimes they do this alone, when you are not present and only have oil of saffron and blood of dragon.
And now do this same operation on great wounds when it is necessary to pause over them and tighten them, and on recent wounds with their own blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in the time of summer, then you must not entertain the position of this powder, but rather cure those wounds with what we have said, by pausing over them some ointments that are degistive, or by pausing over them powders of barley flour mixed with water and honey until they give a poulture; and immediately cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
But if there is a fracture in bone at the wound, and it is small, then you must extract that with forceps.
And I will say the cure of fractures of the head in this way that is poisonous.
On the Wounds of the Neck.
But if the wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and it is similar to a simple wound of the head.
But if the nerves of the neck are cut or an artery is injured, then if it is a nerve, do not intervene with surgery but rather avoid any treatment that would cause violent stiptication, such as using zinc and egg whites which are like vinegar and similar to them, because they irritate the nerves and contract that. And do not pause over the wound any cause that is too cold, because the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuation is in the brain, which is the most noble part of all the members.
And if what is cured by medicines is light, just like it is washed with double water, some times infused in rose oil or not-rose oil, and thucia when it is washed with double water and the other parts are reduced according to this manner, and ointments moist.
But if the wound is great, then administer sutures, or bind the lips of it tightly, and immediately cure that with powders until it is healed.
But if the wound is deep or occurs in the lowest part of the poulture, then pierce it at the most depressed location.
But if the wound already has an incised artery and bleeding occurs, then separate or dry it, or tie it, or cauterize it if necessity requires that.
But if the vertebrae of the neck or all have been incised and the veins of the neck are saved, then you must adjust the lips of the wound with sutures over the canal of the neck and do not touch that; before equaling that and reducing it to its natural figure, and immediately strengthen that with decent stretching, and loosen that for a few days; and immediately cure that with ointments in which there is stiptication and excitement until it is healed.
But if the wound has been made in the bone, then strike it, and then if there are fragments of bone, extract all those that you can from them; and what is not united, leave that until the wound heals, and separate it and the excrescence from it be alleviated.
And if the wound is recent, then powderize over that a powder which I have recommended to you. But if the wound has been made into a fistula, then cure that with what I will remember to recommend in its own chapter.
If it is a blow from a lance or cote, and the wound's depth is great, then consider more seriously if there is breathlessness from the wound when the patient faints; know that the wound is mortal.
And if the wound is not deep and the wound is recent with its own blood, then pause over it with powder in the first hour, and do not strengthen that so that the blood is not retained in the depth of the wound and returns to the heart and revives the patient, but rather pause over it an attractive ointment, and loosen that twice a day.
And if the ointment is not present, then pause over the orifice of the wound with a fine cloth so that it absorbs what there is of the humidities; and make the patient sleep over the wound so that the water that is in it is adjusted.
But if three days or more have passed since the wound and there is no spasme nor tremor of heart nor constriction of belly, and other good dispositions are present in him, then know that the wound is saved; and then cure it with poultices and with the other cure until it is healed.
But if the healing of him is delayed, and all time has been open, then know that a fistula has been made; cure it therefore according to its own chapter.
And if the wound is caused by incision of a sword or cote, and is simple on the surface of the foot or hand, then cure it with what comes before suture, if great, or with powder, if small.
But if the wound has made an impression in the bone, and some fragments of bone are separated, then twist the wound and extract those fragments, if they can be separated. But if they are not separated, then loosen those fragments until the wound heals, for the extraction of them is alleviated.
And as for other wounds that occur in other members, the judgment in their cure is the same as what we have said.
On Wounds of the Belly.
The indisposition that occurs in the belly is either great, or small, or medium-sized.
And a small disruption is made difficult by another method, and it is seen that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not take care to bring them back to their place soon, for they open up and are swollen, making it difficult for the instrument to enter.
And therefore the best disruption is medium-sized, for in that there is not difficulty in reducing the bowels, just as there is difficulty in the two species mentioned before.
And know that suture of the belly is according to four methods, but two sutures are common and necessary in suturing other wounds of the body.
And two other stitches proper to the belly communicate with the other wounds, but however are more proper in the suture of the belly.
And I recommend to you all that which has been exposed and declared.
Therefore I say that when the wound is small and some cause of the bowels has occurred through it, and it is made difficult to reduce them, then this is in one of two ways: or by the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when inflammation of the bowels has come about due to the coldness of the air.
And therefore when this is so, you must know that you should scrape that area in such a way that you submerge a sponge or wet cloth in lukewarm water, or that you gather squinant, cyperum, and spic, and soak the bowels in it until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes I have seen that this has been done with vinegar in which there is astringency, and it is better than water alone for the resolution of the inflammation.
And therefore when you see the inflammation be resolved, then you moisten the bowels with water in which there is a high and bitter taste, for by this it is alleviated the instrument of the belly with little cause.
But if it is excused the instrument of the belly to this cure, then you should split the disruption a little with an instrument on which there are incised grooves.
And the first cure is better, when it is proper and not septic, and there is no occupation to dry out near necessity and faintness.
Of the Instrument: It is seen in its form what it is.
One part of it is bent acutely, and the other part not acute, and its extremity subtle, and not like the subtlety of a spatula, but rather blunt a little.
And therefore when the wound is enlarged and protrudes outside the belly, then you must know that its reduction should be according to its natural form, in its proper place, if possible on top of it, for that is better.
But when the disruption is large and is in the lower part of the belly, then you must know that you should make the patient lie on his back, and put his knees higher than his head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should put the patient's head and legs higher than the remaining parts.
And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then you must pause your intention and consideration at all times so that the part where the wound is may be higher than the other.
And thus it is necessary for you to administer this in great wounds and in medium-sized wounds.
And in small wounds, pause over what is prepared for you, and make sure that the minister has all the disruption with his hand and adjusts the lips of it, and makes sure to uncover from that to this, which has some other cause for suture.
And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle, or count the needle according to the quantity of the amplitude of the wound; and then leave off from the extremity of the disruption of the said ring finger, and strengthen the needle one, so that you do not put faith in the two extremities of the cord, with the two extremities of the ciphac which is left over the cord of the parted parts, until you make it penetrate from that part; and you have already added two extremities of the cord and two extremities of the ciphac, and so there are made four orders.
And then strengthen with double faith in the circuit of the needle, and sometimes from two parts together, and then add the two lips and the wound by decent addition; and then leave off the thickness of the finger and put another needle in it, and then tie that with thread just as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if necessary with the needles until you have completed all the contraction of the wound.
And the needles should be medium-sized between greatness and subtlety, because the subtle needles barely cut into the flesh; and the thick ones are of difficult instrument in the cord, and therefore it is necessary for them to be medium-sized in subtlety and thickness.
And it is not necessary for the needle to be inserted in two extremities of the cord that are properly close together, because then the flesh would not be cut slightly and the wound would be exposed before its consolidation.
And they should not be prolonged in the suture so that the wound is prohibited from consolidation.
And then insert the extremities of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient's sleep; and pause over the suture with powders expanded from all parts, which have the extremities of the needles; and leave those until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And these species of suture with needles in this manner are more suitable for small wounds, because it suffices to use one needle or two or around that many.
But the second suture is common: and it is that you administer with suture the four extremities, of the cord and two extremities of the ciphac, in one go, with a needle in which faith is wrapped in subtlety and thickness.
And then, when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, withdraw the needle from that middle part from which it began, in order that the thread may retreat back to the highest point of the wound, so that the suture is according to the suture of cloth, with which the cloths are stretched.
And pause between each suture for the amount of time equal to the thickness of a little finger.
And this suture is known to men.
And with this suture, I cured the wound which had been inflicted on a man in his belly, which had been wounded by a cote, and was the disruption of a wound more than a palm, and was situated around two palms from the middle of the bowel and was the disruption in the middle of the member; and then I reduced that after the bowel had been opened up for 24 hours.
And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or thereabouts, and I cared for him and he was healed; and then I saw him alive for many years, and he was converted to his natural disposition.
And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by a miracle it was so, for you did not cure him with ointment, for he was in a place where ointment was not found nor any medicine, but you paused over the wound with a fine cloth twice a day and ablution assiduous with water of honey until he was healed.
But you told two species of suture proper according to the narration of Paulus.
And that is when you began with the suture of the cord, and inserting a needle from the outer part to the inner part.
And then, as the needle penetrates into the cord and makes a knot according to rule and in length along the entire body, and leaves the extremity of the ciphac where you inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from the inner part to the outer part in the other extremity of the thread.
And then, when you have made that penetrate, then you make it penetrate another time into the same extremity of the thread from the outer part to the inner part; and leave the extremity of the ciphac which is in this place, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from the inner part to the outer part.
And make it penetrate with your penetration which you make it penetrate into the thread in the extremity of the mirror which is in the part of it until all that penetrates.
And then, starting from this side, close it with the extremity that is of the thread in the other side, and pull out the needle from the cord which has penetrated, and then reduce it into that cord and sew the extremity of the thread that is on the other side with this extremity of the mirror; and pull out that from the cord which is from part of it.
And do this once and again, and do this once more in another way until you have closed all that is outside according to that example.
And the sum of this manner of suture is that you sew with a thread of skin which sews the skins, in such a way that you sew the ciphac once from the part of the extremity of the cord, and then leave it off until you have completed it.
But the second proper species of suture which you call Gualia, and this is said to be spoken by you and recommended for it, is that you sew according to the natural order with a thread of skin which some medical men sew according to, in such a way that they add all the parts to its corresponding part according to nature; and apply the extremity of another skin and the extremity of the mirror to the other extremity of the skin, and this is done according to your recommendation.
You should put the needle in the extremity of the mirror at your own discretion from the outer part, and make it penetrate to the inner part in that same spot, and leave two extremities of the thread; and then turn back the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside in the two extremities of the thread.
And then turn back those same ones, and make them penetrate from the inner part to the outer part in two extremities of the mirror that are on the contrary side.
And this manner of suture is better than the common light suture, and it is the suture that was mentioned previously.
This is the saying of Gualia.
And others say that the suture of the belly is corrected with two needles, so it is that you insert into these some thread, and begin with the introduction of a needle of this kind which is due to you, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the suture of those who sew skins together.
And you know that when the disruption is in the middle location of the belly, then the suture of it is more difficult than for other locations in the belly.
But the judgment of wound healing is a judgment about other wounds.
Which cause is because when you achieve the recent wound with its natural blood before it is altered by air, and reduce the bowel and sew it and adapt it decently, then you pause over that flesh-colored powder.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then you pause over that certain ointments which are at your presence, until they make a hard crust and drop their threads, and become consolidated cord and mirror; and then cure it thus as is the healing of other wounds, until it is healed.
But if you do not have those medicines at hand, then you pause over that for now, because it begins to produce pus, cote and changes into a different form twice a day, just as I taught you, until it is healed, for you will not need other medication in many dispositions when wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound may communicate to the main members, then you must soak wool in tempered oil of good quality, or in rosy oil, and pause it in the circuits of the places which are between the bones and leave them there.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your own bowels, because many times this has happened, then you must clarify that with vinegar stiptic black tebe, and especially if the purulence is penetrated into the bowel and is made to exit through the cavity of it.
And you know that what is from the thick bowels is for a lighter and easier healing than what is in the subtle bowels.
And it is of difficult healing because the bowel which is called "gegunu" does not receive healing from wounds that are in it; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it, and because of the magnitude of it that is in those, and because of the subtlety of the body of that, and because of its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if the wound is processed from the thread, and you obtain it recently, then reduce it according to your own rule with which you reduce the bowels together.
But if it has passed into the space and is already green or black, then you should strengthen it with thread on the place that is degenerated from it, so that the flux of blood may return, for in the thread there are veins and arteries.
And then insert this which is another bond, and pause the two extremities of the thread pending from the left side of the wound outside, so that on you there may be alleviated the attraction of it, namely the coagulation of the thread and emission of pus from the wound.
Remembrance of wounds when they occur in the bowel.
When a disruption occurs in the bowel and it is small, then it is possible that it can be restored by certain men, for thus you saw him who was wounded in his belly with a blow from a lance and had an old wound and a fistula, and there was great pain and vomiting.
Then you proceeded with the treatment of it even though it was not contained in the healing of it, but instead continued to subtletize that into what was already healed and the location was consolidated.
And you saw that the location was already consolidated, and then you turned your attention to the patient who had developed an evil humoral imbalance as a result of the accident in his belly; and none of this was caused by that evil accident and he remained in his natural disposition eating and drinking, and then entered into baths and was exercised in his usual duties.
And some experienced people will say that when an ulcer occurs in the bowel and it is small, then it is necessary to bind it according to this manner: and it is that you take fromiguas of large caps; and then adjust the two lips of the wound and pause one fromigua of those which has an open mouth on the two lips of the wound; therefore when it takes hold on these and strengthens its mouth, cut off the head of it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then pause another fromigua near the first one, and do not cease to make fromiguas one after another according to the quantity of all the wound.
And then reduce it and sew the wound; and those caps remain attached to the bowel until the bowel is healed; and there will be no harm to anyone's malady.
And it is possible that the bowel be tied with a fine thread which is made from the bowels of beasts attached to it, since it is more in an agalha; and it is that you take the extremity of these threads of the bowel, and it is much desiccated, and then tie the extremity of it to the thread of it, wrapped, and then insert that thread into agalhas and sew with it on the bowel, and reduce it in the disruption.
And this manner of suture with fromiguas is not but according to the way of faith and hope.
But if the wound is great and wide, especially if it is in one of the subtle bowels, since then it is not merely a matter of subtletization, but rather a complete healing of it.
On the healing of abscesses and fistulas.
Know that every wound and abscess when it becomes old and antiquated, and is made into an ulcer, and is not consolidated and produces pus all the time and is not cut off, then, wherever it may be in any member, universally it is called fistula and we call it azukem.
And fistula, according to truth, is a nodulation that is febrile, hard, white, with which there is no pain and in which there is a cavity like the cavity of the sorrow of an owl; and therefore it is called by some "rizatz", i.e. pain.
And in certain men, it is humid, which produces pus; and the humidity is so strong that it is abscised within a few hours. And sometimes this humidity is great, and is little, and is thick, and is subtle.
And now all those causes and signs of them and their cures with medicines have been shown in the division.
And it is necessary that you should know the cure of fistula which is made by way of operation with me.
And know that fistula occurs in all the members of the body; for there are fistulas that penetrate to the great veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the cord, or to the bowel, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to some of the joints composed by composition such as the shoulder and hip; and those are which give proximity to the main member and its likenesses.
And therefore that one of these fistulas which is according to this manner is one of the diseases of difficult healing, and does not receive cure, and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
And if there is some fistula whose depth does not reach those places which I mentioned, and you wait and trust in the healing of it, and you want to come to a knowledge of it, then take a tenta of iron or steel, and if the fistula follows a straight line, and you will probe that with it.
But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a subtle leaden tenta, for lead, with its lightness of body, is alleviated and curved to follow the twisting.
And if the fistula has many frightful things, it is not possible for you to signify upon it with a tenta.
Then clarify the opening by its openings, for the humidity which you use to clarify that goes through the other openings and flows from them.
And then inquire with great subtlety, according to the manner in which it is possible for you to know if here there are bones or nerves, and whether the fistula is distant or nearby, or whether it is a fistula with many openings and situated above all on the sum of your strength, with your questioning, with your searching out the sick person, and the invention of pain due to your compression with your hand on the place, and likenesses of significations and causes accidental to the abscess.
And when you have considered all those causes with true station, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider now whether the fistula is apparent, nearby or in a salt-like place, distant from a joint, nerve, artery, or vein, or one of the places which I mentioned to you.
Now you will cut off the fistula according to what was said before in the narration of it, and stop this which is in that filtration and corrupt flesh, and this which is born in the opening of the flesh, or in the vein and likenesses, and cure this until it is healed.
But if the fistula is of great depth and follows a straight line, then you must insert it into the preon as far as possible for you, and properly remove all its corrupt flesh; and properly administer some enveloped in acute medicines, and introduce those into the cavity of the fistula which you have comprehended with iron.
And make this with that, making it into the cavity some times until the acute medicine corrodes all that remains in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
And then restore that with emplasters which generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by this, then you must cauterize that according to what we have recounted.
But if the cause of fistula is bone and you are certain about that, then you must inquire into it and cut off that according to what we have recounted, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member such as we said.
But if the bone is exposed to you and there is some corruption and blackness, then you must remove that until all the corruption is hosted out; and properly cure that with what is necessary for it to be healed.
And if it is not healed and produces pus just as it was, then you must know that you have not reached the total eradication of corruption; and therefore you uncover it further and make the reason of it and the purification of it with your utmost strength, and properly restore that.
And therefore if it is healed, good is; and otherwise, then you must know that that corruption is in the deep recesses of the body, which has not been reached, and therefore in that case there is nothing to do but to leave it.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is to your advantage to attract that, then you must attract it with subtle forceps which are suitable for that.
And if there are many bones, then you must make the extraction of all those with great subtlety, and of none leave any cause for your strength.
But if any cause of the humors is contrary to you, and in their insertion there is no fear nor error, then you must insert those ligaments or flesh if it is here, and deliver the bones.
But if you do not have preparation to extract the bones of your time, then pause over the wound as it pains that wound, and leave that in until it is at the environment of those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound so that it may not be consolidated, and the section which you have inserted into your operation.
They had, if you fear, pause over it with a poultice soaked in rose oil, or a poultice soaked in Egyptian ointment, or some of the green ointments, for when those ligaments will have been dissolved, and the bones are separated from their abstraction, and that attraction is alleviated.
But if it is a great bone like the bone of the hip or coccyx or similar to those, and what is corrupted on it is only the surface of it so much so that it is only the face of it, then you must remove that with a reamer so much so that it will be removed that blackness and corruption, and properly restore the wound.
But if what is corrupted on it is a great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and insert all into the place where the corruption has occurred, and then cure that until it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you this, that you encounter with a man in his own coccyx for which you pause it and exemplify and assist over your operation.
There is a young man of about thirty years old, to whom it happens that he has pain in his coccyx, and the parts inside are inflamed on the matter inside the body until the matter reaches the coccyx, and it is material of abscess with great abscess, and there is no external cause.
And then the time was extended with that by the error of the doctors until the abscess burst forth, and a great abundance of matter poured out, and his cure was properly paused until the bone was fistulized, and they made son in it many openings through which all the pus and humors of the body flowed.
And then a multitude of doctors cured him for about two years, and there was not in them wisdom but only in the art, until you were called.
And I saw the bone of him and the matters that were flowing from it through many openings in his great body; and already the body of that man was entirely stabilized and the color of him was yellowish.
And then I introduced a probe into one of those openings and guided it to the bone.
And then I carefully examined all the openings and found that those reached their proper places in all parts of the bone.
And then I carefully cut and inserted myself into one of those openings until I uncovered a part of the bone, and I found it rotten and corrupted and denigrated; and already a part of the bone was corrupted within which had penetrated to the marrow.
And then I saw what was uncovered and prepared from the discovered bone.
And I saw that it was not in the bone, but that corruption which had abscessed and prepared, and I had already removed it.
And then I paused the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicines for a long time, but it was not consolidated.
And then I iterated and uncovered again over the bone secondarily on the first discovery, and found continued corruption in the bone.
And I saw that it was not in the corruption, but rather in the bone itself; and accordingly, I had to perforate again to make the cure of it and restoration, and it was not restored.
And then I discovered on the other occasion and did not cease to insert the small bone little by little particularly and perforated the restoration of it, but it was not restored until I inserted around a palm's length from it, and that extracted with its own marrow, and accordingly, restored that with medicines, and it consolidated slightly and healed.
And it is not necessary to iterate in the operation of that and section of that except for the disposition of the flesh of that and the scarcity of tolerance of that and fear of that of death, because that happened to him at all hours by superfluity of evacuation bad syncopation.
And therefore his healing is due to complete healing, and nothing is in the place of hard bone; and it has been done well the disposition of him within his body and returned to its virtue; and he has been converted to his own dispositions and did not cause any contrariety in walking or harm in any cause.
But if it is a prominent bone in the body that has been traumatized, then you must cut off that according to this manner: and it is that you take a ligament and stretch it to the extremity of that prominent bone; and command someone to extend it further; and pause that ligament when it is thicker than the first one; and properly bind that over the flesh that remains between the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you can draw the flesh to the parts left, and then uncover the flesh over the place which you want to suture so that the sutures do not harm the flesh.
And pause fist or table left of the bone decently, because when you do this, it is not prohibited for the sutures to cut off the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that the suturing be done on the corrupted place little by little, because if it is in the concavity of the bone where corruption and does not appear to the sense, and perhaps another suturing will be forced again.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, beforehand it is one continuous part with another, and the corruption is in the middle place or in a part of it, then you must uncover all the flesh; and properly pause fist left, and properly suture that from the first part where the corruption is to the point where the suturing of the other part continues.
And the suturing should be according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is at the joint, you must incise that corrupted joint, and sew the bone where it continues from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in the ratio but in vain.
And if the corruption is in the breast of the arm or the foot, it is very difficult; however, you must inquire into the corruption and how it appears to you, and then open that up, and cleanse that according to any disposition that is possible for you, and with each attempt, rectify it as far as possible without causing harm to your veins or nerves.
And you must know what are the incisors and the saws to be used to incise these bones are many according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and subtlety and greatness and smallness, and hardness and rarity; for which it is necessary that you prepare all kinds of instruments suitable for each operation.
And you must know that this operation signifies to you the species of instrument which you need; when in your case it is great study and long experience and knowledge of the methods of this art, and witness of methods of diseases, for then you already have them by yourself what is convenient for each disease.
And I now shape you in the end of this chapter with the number of instruments which you will pause with simple ones and with which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experience on others. Forma de serra:
Forma de autra serra:
Forma de autra serra gran:
Forma de ray: The head of this ray is to be shaped like the head of a star-shaped key, and its points are to be shaped like the points of an astilegio.
And it is not necessary to do anything else but with this ray, to be confounded the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or if the mouth is very wide.
Forma de razori menor:
Forma de razori lat:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: Forma de lu:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:
Forma de razori autra subtil:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:
Forma de un autra inscissori:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:
And the extremity of it is triangular and has a sharp point.
And it is made of Indian steel, and similarly, all the reasons we have said about razors, incisors, and saws apply.
Of incising extremities and bone sawing.
The extremities may be affected by either intrinsic or extrinsic causes, or as you have medicated that corruption with those medicines and the cure has not been achieved, or sometimes the corruption will go away without any apparent cause, and then it is necessary to incise that member into which the corruption has entered, so that the malady may escape through that opening of death or evil that is greater than the damage done to the member.
And the sign of that to which it happens is that the member becomes black until it is cooked and the fire has consumed it, or it can be approached so closely that the blackness enters into that member that is like it and takes all the flesh; and thus you must incise it.
And similarly, if it is caused by the percussion of certain venomous causes, such as those of scorpion sea or viper or ratel and similar things.
And if the corruption or percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you must incise the finger and not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the hand.
And similarly, if it reaches the hand, then you must incise that of the root of the finger, and not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the armpit of the arm.
And if it spreads that far, then you must incise the arm up to the armpit in the joint.
And if the corruption passes beyond that and spreads around the armpit, then in that case it is the death of the malady; and to administer another cause other than this in treatment is quantity of virtue.
And similarly, when corruption spreads to the foot of the toe, then you must incise that into one of the toes.
And if it takes hold in the ankle of the foot, then you must incise the entire foot. But if it enters the knee joint, then you must incise the camba into the joint of the knee.
And if the corruption has already spread over the knee, then it is not a cure but a dismissal, and leave the malady to die.
And the manner of incising the member or sawing it is that you strengthen the ligament in the part where you wish to begin, and then stretch another ligament over the location; and extend one ligament to the parts behind, and extend another ligament to the parts ahead; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments as far apart as possible until all the flesh is exposed; and then proceed with incision or sawing.
And it is necessary that a cloth be applied to all the parts so that the wound does not touch the location, and that the malady's injury is adjusted and apostema caution.
But if bleeding occurs while you are working, then you must cauterize the location carefully, or pause and apply some powder that restrains the blood; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
And then bind the wounded member with a ligament in a way that is convenient, and cure it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you that you try to find a man in his own foot, this accident which you and I have mentioned, which is when the blackness occurs in his foot with an adjustment that was assembled for combustion of fire.
And this corruption occurs first in his toe, and then spreads to the entire foot.
And then that man prepared himself so as to put the cure into the member with the intensity of his pain and adjustment, and he incised that foot up to the joint, and it was healed.
Long time ago, that corruption occurred in the toe of my hand.
And then it came to me, and it pierced through my hand and caused that superfluity to resound above the hand of medicine, and thus the purification of his body was accomplished; and no longer did the superfluity rebound and began to go to another toe, until it reached the hand.
And he asked me to incise the hand of him, and I did not want to do so because I was waiting for the rebound of that superfluity, and rather I feared the incision of his hand to death, because the power of the malady was upon a precipice.
And when he left me, he returned to his land and told me that the man had prepared and incised his entire hand, and it was healed.
And I have not added this narrative except that it may be an aid to those who suffer from this disease, and that it may be a signification by which it is signified and according to which it is worked.
On the care of sinews and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
When apostema occurs on some fleshly members and the space of the apostema is prolonged until it forms a collection of pus, and then it breaks and perforates, and the pus flows out from it, and leaves the location empty as if it were a vessel, and the covering that is above it is like fine cloth, and there is no further corruption, nor does it infect the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called sinu, and it is not named fistula.
But if the space is prolonged to the point that corruption invades some member, then it is called fistula and not sinu.
And the cure for it is that you incise that covering entirely, just as it is turned, and especially when it is subtletized and made like a cloth, and comfort yourself that it does not stick to the location by its corruption.
But if you wait until the covering sticks and that corruption has not achieved its ultimate consequence, and on the covering has appeared a spot, then you cure it with a poultice.
And you consider the sinu, and then if it is great, and the arm that is from fetent odor, then poultice it with this Egyptian medicine which is made of oil, vinegar, and ziniar receiving equal parts, and be adjusted in a vessel, and be cooked over the fire until the medicine becomes soft and suitable for a gentle application.
And then you take from it the water that is necessary and dissolve it with honey and water; and poultice it on the sinu, and strengthen the orifice of it, and leave the medicine in it for two hours.
And then extract that with great care; and do so for as many days until the sinu is purified and the stench is removed.
And some times it is poulticed with ash water when this medicine is not present; and it is that you take the ashes of vitis, and put them on top of the water; and then mix it well and poultice it on the sinu until you are convinced that the wound is clean.
And if the patient has no tolerance for the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then poultice it with honey and water mixed with ziniar crushed, and poultice it with wine and honey mixed, because of the property of honey that purifies and cleanses, and wine makes the wound adhere, and especially when there is superfluity of stipticity and dryness.
And when you do this several times and are convinced that the wound is removed, then poultice it with water that makes the flesh in it.
And it is that you take from the dyafinicon and dissolve it in rose oil and stiptic vinegar; or that you poultice with some medicines and other ointments that have the properties which I have written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the orifice of the wound is narrow and does not receive the poultice canula, then you enlarge it gradually with a small iron tool, and pause in it a wrapped cloth made of Egyptian ointment or Basilican ointment until it is enlarged.
And similarly if the orifice is wide, then you add the edges of it with a suture and leave just enough space for the poultice to be added.
And if the orifice of the wound from which the flesh flows is elevated to the upper parts, then dry it at the lower part that is in it so that the flesh may flow downwards, for when the flesh is constricted in the abundance of sinu, the skin will be generated.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinu within the environs of the bone at the lower part according to your will, then you must force yourself to prepare the member with preparation for which the flesh flows slowly according to your arrangement and that there be no cause in it for the flesh.
But that which is on the orifice of the sinu, which you should leave in all the time for fear that it may ignite what is adjusted within the flesh. And so that you may know if what flows from the flesh is much or little, whether it is digested or not digested.
And now you should consider the place of that sinu, whether in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an apostema.
And when your medicine is prolonged in this way, and you see the matter that is discharged over the orifice of the sinu already adhering, or almost adherent, then leave it alone for 3 days, and when you remove the dressing, change the cloth to another and renew the ointment.
But if the sinu gives off a subtle space, then do not despair of its adherence, for the healing of it is approaching, for some people in whom the tardy generation of flesh occurs in their wounds, and from those who are contrary to it.
And if the sinu is not adherent after many days, and the brac remains indigest, then you should know that the sinu does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinu is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you adjust to desiccation of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and virtue, they become dry just like the enguent dyafinicon, when it is adjusted with an excess of zegi.
And the most important thing of all is that which is cured, namely, to take enguent dyafinicon and dissolve it in rose oil, and then pour it over the wound, so that the old flesh is equalized in its substance, and then comfort yourself with it, and use it.
And it seems to work in that action, when there is no brac, to take enguent dyafinicon and honey, and to mix them together so that they become thickened, and use it; or to take mirra and aloen and gall, and to grind all of it into a powder and sprinkle it over the honey which has been heated until it becomes thickened, and then line it with this mixture on cloth and strengthen it over the sinu; and line it with the honey which you have mixed together so that it becomes thickened, and sprinkle it over cloth and strengthen it.
And some times administer Aristologia longa and Razitz of lili celesti (and it is lili celesti) and farina of errors and centaurea, and use those simples or adjust them, grind them and powderize them over the honey which has been recounted; and then use it.
And if the sinu is prolonged and does not heal through this cure, then you should know that the corruption is in the bone of it, and already inquiry is being made in the bones or other hard members or joints; then you should treat it with fistular cure, just as above is said.
The treatment for paronychia and fingernail irritation caused by abrasion and digit incision added, as well as sectioning.
Panarici is an abscess that leaves behind the nail of the finger or toe and strongly attacks the other fingers, and when it is prolonged and its cure is more precious, either it becomes apostematized by another apostema, or it becomes corrupted, and pours brac into what corrodes the root of the nail, and strongly corrupts all of that, and strongly spreads its corruption to the bone, so that it becomes a foul odor, and the extremity of the finger or toe is made dark, and the color of it becomes made fusca.
And therefore, when you have done what we have said in the division and do not confirm your cure, then it is necessary that you incise with a sharp instrument all the superfluous matter that remains from the nail and then cauterize the wound properly over water, because cauterization is very helpful in this way.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions to the nail have already filled up the spaces within, and begin to pierce and lead that flesh away, then it is necessary that you pause a fine ray beneath the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh, and push it up and cut through that flesh with ease, and pause over what remains of the flesh with medicines that cause corrosion until all is removed; and then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
But if the corruption has already taken hold in the bone, then it is necessary that you incise the bone and extract it, for no time is there healing when the bone is corrupted.
And if corrosion and corruption go into the digit, then you should incise it in one of the joints according to the precept of its remembrance, and then cure that until it is healed.
But if the nail becomes percussive or atritic, and becomes inflamed in that place with a violent pain, then it is necessary that you first fleubotomize the malady, and then dry up the nail with a sharp spatula with a transverse section above and below, and be careful not to cut too deeply into the skin left behind the nail, for you will cause the malady's violent pain to become even worse, and it will lead to the nativity of superfluous flesh in that place; and then cure that place with what brings relief from the pain.
But this adjustment, which is natural in many men, strongly attacks the flesh, and strongly settles in the bones, or strongly settles in the nail.
And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or it is the nativity of them in certain joints of the fingers. But what is born in some joints of the finger does not hurt, and that which is born in the joints strongly hurts.
And among those that are born with fleshiness, the section is light, and it is that you should incise the root of it with a blunt spatula.
But for that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore be careful not to make an abscess.
But in those that are born with digits, it is necessary to incise the joints; and then you should first cut away the flesh from there with an incision round and deep into the bone, and then saw with one of those convenient saws suitable for this purpose, and then cure that until it is healed.
But consolidation which occurs in the fingers between their joints sometimes or by nativity of the man who has it, or by consolidation of wound or by combustion of fire, or by similar causes; then it is necessary to remove that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
And then pause between their wraps of linen and oil scented with rose for so that they are not consolidated too quickly, and separate them, or pause between them a thin plate of lead until it is consolidated according to what is necessary.
And similarly if consolidation occurs in some fingers at the palm, then you should cut away that consolidation according to how it is prepared and conforms to the figure of the member.
Of incisions, there are various types.
Vices are thus varicas, and so are veins wrapped in thick fatty tissue, full of melancholic superfluities that come to swell the limbs of the body, and most notably in the thighs, and especially in the thighs of travelers, laborers, and carriers.
Then it is necessary that you administer purgation of the body with black bile several times with strong expulsion, and then let the patient's blood flow from the Basilic vein.
But the cure for them is done with iron in two ways: one way is to incise and attract that black blood, and the other way is to elevate the vein and extract all of it.
The section of it is done in this way: first, grasp the thigh with cold water to resolve the thick blood that is clogged in the vein, and then strengthen the thigh of the patient at the superior part of the groin to the lower part of the navel with a bandage, and then cut open the vein in one place, or two, or three with a wide section, and then elevate the black blood with the help of the partition of the thigh up into its own place, and from there down to the bottom, until the amount of blood that you want and that is necessary for the patient's health has been taken away, and which takes away the virtue of the patient.
And then he (the doctor) will say that and command him (the patient) to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
And then iterates on the cure through phlebotomy when the veins are full and he notices that the patient is suffering.
But the elevation of them is done in this way: you will grasp the thigh of the patient if it is swollen and put it in a warm bath and then grasp the thigh with cold water until it becomes red and the veins are expanded; or if there is no bath, exercise it strongly so that the member is warmed up.
And then you will cut the cord in the right side of the vein by sectioning it in the length or at the end of it, or at the lowest part of it, or at the top.
And then you will open the cord with an incision and excise the vein entirely until it appears to the sense, and then it is necessary for the patient to recognize that sometimes that vein requests descent into blackness.
And thus, as you remove the cord and then take out that white thing which is called a cord.
And then you will put that thing down and place the thread in such a way that it is elevated and cast off from the cord, and suspend it with one ounce of lead.
And then you will make another cut, right next to the previous one, for three fingers' width, and you will excise the cord from the part above the vein until it appears.
And then you will elevate it and incise it in the rear section of the tusk, and then extract it and elevate it until it is issued through the second section, and then extract it from the section that is above it.
And then you will place it in such a way that you extract the tissue from the section that is the highest or most superior of all the sections, until everything is issued; and afterwards, make an incision on it.
And if it does not obey you to extract and elevate, then insert a needle with a strong double thread and tie it there, or insert the thread below and turn your hand around until it is pulled out. And beware that it is not incised; for if it is broken, it will become difficult for you to elevate that part and will bring harm to the patient through that injury.
And when that part is entirely removed, then pause over the location of the wound, submerged in wine and rose-scented oil and unrosed oil, and cure it until it is healed.
And if the life is constricted because of twisting and turning to the extent that it wraps around the parts, and it is not according to straightness as we have said, then you must cut on all sides of the twisting and turning of the part, and suspend it with an incision until you elevate the entire thing.
And beware that your section should not cut the vein and should not plague it, for if you do, it will be difficult for you to elevate that thing; and exercise your prudence in that.
The shape of the wound that has been cut with a sword.
It is not like that, nor is it a sharp point or edge, for if it were, it would cut the vein with its subtlety. Instead, it has a coarse flexibility, so that if it were too fine, it would cut the vein because of its fineness. And it is in this superfluous thickness, as we have said.
On the extraction of the saphenous vein.
This vein is generated in the thighs, in the lower parts of the land, just as Al-Ateji described it in the land of the Arabs and in the dry and arid lands of India, where there is little vegetation or water.
And it is also generated in other parts of the body beyond the thighs.
And the generation of it is from putridity that remains behind the cord, just as venom flows out of the body through serpents and worms and scorpions and worms that are generated between the cord and the flesh.
And the sign of its susceptibility to the coming forth of it is that this vein becomes inflamed in the thigh with great heat; and at that location, a vesicle forms; and from that vesicle, the vein begins to issue forth like a plant sprouting.
And then when his extremity appears, you should wrap around it a lead weight of which the weight is one and two-thirds drachmae, tie it up and let the lead hang from the bed.
And whenever you notice some cause at the parts outside, envelop it in lead and compress it. And if it is prolonged, then you must incise a part of it and wrap the remaining part; and do not cut that part to the root until it has been completely removed, for if you cut it too soon, it will be constricted and enter into the flesh, causing apostema and pyemia in the location and bad ulceration.
Therefore it is necessary to treat it gently and extract it little by little, until it is completely removed from the body, without leaving any cause or residue behind.
And from this vein, it has been seen in some men who are its full length of 20 palms and above. And I have already seen one that measures 30 palms.
And if it is incised at the time of its medication, then you must insert the thread into the track of the vein and perforate it with a long track through the body, until all that is in the material is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the location for several days with medicines; and afterwards, care for it by curing apostemas.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, and most especially when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot, and comes to me with many orifices, and is connected to each orifice branch.
And therefore care for this vein just as we have said in the division, and also according to what has been said above.
On the sectioning of worms generated under the skin and it is called Bovine Distress.
This illness is called "bovine disease" in some lands because many times it affects the cows and there are very few worms that are born between the cord and the flesh, and they go up and down throughout the body, and are manifested by a sensation of numbness from member to member until they break the cord and come out.
And the generation of it is through putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms and serpents and earthworms and ascariids are generated in the belly.
And it is feared because of the evil of it, for when it goes to the heart and is elevated to the head, and is brought to the throat, then it is very strong in it and enters and destroys the throat, and this happens many times.
And therefore when you want to cure that and extract it, then you must not proceed unless you have first made the necessary preparations and appearance of it in the sensation, and accordingly you should strengthen what is above it and what is left below it with a strong constriction, and afterwards dry out and extract it.
And if it is inflamed in the flesh and you do not treat it, then you must pause cauterization with fire over the location until it dies, and the greatest fear is corruption of it, which corrupts the location just as we have said.
And if you reach the location where it is about to emerge from the throat, then strengthen above the skin with a strong constriction, and afterwards dry out and extract it; and it is necessary that the patient uses purification of their body through medicines evacuating bad humors, and guard against foods that cause putrefaction.
On the sectioning of Naphar's illness.
This illness is called Naphar in our land, and it is a pain that comes to certain members of the body, and it is spread from member to member.
And I have already seen it according to what you told me. You went to visit a sick woman in a village, and you saw her arm and noticed a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and after staying for an hour, I saw that inflammation rise like a worm going up this way, but more slowly than it should be, as if it were live silver when it flows from place to place.
And then I went to the pain in that location and found myself in the muscle, and afterwards stayed there for about an hour.
And afterwards it went into another body, until it reached the other arm.
And afterwards I was told that it [the pain] turned itself around the entire body, just as you saw; and I was very amazed at the transformation of it and the speed with which it moved from member to member. And you had already seen this in my own veins according to that manner, however, I have seen many others who have found pain being transformed from member to member. But I did not see it in the same way as in the woman.
And you do not think it is this way except that it is because the woman was old, with dry skin and exposed veins, and in this appearance the sensation of that transformation appears.
And it is necessary that there does not appear this same retro-cure in those who are delicate and have moist skin and veins narrowed.
And when you want the cure of it, and the patient feels that pain, then you should not appear at the throat as we have said, but instead you strengthen over that location and leave it slightly and dryly on that place until that bound ventosity is released, and then cauterize the area.
But if you do not reach it through the usual channels (los tieus huels), then you cure that location by excision of the body and with what expels ventosities, and charm those places with fetid pills and with pills of serepia and similar ones.
On the extraction of Sageta's.
Sagetas are diversified according to species, and according to the locations of the body in which they are found, because their diversity is that some have large points, small, concave, and dull, and these are solid ones; and there are those that have three angles, and those that have tongues; and there are those that have astels.
And of the signs of the cervel is when it finds the sageta and passes through the bone, and comes out from the cyphac which is above the brain, because accidents occur by this hot soda, scotomia, vertigo, trembling in the hands, inflammation and trembling of the tongue, spasm and mixture of understanding and vomiting of gall, and very little is spoken and destroyed is the voice, and it comes out from the place of the wound a white humidification like powder, and eyes that seem similar to the quality of the flesh.
And therefore if these signs appear to you, then you abstain from the cure and extraction of the sageta, unless it is outside.
But the signs of the sageta when it is in the heart are that it is near the left breast and feels hard, like a stone, and is not soft; and very little is its movement similar to the movement of the pulse, and blood flows from the wound with black blood, and there is heat in the extremities, and sweat, and faintness; and therefore know that death descends slowly.
And when the sageta has pierced the lung, the signs are: blood foams from the wound, and the vessels that are near the collarbone are inflamed, and the patient's complexion has changed, and he expires with great breathlessness, and demands a draft of cool air.
And if the sageta is in the vein that is in the feet, and the pain is near the little bones of the feet, it makes a great deal of noise with a vehement pain and sighing, and none of the members of the muscles are moved.
And if the sageta is in the stomach, then very little will come out from the wound as some undigested food.
And if the sageta is in the abdomen and is fixed there, it will produce some rent or tear in the wound, or the membrane, or the bladder which is disrupted, and there is no hope for the cure of the wound by extracting the sageta.
And if the sageta is in the bladder and it comes out with urine, and processes some cause to the outside parts, and very little is pain on the patient, then you should know that it is mortal.
But the other members such as the face, neck, and shoulder blade, and the vertebrae and the auxiliary bones, and the ribs of the back, and the pelvis, and the femur and their likenesses in the members are saved according to the major dispositions when the sageta does not reach a vein or artery and is not venomous.
And I recommend this to you, that I have seen the being of these sagetas, for what signifies by this on the cure thereof.
The cause of this is because in one man the sageta was lodged in the lacrimal duct of the eye socket at the base of the nose, and I extracted it from there to the other side, leaving the gray matter of the ear intact, and he recovered, and did not suffer any harm in the eye.
And I extracted another sageta from a Jew, which was lodged in the gray matter of his eye socket, leaving just below the eyelid and above. The sageta had already been hidden and it wasn't possible to get more than a small part of it with the instrument that had no ears.
And the Jew is satisfied, and did not suffer any harm in his eye.
And I extracted another sageta from a Christian man who had it lodged in his shoulder blade (golayro), and it was an Arab sageta, and it was the one with ears; and then I cut open above it between two guides, and it was already submerged in the shoulder blade of him; and then I carefully extracted it, and the Christian man recovered.
And I extracted another sageta from a man who had it lodged in his abdomen (ventre), and thought that he would die because of it; and therefore, after waiting 30 days and there was no change in his condition or disposition, I cut open above the sageta and manipulated it beneath, and he recovered, and did not suffer any harm or accident.
And I saw another man in whom was lodged a sageta in his back (dos), and the wound had become consolidated over it, and after seven years, I extracted the sageta from the base of the spine.
And I saw a woman in whom was lodged a sageta in her abdomen (ventre), and the wound had become consolidated inside it, and there had been no change in her natural functions or movements, and the woman did not suffer any harm or discomfort from her natural operations.
And I saw another man in whom was lodged a sageta in his face (cara), and the wound had become consolidated and the sageta had remained intact, without causing any great pain or similar symptoms.
And I extracted the sageta from the nose of the king's prince who had it lodged in the middle of his nose and had already declined to the right side by a little bit, and the entire sageta was hidden.
And I was summoned to the cure of him within three days after the insertion of the sageta.
And then I probed the wound of the sageta very gently; and then I asked him with a subtle question, and he did not sense it; but he felt a prickling sensation below the right ear, and then I suspected that this prickling was due to the extremity of the sageta.
And I applied the ointment to the location where virtue is attractive and digestive, supposing that the location was inflamed because it appeared to me as if the location of the sageta was becoming inflamed, so that it would heal over it.
And there was no significant accident in the location that the sageta had reached, and I continued to apply the ointment over it for many days and there was no accident; and the wound became consolidated in the meantime, and the patient's condition improved gradually over the space of many days until one day he felt the sageta inside his nose and recognized it to me.
And then I applied the acute corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it was fully open, and with the attempt I gently probed the extremity of the sageta, which was attached to the bone.
And then I adjusted in the application of the medicine to the wound for that which appeared to me visibly the extremity of the sageta, and I passed the time with it over the space of four months.
And then since the wound had become more inflamed, it became possible for me to enter with forceps into it, and I removed the sageta, and did not pay attention to its surroundings, as I did not cease to subtly and ingeniously work on it with various instruments of ingenuity, until one day I began to take it out with descending forceps, according to the form that would come at the end of this chapter, and then I extracted it; and then restored the wound.
And some doctors judged that the nasal cartilage was not restored, and I restored it, and the wound is consolidated, and the patient's health is completely restored, and there is no need for any further treatment.
And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some sagerias, because it is necessary for this rule and meaning on that which I have not said, since the parts of this art and the definitions of that one are not understood by narration nor comprehend those free.
And the skilled craftsmen (artifexs) are aware that there is little information available on this subject, and that what is present about something is also absent; and they find a new operation and novel instrument necessary for the descent of extraneous causes from the art when accidents occur.
And therefore, I say that sageritas are not expelled from the members in which they are lodged except by two methods: either by attraction of the place into which they enter; or by the contrary of the other side.
And that which is expelled through the place into which it enters, or is a sagerita proceeding from a fleshly location, and is attracted and expelled.
And if it does not obey the summons of the hour in which it is caught, then it must be left alone for some days until the flesh that surrounds it becomes soft and relaxed, and the attraction to it and its egress are alleviated.
And similarly, if it is fixed in the bones and does not obey your summons, then leave it alone for some days and gently coax it with attraction and motion each day, and it will be expelled.
And if it does not obey your summons after some days, then you must pierce the circle of the sagerita in that bone on all sides with a subtle taravel until the location is amplified by the sagerita, and then extract it.
But if the sagerita has already been hidden in the location of the body and is hidden from the senses, then you must inquire about it with all tentativeness, and if you feel it, then draw it out with certain instruments which are convenient for its attraction.
And if you cannot work on it because of the constriction of the wound and the length of the preon, and here there is no bone or nerve or vein, then you must feel around the wound until it is amplified and it is possible to extract the sagerita.
And if you have the means with which to hold it, then you must deliver the flesh in which it is fixed from all sides with all the skill that you can muster; and ingenia on this, if you cannot on the evulsion of the flesh at the fracture of the ears and the twisting of those until it obeys.
And when you administer the extraction of the sagerita in each location where it is, then you must use with twisting of your hand and forceps on all sides until it obeys; and subtlely with subtle subtlety that the sagerita is not broken and that it is made easy to your difficult attraction to it and its extraction.
And if you cannot act on that of your time, then you must leave for some days until the parts in the circle of it are softened, and then iterate, for when it is alleviated. But if you find that there is a contrary flow of blood, then you must administer the water that we have spoken of in our chapter on healing.
And guard your virtue of inscribing veins or nerves, or cord, and administer skill in all manner possible to the extraction of the sagerita; and do this with facility, tranquility, slowness, and firmness, just as you and I have recommended.
And thus, as you make the sagerita contract by its own power, for then the patient will be according to the figure in which the fire should cause the settling of the sagerita in it, for it is more justifiable. But if this is not to your ability, then you must administer what is to your ability according to the figures.
But the sageritas that are outside-located by the contrary of the other part, or which already process some part to the outer parts, or make gelatinousness the extremity of the sagerita by sentiment of the part above the code and sometimes it is eminent; therefore you must cease on that; and be the cessation according to the quantity in which they take the forceps; and thus attract it, for it is made easy to being drawn.
But if it is retained in the bone, then you must twist the limb according to contrary motion until the sagerita presses into the bone, and amplify as it meets, and thus extract that.
And if not, leave that for some days, and then iterate on it until it is ready.
And if the root of the sagerita is in that place, then you must propel it with force.
But if the root is fallen and you must administer an impulse, then you must introduce it into that place, if it is deaf, make a hollow sound so that it enters the concavity of the force in the tail of the sagerita and thus propel it with force.
But if the sagerita is concave, then you must propel it with a strong sound entering into that place, for the sagerita is alleviated by that.
And if the sagerita is entwined, then you must uncover what lies beneath, all the flesh in which it is veiled, if that is possible for you, and thus care for it with what is needed.
And if the sagerita settles in the feet, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side, and is near enough that you can touch it with your finger, and it is to your ability to cease on it, then cease on it and take care not to inscribe vein or nerve, and extract it, and thus close the wound if needed, and care for it until it is healed.
I think I can help you with that!
Another interesting passage!
Another interesting passage!
Another interesting passage!
It looks like we're moving on to a new topic!
It looks like we're getting more specific about the type of veins being discussed! It looks like we're getting more specific about the type of veins being discussed! It looks like we're getting into the details of the veins! It looks like we're getting down to business! It looks like we're getting into the details of the veins and their characteristics!
It looks like we're getting into the details of the veins in the leg!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical remedies!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical practices!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures! It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures! It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of wound care!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical remedies!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical practices!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of wound care!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of book structure!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical remedies!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical remedies!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical remedies!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical remedies!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical remedies!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical remedies!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical remedies!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical decision-making!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical observation!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical remedies!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical observation!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical caution!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical procedures!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical technique!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical subtlety!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical diagnosis and treatment!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical caution!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical decision-making!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical technique!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical technique!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical observation!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical care!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical problem-solving!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical diagnosis!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical challenges!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical anatomy!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical caution!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical technique!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical application!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical caution!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical diagnosis!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical wisdom!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical timing!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical pragmatism!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical age-related considerations!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical preparation for bleeding (fleubotomia)!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical contraindications!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical diagnostics!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical decision-making!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical timing!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical caution!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical treatment!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical procedure!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical technique!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical diagnosis and treatment!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical treatment!
It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical technique!
It looks like we're getting to the conclusion of this medical text!
It looks like we're getting to the final instructions on how to perform a bleeding procedure (fleubotomia)!
It looks like we're getting to the final advice on how to perform a bleeding procedure (fleubotomia)!
It looks like we've reached the final sentence of this medical text!
It looks like we're getting to the final advice on how to perform a bleeding procedure (fleubotomia)!
It looks like we're getting to the final advice on how to perform a bleeding procedure (fleubotomia)! It looks like we're getting to the final conclusion of this medical text!
It looks like we're getting to the final conclusion of this medical text!
It looks like we're getting to the final advice on how to handle a severe bleeding procedure (fleubotomia)!
It looks like we've reached the final sentence of this medical text!
It looks like we're getting to the final advice on how to handle a situation where there is still some bleeding or discoloration at the wound site.
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
It looks like we're diving into a new section!
It looks like we're diving deeper into the topic of breathing exercises!
It looks like we're diving even deeper into the topic of ventilation!
It looks like we're diving into a list of specific locations on the body where scarification and blood extraction (ventozacio) is performed!
It looks like we're wrapping up the text!
It looks like we're wrapping up the text with some practical advice!
It looks like we're wrapping up the text with some practical advice!
It looks like we're discussing the benefits of ventilation (ventozacio) in the neck area!
It looks like we're discussing the location of the ventozacio (ventilation) in relation to the fleubotomia (bleeding) procedure!
It looks like we're discussing the importance of using a proper instrument for bleeding (fleubotomia)!
It looks like we're discussing the importance of not using a certain instrument on the elderly or those with certain medical conditions!
It looks like we're discussing the importance of not forgetting (oblivio) and the need to command the person performing the ventilation (ventozador) to be careful!
It looks like we're discussing the location of ventozacio (ventilation) in relation to fleubotomia (bleeding)!
It looks like we're discussing the importance of not over-ventilating (enpellida) in the alkehel region!
It looks like we're discussing the effects of ventozacio (ventilation) in the alhagdahan region!
It looks like we're discussing the importance of proper technique when performing ventilation (ventozacio)!
It looks like we're discussing the effects of ventilation (ventozacio) on the mouth and gums!
It looks like we're discussing the effects of ventilation (ventozacio) on the body!
It looks like we're discussing the effects of ventilation (ventosacio) on the blood vessels!
It looks like we're discussing the importance of proper technique when performing ventilation (ventozacio) and scarification!
It looks like we're discussing the effects of ventilation (ventozacio) on certain parts of the body!
It looks like we're discussing the importance of proper technique when performing ventilation (ventozacio)!
It looks like we're discussing the effects of ventilation (ventozas) on various parts of the body!
It looks like we're discussing the effects of ventilation (ventozas) on the heart and blood vessels!
It looks like we're discussing the relationship between different types of ventilation (ventozas)!
It looks like we're discussing the importance of proper positioning and timing when performing ventilation (ventozas)! It looks like we're discussing the importance of continuous effort when performing ventilation (ventozas)!
It looks like we're discussing the process of scarification and suction (scarifiqua e itera)!
It looks like we're discussing the importance of moderation when performing scarification (scarifiques)!
It looks like we're discussing the process of scarification (scarificacio) and suction (succio)!
It looks like we're discussing the process of scarification (scarificiques) and its effects on blood flow! It looks like we're discussing the process of scarification (scarificiques) and its effects on blood extraction!
It looks like we're discussing the process of scarification (scarificacio) and its effects on blood flow!
It looks like we're discussing the process of extracting blood (sanc) and the role of scarification (scarificacio) in achieving this goal!
It looks like we're discussing the process of extracting blood (sanc) and the role of scarification (scarificacio) in achieving this goal!
It looks like we're discussing the depth of scarification (codena)!
It looks like we're discussing the properties of different oils (olis) and their effects on the skin!
It looks like we're discussing the properties of different oils (olis) and their effects on the skin!
It looks like we're discussing the properties of different water sources (ayguaros) and their effects on the skin!
It looks like we're discussing the properties of different water sources (vi agre) and their effects on the skin!
It looks like we're discussing the properties of different water sources (vi antic) and their effects on the skin!
It looks like we're discussing the importance of proper ventilation (ventozacio) and its relationship to bathing (bahn)!
A Latin phrase!
It looks like we're discussing the importance of considering one's emotions and physical state before performing certain actions!
It looks like we're discussing the importance of taking breaks and nourishing one's body!
It looks like we're discussing the importance of moderation in one's diet and habits!
It looks like we're discussing the importance of proper hydration during certain medical procedures!
It looks like we're discussing the importance of proper hydration and medication during certain medical procedures!
It looks like we're discussing the importance of proper placement of scars (scarificacio)!
It looks like we're discussing the importance of proper technique in scarification (scarificacio) and its effects on the body!
It looks like we're discussing the effects of scarification (scarificacio) on certain medical conditions!
It looks like we're discussing the effects of scarification (scarificacio) on the liver and skin!
It looks like we're discussing the administration of certain medicines!
It looks like we're discussing the administration of certain medicines in the treatment of skin conditions!
It looks like we're discussing the preparation of a certain medicine!
It looks like we're discussing the preparation of a certain medicine administered by fire!
It looks like we're discussing the preparation of a certain medicine!
It looks like we're discussing the preparation of a certain medicine!
It looks like we're discussing the preparation of a certain medicine!
It looks like we're discussing differences in medicine preparations!
It looks like we're discussing the proper way to administer a certain medicine!
It looks like we're discussing the proper way to administer a certain medicine!
It looks like we're discussing the proper way to handle a certain type of candle!
It looks like we're discussing the administration of a certain medicine!
It looks like we're discussing the characteristics of this medicine!
It looks like we're reaching the end of the text!
It looks like we're discussing the administration of certain medicines!
It looks like we're discussing the quality of using certain medicines!
It looks like we're discussing the proper way to administer certain medicines!
It looks like we're reaching the end of the text!
It looks like we're discussing the effects of a certain medicine!
It looks like we're discussing how to prepare and administer a certain medicine!
It looks like we're discussing how to treat a certain medical condition!
It looks like we're discussing how to treat a condition where blood is multiplied or excessive!
It looks like we're discussing the use of leeches (sanguissuguas) in medicine!
It looks like we're discussing the use of leeches (sanguissuguas) in medicine!
It looks like we're discussing how to treat certain medical conditions!
It looks like we're reaching the final part of this medical treatise! It looks like we're discussing the importance of this chapter in the field of medicine!
It looks like we're being addressed by the author, who is warning us about the importance of this chapter!
It looks like we're getting to the root of the matter!
It looks like we're coming to the end of the author's journey!
It looks like we're reaching the end of the author's writing!
We're back at the beginning!
We're starting a new chapter! We're starting the introduction to this chapter!
We're getting into the meat of the chapter!
The author is getting specific about diet!
The author is wrapping things up!
The author is providing specific dietary advice!
The author is highlighting the importance of bone health in older age!
The author is discussing the natural processes that occur in the body!
The author is emphasizing the importance of dietary changes!
The author is highlighting the diversity of fractures based on the different parts of the body!
The author is concluding the discussion of fractures!
The author is concluding the discussion of fractures! The author is describing the various types of fractures that can occur in different parts of the body!
The author is concluding the discussion of fractures!
The author is providing a summary or key to fractures! The author is describing the characteristic signs of a fracture!
The author is providing a cautionary note about diagnosing fractures!
The author is cautioning against premature diagnosis and recommending a more nuanced approach to diagnosing fractures!
The author is describing the importance of careful observation and diagnosis in determining the extent of a fracture!
The author is providing guidance on how to treat an abscess that has developed cautiously!
The author is highlighting the relative ease of treating fractures in soft tissues compared to those in bones!
The author is concluding the discussion by emphasizing the importance of remembering previous experiences!
The author is providing guidance on how to treat fractures in the arm or leg!
The author is providing guidance on how to treat fractures in the arm or leg!
The author is emphasizing the importance of caution and gentle care when treating fractures!
The author is emphasizing the importance of taking advantage of opportunities and making adjustments as needed!
The author is warning against excessive stretching and compressing, as well as the careless actions of foolish surgeons who can cause abscesses or contractions!
The author is concluding the discussion by emphasizing the importance of understanding the quality of the member's structure and its relationship to the fracture.
The author is providing guidance on how to treat fractures in small bones or limbs!
The author is providing guidance on how to treat fractures in larger bones or limbs!
The author is providing guidance on how to treat fractures and apply wraps!
The author is providing guidance on how to treat fractures and apply wraps! The author is providing guidance on how to treat fractures and apply wraps!
The author is providing guidance on how to treat fractures and apply wraps!
The author is providing guidance on how to treat fractures and apply wraps!
The author is providing guidance on how to treat fractures and apply wraps!
The author is providing guidance on how to shape the star-shaped wraps!
The author is providing guidance on how to shape the star-shaped wraps and apply them to the fracture!
The author is providing guidance on the thickness and quality of the threads used in the wrap!
The author is providing guidance on the importance of using subtle threads in the wrap!
The author is providing guidance on how to treat the patient's extremities (hands or feet) if they are affected by the wraps!
The author is referring to some fractures that are accompanied by a wound (plague) and subsequent disruption in the continuity of the bone (disruption in the codeina), and how one should come up with a plan for treatment based on individuality.
The author is cautioning that not all broken bones (trenats) are suitable for wrapping with stars on the first day. The reason is that when the bone is large, it's better to wait 7-10 days or more before applying wraps, depending on the risk of developing an abscess.
The author is describing the method used by the Ancients to treat fractures, dislocations, and sprains using a type of plaster (emplaustre).
The author is describing the method of applying plaster (emplaustre) to treat fractures, which is suitable for many complexions and especially for women and children, as it does not generate heat or cold on the skin.
The author is describing the process of preparing the plaster (emplaustre) and applying it to the skin.
Another method for plasters to restore fractures and dislocations and torsions: recipe of assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, which is the root of saved sage, one and two-thirds drachmae; of myrrh and aloes, one and five drachmae; of alochil, twenty drachmae; all should be ground and sifted and mixed with water or album of hou or if the patient's complexion is scalded; and then use this plaster, for it has a good composition and restores broken bones lightly, and cures many men.
Another method for plaster which cures fractures and torsions: recipe of myrrh and white alum, one and two-thirds drachmae; of myrrh and aloes, one and five drachmae; of acacia, six drachmae; of Armenian balm, twenty drachmae.
The final sentence!
The final recipe!
The final statement!
Another recipe for plaster!
Another shortened method for making plaster! The final instruction!
The final note!
Another method of plastering!
A final note from Hippocrates!
A final note from Gualia!
Another recipe for plaster!
A final note on the quantity of plaster! A final warning!
A final step in the treatment process!
The final instruction!
The final note!
The final instruction! The final note!
The final instruction!
The final instruction!
The final warning!
The final statement!
We're moving on to a new chapter!
The different types of fractures!
The different types of wounds and their causes!
The different types of fractures and their wounds!
The fracture that is hidden within the bone!
The fracture that is caused by falling or percussion!
The majority of fractures occur in humans!
The different types of fractures are like stars separated! The final phrase!
The final statement!
The final sentence!
The importance of considering the patient's symptoms in fracture treatment!
The importance of treating underlying conditions before expecting a cure!
The importance of studying the symptoms and signs before starting treatment!
The importance of considering the season and the condition of the bone when starting treatment!
The importance of considering the location and extent of the fracture when starting treatment!
The importance of carefully examining the patient's head and neck!
The importance of detecting the extent of the injury and taking appropriate action!
The mention of two different surgical approaches!
The description of two different surgical approaches!
The importance of using the right tool for the job!
The importance of having a variety of instruments and being able to adapt to different situations!
The importance of using instruments with ease and precision!
The importance of being cautious when working with dense or hard bone!
The importance of carefully considering the shape and size of the bone when performing surgery!
The importance of having a variety of instruments with different shapes and sizes to suit the unique characteristics of each bone!
The description of the three species of taravels and their characteristics!
The importance of carefully removing bone fragments and using precision instruments to achieve the desired outcome!
The importance of exercising caution when using instruments to avoid causing harm or damage!
The importance of carefully extracting bone fragments and reassembling them in their correct position!
The importance of carefully handling and repairing small bone fragments!
The description of the second surgical method!
The description of the lenticular and acute parts of the bone!
The importance of carefully and gently handling the bone fragments!
The importance of carefully removing any attached cause or fragment from the bone!
The importance of carefully shaping and smoothing the bone fragments to ensure proper alignment!
The importance of carefully shaping and smoothing the bone fragments to ensure proper alignment!
The importance of carefully treating and correcting small bone fractures!
The cause why it is not understood by all those who have studied in that art. The conclusion that we have shown in great fractures!
The importance of carefully dressing and treating wounds!
The importance of carefully monitoring and treating wounds!
The importance of using powdered medicine to treat wounds!
The importance of keeping the wound clean and free from infection!
The consequences of neglecting the wound and allowing infection to spread!
The use of medicine to treat the wound and prevent infection! The application of medicine and the use of species of cure!
The beginning of a new chapter!
The art of repairing a broken nose!
The anatomy of the nose and the importance of preserving its structure!
The art of setting a broken nose! The importance of taking care when performing surgery!
The technique for setting a broken nose when the fracture is in the upper part of the nose!
The technique for setting a broken nose when the fracture is in two parts!
The importance of early intervention and rest in the recovery process!
The technique for applying a nasal splint to set a broken nose!
The importance of using the right materials and techniques to set a broken nose!
The use of a different material to set a broken nose!
The flexibility to choose between two options!
The use of various substances to treat infection!
The use of natural remedies to treat infection and promote healing!
The importance of treating fractures and promoting healing!
The treatment of nasal wounds and the use of lead canules!
The beginning of a new chapter!
The art of repairing a broken jaw!
The importance of carefully assessing the extent of the fracture!
The technique for setting a broken jawbone!
The importance of repositioning and stabilizing a broken jawbone!
The technique for repairing and stabilizing a broken jawbone with loose teeth!
The importance of rest and relaxation in the recovery process!
The technique for correcting and stabilizing the jawbone!
The importance of patience and allowing the fracture to heal naturally!
The use of previously discussed remedies to treat infection and promote healing!
The importance of assessing the severity of a broken bone with an accompanying wound!
The technique for enlarging the opening of a wound to facilitate drainage!
The importance of dressing and protecting the wound to promote healing!
The next chapter!
The art of repairing a broken sternum!
The different ways a broken sternum can occur!
The different types of sternum fractures and their implications for treatment!
The importance of having two assistants during surgery!
The importance of carefully aligning the fracture to achieve proper form!
The importance of stretching and elevating the sternum to achieve proper alignment!
The importance of using a reclining position to facilitate proper alignment!
The importance of using assistants to elevate the sternum and facilitate proper alignment!
The importance of removing fragments from the sternum!
The technique for removing fragments from the sternum!
The description of the tool used to remove fragments from the sternum!
The importance of adjusting the tool's length during surgery!
The importance of closing the wound with sutures!
The importance of dressing and covering the wound!
The use of a dressing to promote healing and prevent infection!
The importance of monitoring the patient's progress and adjusting the splint as needed!
The importance of proper positioning and elevation during sleep!
The importance of monitoring and adjusting the splint as needed!
The importance of updating the dressing and splint as needed!
The expected recovery time and variability in healing!
The end of the first chapter!
The second chapter!
A detailed description of the fracture!
The importance of careful preparation and reduction!
The use of various materials to promote healing!
The importance of shaping the slate to fit the contours of the shoulder!
The importance of securing the slate and preventing it from shifting!
The importance of monitoring and adjusting the dressing!
The importance of keeping the patient comfortable and stable!
The expected recovery time!
The importance of carefully monitoring the dressing and knowing when to remove it!
The importance of monitoring for signs of infection and taking action if necessary!
The start of a new chapter!
The treatment of a fractured foot!
A detailed description of the fracture!
The symptoms of a severely broken foot!
The process of restoring the foot to its normal shape!
The process of applying the dressing and splint to the broken foot!
The importance of monitoring and adjusting the dressing and splint to ensure proper healing!
The start of a new chapter!
The repair of fractured ribs!
The importance of recognizing the location and nature of rib fractures! The importance of recognizing the signs and symptoms of rib fractures!
The importance of proper treatment and care for rib fractures!
The consequences of not treating rib fractures properly!
The ancient wisdom!
The importance of proper nutrition and care for rib fractures!
The importance of being cautious and prepared for potential complications!
The importance of taking precautions against infection!
The importance of covering the wound with lanolin and applying poultices!
The importance of taking decisive action to treat the patient!
The importance of closing the wound and applying dressings to promote healing!
The treatment of internal infection!
The final stage of treatment: recovery!
The next chapter!
The repair of spinal fractures!
The description of spinal fractures! The diagnosis of spinal fractures!
The sign of recovery!
The importance of observing and weighing the patient's condition!
The gravity of the situation!
The power of natural remedies!
The treatment of internal infection!
The importance of rest and relaxation in recovery!
The treatment of bone fractures!
The treatment of bone fractures!
The treatment of broken bones!
The next chapter!
The repair of a wide wound!
The description of a wide wound!
The treatment of a wide wound!
The alignment of a fractured bone!
The treatment of a fracture in the long bone! The application of a dressing!
The alignment of the cavity!
The treatment of an internal infection!
The treatment of fractured bones!
The next chapter!
The repair of a fractured arm!
The arm!
The treatment of a broken arm!
The application of splints!
The treatment of a broken arm!
The treatment of a broken arm!
The second method!
The strengthening of the extension!
The treatment of a fracture near the muscle!
The treatment of a fracture at the elbow!
The final step!
The treatment of an internal infection!
The method for strengthening the fracture!
The final step!
The final step!
A new dimension!
The final step!
The final instruction! The conclusion!
The final verdict!
The final warning!
The final advice!
The final caution!
The final instructions!
The final instructions for the splint!
The final instructions for feeding the patient!
The final instructions for the patient's recovery!
The final caution!
It seems that we have reached the end of the manuscript!
The final topic!
A detailed description of the arm!
A description of fractures in the arm!
A description of the treatment and recovery process!
A description of a more challenging fracture!
A description of a particularly severe fracture!
A description of the treatment process!
A description of a more complex fracture!
A description of a particularly severe fracture!
A description of the treatment process!
A description of the importance of rest!
A description of the treatment process!
A description of the doctor's role!
A description of the patient's situation!
A description of the patient's situation!
A description of a serious injury!
A description of the treatment process!
A description of the importance of understanding the names and positions of the stars!
A description of the treatment process!
A description of the importance of using soft and moist cloths!
A reminder to monitor the patient's progress! A description of a treatment process for inflammation!
A description of the importance of not moving the affected limb too much!
A description of the final stage of treatment!
A description of the importance of nutrition in the healing process!
A description of the importance of patience in the healing process!
A description of the patient's recovery!
A description of the time it takes for the fracture to heal!
It seems we've reached the end of the manuscript!
It seems we've reached the final chapter of the manuscript!
A warning about the importance of gentle treatment for wrist and finger fractures!
A description of the treatment process for wrist and finger fractures!
A description of the treatment process for bone fractures!
A description of the treatment process for bone fractures!
A description of the treatment process for finger fractures!
A description of the application of a splint!
A description of the treatment process for fractures in the outer parts of the hand!
A description of the treatment process for finger fractures!
A description of the treatment process for fractures in other fingers!
A final thought on the importance of careful consideration in restoration!
The final chapter!
The final chapter!
A description of the treatment process for a fractured vertebra!
A description of the restoration process for a fractured vertebra!
A description of the treatment process for a fractured vertebra!
A description of the treatment process for a fractured vertebra!
A description of the treatment process for a fractured vertebra!
A description of the treatment process for a fractured vertebra! A description of what to do if an abscess forms!
A description of the wrapping process!
A description of the wrapping process!
A description of the final stage of the treatment process!
A description of the final step in the treatment process!
A description of the importance of proper wrapping and binding in the treatment process!
A description of the final step in the treatment process!
A description of the final step in the treatment process!
A description of what to do if the bone is dislodged!
A conclusion!
A warning about the importance of proper treatment!
A final remark about the duration of the treatment!
The final chapter!
The title of the final chapter!
A warning about the importance of proper treatment!
A description of the consequences of ignoring or mishandling a fracture!
A description of the process of restoring a fracture!
A description of the final step in the treatment process!
A final remark about considering all the dispositions!
The final chapter!
The title of the final chapter!
A description of the bones in the leg!
A description of the treatment process for fractures in the leg!
A description of what happens when two bones are broken together!
A description of what happens when the smaller bone in the leg is broken!
A description of what happens when the larger bone in the leg is broken!
A description of the final step in the treatment process!
A cautionary note about the importance of gentle treatment!
A description of the surgical process for fractures in the leg!
A description of the wrapping process for fractures in the leg!
A description of the positioning of the bones in the leg!
A description of the application of a splint to the leg!
A cautionary note about the importance of proper treatment in fractures!
A passage about careful observation and treatment of the leg!
The final chapter!
The title of the final chapter!
A description of the frequency and types of fractures affecting the heel, foot, and toes!
A description of the treatment for fractures affecting the bones of the foot!
A description of the process of reducing and stabilizing fractures in the foot!
A description of the application of an emplastre (a type of bandage) to stabilize the foot!
A description of the process of securing the emplastre with bandages and other materials!
A description of the timing and procedure for removing the splint!
A description of the process for treating fractured toes! A description of the process for treating fractured toes (continued)!
A description of the process for treating multiple toe fractures!
A final reminder to consider all the causes mentioned earlier!
The final chapter!
The title of the final chapter!
A description of the treatment for a fractured clitoris!
A description of the treatment for a fractured clitoris (continued)!
A description of the treatment for a fractured clitoris (continued)!
A final instruction on the treatment for a fractured clitoris!
A description of an additional treatment for a fractured clitoris!
A final step in the treatment for a fractured clitoris!
A description of the treatment for a fractured bone in the pelvis!
A final reflection on the importance of understanding and applying the principles described in this book!
A description of the treatment for a fractured penis!
The final chapter!
A description of the restoration of bone fractures when there is a wound!
A warning about the importance of prompt treatment when there is a fracture with a wound!
A description of the treatment for a wound that is bleeding!
A description of the importance of prompt treatment and restoration after a fracture!
A description of the treatment for an abscess (apostema) that has developed after a fracture!
A description of the treatment for a fractured bone that is prominent above the knee!
A description of the treatment for a fractured bone that requires reduction and alignment, using a specialized tool!
A description of the importance of careful handling and alignment during the surgical procedure!
A description of the shape and structure of the instrument being used!
The final description!
The name of the instrument!
The importance of precise positioning!
The process of realigning the bone!
The importance of aligning the bone fragments!
The importance of reducing the bone to its proper position!
The importance of removing the bone fragments!
The importance of confirming the reduction and providing relief to the patient!
The final steps in the treatment process!
The final touches on the treatment process!
The importance of caution when treating fractures! The characteristics of a ligamentous fracture!
The importance of proper wound care!
The use of ointments and medications!
The importance of patience and careful observation!
The importance of patience and observation when treating wounds! The importance of careful observation and treatment!
The importance of prompt treatment and proper care!
The importance of proper care and attention! The importance of prompt treatment and proper care!
It looks like we've reached the end of the manuscript!
A new topic!
The importance of recognizing and treating swelling!
The importance of administering the right medication!
The importance of gentle compression and the use of lead to reduce swelling!
The importance of draining and removing excess fluid!
It looks like we've reached the end of the manuscript!
The importance of restoring the natural function of the affected limb!
The importance of considering multiple factors when treating a fractured bone!
The importance of nourishment and gentle care!
The importance of gentle traction and continued treatment!
It looks like we've reached the end of the manuscript!
The importance of careful treatment when restoring fractured bones!
The importance of allowing the affected limb to return to its natural function!
The importance of cautioning against unnecessary and potentially harmful medical interventions!
The use of medicinal herbs and other natural substances to treat wounds!
The importance of gentle massage and movement to aid in the healing process!
The importance of careful and precise treatment when dealing with complex medical conditions!
It looks like we've reached the end of the manuscript!
The art of setting broken bones!
The consequences of dislocation!
The importance of prompt reduction in cases of dislocation!
The risks of delaying reduction during the inflammatory stage!
The importance of prompt and gentle treatment during the inflammatory stage!
The importance of treating the entire affected area!
The conclusion of the section on dislocation!
The final chapter!
The treatment of dislocation of the jawbone!
The treatment of temporomandibular joint (TMJ) dislocation!
The return to normalcy when the dislocation is minor!
The importance of prompt and gentle reduction when the dislocation is complete!
The importance of gentle and precise manipulation!
The use of cold water and oil to facilitate reduction!
The use of gentle and soothing methods to aid in medical treatment!
The importance of rest and relaxation!
The importance of gentle and easy treatment!
The complications that can arise when the jawbones are not properly reduced!
The dire consequences of neglecting proper treatment!
The final chapter!
The treatment of clavicular dislocation!
The dislocation of the collarbone!
The restoration of the collarbone! The use of manual pressure!
The application of emplasters and powders!
The importance of proper treatment and reduction!
The importance of gentle and soothing treatment!
The reduction of the muscle extremity!
The final chapter!
The reduction of muscle dislocation!
The three ways in which the muscle can become dislocated!
The second way in which the muscle can become dislocated!
The ease and difficulty of muscle dislocation!
The consequences of muscle dislocation!
The importance of taking action!
The importance of recognizing the dislocation!
The importance of a clear and direct touch!
The importance of early reduction!
The reduction process!
The treatment plan!
The treatment process!
The reduction technique! The importance of gentle treatment!
Another reduction technique!
Another treatment approach!
The use of cloths to prevent irritation!
The extension and binding of the arm!
The use of a scale to measure the patient's arm!
The application of the treatment!
The importance of gentle food for the patient!
The gradual reintroduction of food and exercise!
The use of cauterization to treat joint dislocation!
The consequences of failed treatment!
The reduction of the dislocation!
The application of another binding!
The use of baths to alleviate gravity and promote natural movement!
It seems that we have reached the end of the text! The final chapter is titled "Capitol .xxvii." which means "Chapter 27".
A new chapter!
The challenges of shoulder dislocation!
The importance of prompt treatment and the challenges of apostema caut!
The restoration of the shoulder!
The return of the shoulder to its proper position!
The forceful reduction technique!
The two ministers extending the arm!
The arm is rotated and wrapped!
The doctor applies oil to the joint!
The reduction is paused and the arm is suspended!
The bandage is removed!
The bandage is reapplied and the process repeated!
The use of moist heat and gentle friction to alleviate pain! The application of gentle friction to the joint! Corruption has already spread over the linen instrument of bandage, until it becomes clean.
The use of wet compresses to reduce swelling!
We've reached the end of the chapter!
The treatment of shoulder dislocation!
The importance of prompt reduction in shoulder dislocations!
The reduction technique for shoulder dislocations!
The importance of considering the patient's posture during reduction!
The importance of careful follow-up after reduction!
The importance of understanding the anatomy and physiology of the joint!
The treatment plan after reduction!
The use of heat and friction to alleviate stiffness!
We've reached the end of the chapter!
The treatment of finger dislocations!
Finger dislocations can be quite painful!
The reduction technique for finger dislocations!
The post-reduction care for finger dislocations!
The importance of gentle stretching and extension after reduction!
The importance of consistent exercise and stretching after reduction!
The importance of proper alignment and movement after reduction!
The importance of proper alignment and movement after reduction, regardless of the location of the dislocation!
We've reached the final chapter!
The treatment of cervical spine dislocations!
The severity of cervical spine dislocations!
The devastating consequences of cervical spine dislocations!
The devastating consequences of cervical spine dislocations are fully realized!
The incurability of cervical spine dislocations in childhood!
The conclusion of the treatise!
The only hope for cure!
The patient's position during treatment!
The use of wooden supports during treatment!
The role of the minister in holding the wooden supports!
The final adjustments to the wooden supports!
The final step in securing the wooden supports!
The final stage of treatment!
The alternative treatment method! The final stage of treatment!
The final stage of treatment!
The final stage of treatment!
The final stage of treatment!
The final stage of treatment!
The final stage of treatment!
The final instructions for the treatment!
The final instructions for the treatment!
The final instructions for the treatment!
The warning about the importance of proper treatment!
The final chapter!
The title of the chapter!
The discussion on the hip joint and muscle junction!
The discussion on the types of hip joint dislocations!
The discussion on the frequency of hip joint dislocations!
The discussion on the signs of hip joint dislocation!
The discussion on the signs of hip joint dislocation!
The discussion on the signs of hip joint dislocation!
The discussion on the signs of hip joint dislocation!
The discussion on the reduction of hip joint dislocation!
The discussion on reducing recent hip joint dislocation!
The discussion on treating persistent hip joint dislocation!
The discussion on the extent of hip joint dislocation!
The discussion on the extent of hip joint dislocation!
The discussion on the commonality of hip joint dislocation!
The conclusion on hip joint dislocation!
The discussion on reducing hip joint dislocation!
The discussion on reducing hip joint dislocation!
The conclusion on hip joint dislocation!
The discussion on hip joint dislocation!
The discussion on hip joint dislocation!
The conclusion on hip joint dislocation!
The conclusion on hip joint dislocation!
The discussion on reducing hip joint dislocation!
The discussion on reducing hip joint dislocation!
The conclusion on reducing hip joint dislocation!
The discussion on reducing hip joint dislocation!
The discussion on reducing hip joint dislocation!
The final sentence!
The final conclusion!
The final conclusion!
The final conclusion!
The final conclusion!
The final conclusion!
The title of the next chapter!
The title of the next chapter!
The description of hip joint dislocation!
The sign of hip joint dislocation!
The treatment of hip joint dislocation!
The sign of reduction of hip joint dislocation!
The treatment and recovery of hip joint dislocation!
The recovery and rehabilitation process!
The importance of gentle extension!
The final chapter!
The treatment of ankle dislocation!
The nature of ankle joint dislocation!
The sign of ankle joint dislocation!
The treatment of ankle joint dislocation!
The importance of proper treatment when ankle joint dislocation is severe!
The importance of proper positioning!
The process of realigning the ankle joint!
The importance of repetition!
The final stage of treatment!
The importance of patience and repetition!
The importance of gentle handling and protection!
The process of extending and stabilizing the ankle joint!
The process of reducing and stabilizing the ankle joint!
The final stages of treatment and recovery!
The importance of protecting and preserving nerve function!
The process of gradually increasing mobility!
The process of gradual healing and rehabilitation! The importance of proper treatment and rehabilitation!
The importance of seeking medical attention if complications arise!
The end of the text!
The title!
The conclusion!
The importance of positioning!
The process of gradual mobilization!
The process of gradual strengthening and recovery!
The end of the text!
The introduction to a new topic!
The consequences of improper treatment!
The importance of proper treatment and humility! The importance of early intervention!
The importance of proper treatment and management!
The complexity of treating a dislocation with a fracture!
The conclusion and final message! The final words! The classic Christian phrase of affirmation!
