O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, most dear sons, I have completed this book for you which is the last of medical science together with its fulfillment, and I have made an end by its explanations and through its elucidations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forbidden in our region and is alien to all, so its knowledge has been lost and diminished, and nothing remains of it but small descriptions in books from ancient times that have been passed down by hand.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	From this has come error and vanity, and intentions have become closed off, and knowledge is far away.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	Now it seems to me that I must revive it along with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition, explanation and abbreviation.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	And we will come together with the forms of the instruments for cauterization and other tools required for the work, along with their appropriate arrangement, explanation, and preparation as needed.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good master of surgery is found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for one who undertakes this to surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that they know the judgment of limbs, and their forms and connections and separations, and have knowledge of bones, nerves, arms, and their number, and movement, along with moving and resting veins, and where they emerge.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And thus Hippocrates says that the name with its meaning is very important, but it is through action that one achieves little.
et meismement en l’art de main.	especially in the art of medicine.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We tell you in the introduction of this book that one who is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned earlier should beware lest they make mistakes and harm people.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	Thus, I have often seen many who interfere with this science and so abandon themselves without knowledge and without experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut into an abscess of scrofula on a woman's neck, and he cut her carotid artery.
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	which caused so much blood to flow out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I saw another surgeon who treated the bladder stone of an elderly man, and the stone was large.
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	he removed with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it were cut, he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And I saw another surgeon who treated a duke from our land, who had a broken leg with an open wound.
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	And the ignorant doctor holds the fracture in place on the wound with strong bandages, leaving no room for drainage, and leaves it like that until healing.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	And he orders him not to release it.
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And thus, the leg swells entirely, and so does the foot, resulting in its loss.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I was called to go see him, and I hurried to go release his leg.
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	And when I released it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	However, the corruption had already set into the limb, and I could not heal it.
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	And the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the entire limb was lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And then I saw another ulcer that burst and then inflamed due to the malignancy of its nature.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a cancer, when it is purified of melancholic humour, one should not touch it with an iron tool unless it is in such a place that everything corrupted can be entirely removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And for this, dear son, you must know that manual work is divided into two categories:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	That is to say, works where there is danger in many situations;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And I shall demonstrate in each case of this book where there is fear and risk.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Which is why it is necessary for you to be cautious so that the foolish doctor cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	Take up your tools wisely, approach your patients gently yet firmly, and employ the best methods so that by God's grace you may bring them to recovery and earn praise.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	Let the dreadful diseases of severe injury pass.
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Remove your armor from that which makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may travel from this world to the other with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galien says in some of his admonitions:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not treat any illness poorly, or you will be called a foolish doctor.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise in three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapters are about fire cauterization and other medical treatments for acute illnesses, and the chapters are organized from head to toe.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	And the forms of instruments, and the preparation for cauterization, as well as all that is necessary for the procedure.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and cupping, wounds, arrow extractions, and similar things.
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	And this chapter is organized by the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things.
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	And it is organized by the head to foot, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Let us recall the work; it is necessary that I speak of the quality of aid and harm of each temperament.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of aid, and its harm, is a long and subtle art and secret knowledge.
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	And many wise people have spoken of this and agreed upon it.
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	And their words suffice for me, for I fear length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that cautery helps universally all constitutions where there is matter, except for two constitutions:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	That is to say, hot constitution without matter, and dry constitution without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In the combination of hot and dry constitution with matter, some argued and said that cautery is of great help;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	And others said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	That cautery is not beneficial for illnesses that arise from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to treat illnesses caused by heat or dryness;
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	And he who says otherwise claims that cauterization provides great relief for hot and dry illnesses arising within the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the constitution of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree to these words.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And in any case, let not those who have not experienced it intervene, but rather those who understand through long practice the chapter of cauterization, the diversity of human constitutions, and their dispositions and the causes of their illnesses, as well as the occurrences and time intervals.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	Of other constitutions we have no fear, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the surgeons assembled and agreed on the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my son, that fire cauterization is one of the secrets of healing, and of greater benefit than burning medical cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not burn beyond the member which it heats, and harms no other part if properly used.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	Burning medications pass from one member to another, leading to ailments that require swift treatment.
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	And on occasion, the patient may even die.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fires for their height and because of the goodness of their substance do not burn, if there is no excess to them.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And this I have found through experience and the length of my service and study in the art, and it is based on the truth of things.
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	and for this I excuse myself for the length of my words, because it does not please me that I take away from you the secret which is contained in the fire, and the quality of the work, how it cures illnesses of the body, as the philosopher says when demonstrating.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	take it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, my son, they agreed on when the cauterizations should be performed and chose careful timing.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the harmful things coming from below are driven away by cautery.
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And especially if the cauterization is necessary for severe pain, acting quickly to prevent a greater evil from befalling the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And never think of it, dear son, as some foolish physicians do;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	For the illness that is healed by cauterization has no relapse;
et il le dient ensi;	And they say thus:
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	But it is not as they believe, because cauterization is only a medicine that changes the complexion, and dries out the humors causing pain; its value lies in the speed of its action, and the virtue of its work and command.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And it is possible that the illness comes sometimes according to the patient's complexion, and the location of the illness and its strength;
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	and in him are gathered the excesses through eating flesh and similar things unless cauterization is administered where there is little excess and moisture as with tooth extractions for pain and other such things which do not cause a recurrence of the pain.
mais ce avient poc.	but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and it is indeed so;
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	but they do not believe that cauterization is more effective than medicine, but their understanding is false, and cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we administer various treatments for a disease and they are ineffective, then we apply cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore it is clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancients said that cauterizations with golden instruments are more beneficial than those of iron, and this was not due to the quality of gold but rather because of its high value.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	And they said that the skin of the cauterized area does not become discoloured, but this is not true because I have tested it and found that it does happen in some men.
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	And gold cauterizations are better than those of iron, just as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	However, when you heat a golden instrument, you do not know when it is hot by its colour and it quickly cools down.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if one heats it too much;
si font au feu;	They are burned by fire.
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And thus there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we employ fire cauterization which we have adapted to our practice.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Here we have ordered this chapter from head to toe so that the information is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	Olive oil cauterization.
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauterizations are beneficial for moisture and cold affecting the brain, and there are two types done due to a disease called "soda", and because of excess humors descending from the head to the eyes, ears, causing numerous dreams, toothaches, sore throats, and especially all diseases arising from cold such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a solvent medicine three or four nights, according to what their condition, moisture and habit can bear.
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	And then read again the patient's head.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then have him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on top of yours.
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	After that, place the root of your palm onto the root of his nose between his two eyes.
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And where your two thumbs meet, make an incision; then heat the cautery called 'olivare', of which this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And place it on the marked spot with ink, then move your hand up and down and squeeze firmly while rotating.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	Then lift your hand slightly, and feel the place again to see if you can detect the bone underneath even a little bit;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	And if you cannot see it, start the cauterization again until you can see the bone as I instructed;
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	Afterward take a piece of soft cloth, put some softened cotton inside it, place this on the spot and leave it there for three days.
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	Then put moist cotton mixed with butter on top of it;
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	Leave this in place until the inflammation has subsided;
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating the wound with a preparation called 'Tetrafarmacón', until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And the ancients say that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purges itself.
et por ce si aide mues.	and for this reason, aid is provided.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they said one must leave the cautery in place until a part of the bone is burnt, and then remove that which has been burnt from the bone, and it shall be healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And others say that the cauterisation should be left on top, and pressed so hard that it penetrates to the bone, just like the 'vertoil' women put in their hair, for this helps the humours to flow out.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and one should leave the wound open for a long time.
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	afterwards, it must be cleaned and sealed.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two types of cauterization do not seem to me to be good at all in every way, except for some people who have a sense of fear;
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and it seems to me that I should leave it alone;
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	because the head [of the shoulder] is weakened by continued natural movements, as we witness in other limbs;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and likewise when the head [of the shoulder] of the patient is weak by nature, and the first type of cauterization seems more beneficial and effective to me, that is what I use in my work for their well-being.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	From the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When any head [pain] becomes chronic and lasts a long time, the patient must use herbs and pills called "cochies," as well as purgatives for the head, eye remedies, and poultices;
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	And if you perform the cauterization as we have previously mentioned, and it is ineffective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take heed if the patient's shoulder is of strong constitution, and that it is not too cold.
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Then cauterize beneath the aforementioned cautery point slightly.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	Afterwards, cauterize each corner of the head up to the bone, as we have previously stated, and cauterize where it is called "temples".
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	And it is there that one places cupping glasses.
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	Adjust your hand so you do not see down to the bone.
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	The sick person feels much greater pain in this cauterization than with others, and I will speak of it later.
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	and the cauterizations of the horns should be more subtle than those for the middle part of the head, and this is the method:
dou cautere dou chief	For cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When sudden pain occurs in one part of the head and the illness spreads up to the eye, and the skull has been cleaned by purifying medicines, and other treatments that I mentioned earlier for this condition have been done, but with no improvement:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	then treat it with two types of cauterization, namely the medical method and that using fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	Medical cauterization is when you take a piece of elm wood, remove the bark and cut it into two pieces that fit together at the skull joints, then split open the temple where the pain occurs in such a way as to be able to place the elm beneath the skin.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	and when it is answered, bind it well and hold it thus for twelve hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	then undo the binding and treat it with fresh garlic juice, leaving the wound like this for two or three days;
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	then apply a cotton cloth soaked in butter as often as necessary.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment, heal it until it is fully cured;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	and if you see fit, apply some of the caustic medicines I have written about in the twelfth chapter on caustic medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is performed according to this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery, which has this shape.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	It is called "close" for the reason that its head is shaped like a bell with one curve and has an appearance in the middle.
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and place it on the painful spot, hold your hand and slightly twist it, so that half of the tip of the needle is burnt;
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and an abundance of blood flows out.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	Afterward, place cotton on a piece of cloth, and leave it on the spot for three days.
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then put moist cotton in butter, and then treat the spot with ointment until it is healed.
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	and if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare", use its entire tip, and be careful not to cut the artery in this old migraine.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat a migraine as we have previously mentioned in the classification of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the aforementioned cauterizations with fire or iron are not sufficient for him, then you must heat up the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white.
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	make a small cut with the knife over that place, making a line half an inch long, and remove your hand once, and press the knife so you do not sever an artery nor reach as far as the bone.
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	and be careful not to hit the jaw bone when you press it down, and let no air enter that would make him choke or bring spasms upon the patient, and protect against the dangerous evacuation of blood from an artery once severed, a cut which is feared especially by those unstudied and inexperienced;
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	And leave the work halfway through.
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	But I will tell you how to staunch blood when the artery is severed, and I will show you where it is mentioned in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that these cauterizations are not sufficient for the illness and the patient is still suffering, cauterize it again in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	And if you observe this, apply the cauterization we mentioned in the chapter on arterial extraction, using the double-bladed cautery tool.
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And these cauterizations are better and more helpful than those.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	From the pain in the ears due to cold.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ear due to cold, and one has applied solvent medicines and other treatments as we have mentioned before, but the pain persists, then heat this cauterization point called "poin", which takes the following form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	Point around the entire diseased ear, or around both ears if the pain is in both, and move slightly above the root of the ear once you have marked the place of incision.
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	And make X points around each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards, treat the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	For the torture of the mouth...
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	A wound that must be treated with cauterization is none other than those caused by flux, as we have said in the classification of diseases;
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	And do not apply cauterization to similar wounds that result from dryness and damage to nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you treat this type of wound that results from flux of pus and purging of the head and gargles, and it does not improve, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauterizations:
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	One is at the root of the ear, another slightly outside the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	Place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and apply it above the ear's head slightly below the skull's horn, and another one on the temple as long as a thumb.
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	Leave the cautery in place until half of the heart is burnt.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	It has the same shape as the tool we described before, but it is slightly finer and the knife should be a little thicker.
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, leave the wound as I said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but there is no improvement, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauterizations.
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	Two above the two corners of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one at the location called "vessel," as we said before, and the last cauterization on the mouth of the stomach.
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	And it is treated as we said before.
de litargie	Of lethargy.
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this illness, give the patient large herbs and pills that cool the brain.
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	After treating all other parts of the patient's head, apply the mustard poultice to their occipital bone as described in the chapter on plasters.
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	And this is the manner of cauterization:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	If you do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If the wound is treated thus, it is good.
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	And if it is not, perform three cauterizations within the head, descending to the neck, with a span between each cautery.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	Treat it as the others, but if you see a need for adjustment, and the patient is suffering, perform one cautery in the middle.
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if necessary, place two others on the two horns [of the cautery instrument], and treat until it is healed.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	and let the cauterization be that which is called 'olivare', as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	From the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	The head must be cleansed of hair and according to what we have said before;
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	After cleaning the head of the patient, then cauterize on the head and each horn [of the skull], and behind it, three times along the spine of the neck;
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	And if you need to do more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers greatly from a severe disease, then treat with four cauterizations along the spine of the back;
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	And let it remain until the deepest part of the heart is burnt, and lift your hand.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	After the treatment is completed, make sure it has healed, and use the cautery method called 'olive oil', which we previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptic should not undergo fire cauterization unless they are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first modify the brain with herbs and other treatments as we have mentioned in the section on treating severe patients who cannot tolerate medication.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is a child who cannot endure this, have them gargle and chew often with nourishing meats to soothe the brain.
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	After that, place the ruler on the middle of the head, and perform the cautery as we have mentioned before, applying it to the vessel and each corner.
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if the patient is strong and suffering, perform cautery as I have described for those with paralysis and bodily weakness, on the spine of the back and neck, using olive oil in the manner mentioned earlier.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, apply the subtle cautery as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the cause is due to melancholy, stemming from excess or corrupted moisture and thick phlegm, then apply cautery with thin irons as we have mentioned for those suffering paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause is melancholy arising from excess descending into it, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink so that their brain is cleansed, according to what was mentioned earlier in the classification.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After rising, lift up the patient's head;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	After making a well-made flaxen pad, shaped like a circle, place it in the middle of their head.
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	And have the patient lie down with crossed legs, ensuring they are well-supported from all sides.
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	After presenting the flaxen pad, apply some old goat butter.
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	Heat it with moderate fire so that the skin can bear its application.
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	Remove the circle from inside their head, allowing it to cool down.
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this for the patient once every week, along with other good treatments, until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	And if you wish to cauterize with points, make many points throughout the entire cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This manner of cautery moistens the brain equally;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	And then apply moist cotton soaked in butter and chicken fat.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes' awe
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awe first comes to the eyes through the signs I have mentioned in the section above, then begin and give the patient something cleansing for the head, protect it from all moisture, and make them sweat in a bath many times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	After this, instruct him to lift his head and cauterize in the middle of the scalp, performing two cauteries on the two temples if both eyes descend together, or one cautery if it descends individually.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	Cover all the veins and arteries below the heart during the entire cautery process, ensuring that the cauteries are long, extending across the width of the temples.
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	Beware of excessive bleeding, and if you observe too much blood loss, stop the bleeding with as much force as required but no more.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you, concerning the extraction of arteries and incision, the caution with which you must stop the bleeding.
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	and sometimes one performs cauterisation at the space between the two rear bones.
dou cors des larmes	The body of tears.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the veins of the eyes are old and accustomed, and they lie above the paths, or next to the arteries that appear outside the head;
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and one sees that these are cold phlegmatic excesses, then apply the cautery which I mentioned at the beginning, to the eyes from below.
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	Perform the cautery in between the head, two cauteries above the two temples, and two cauteries at the space between the two rear bones.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	et if there is more need, carefully cauterize it above the eyebrows with small cauteries.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	From the body of tears through the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you treat him according to what we have said in the classification, and he does not benefit from it, then give the patient to drink three nights' worth of cock's urine.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	after the king, cauterize his head in the middle of the olive-shaped mark;
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	and make two 'clavilis' cauteries on the two temples, a little below the hairline.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	be careful not to cut the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the 'clavilis' cautery:
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the pupil of the eye is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery which is called 'olivare'.
de coi ci est li forme:	from which this takes shape:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you wish to do so, make two cauteries on the two temples as long as the eyebrows are.
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And do not leave your hand there unless until a third of the paper is burned, according to the manner I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair which pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	Sometimes it happens that the eyelashes turn inwards, prick the eye, and a cauterization is performed according to two methods:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	That is to say, with fire or burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they grow back evenly, then place the patient in your care;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	After, sir, on paper above the eyes make a drawing that is like the leaf of myrtle, and let it be the beginning of the sign from among the hairs.
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then put moist cotton in egg white and parsley mush on the eye, then heat the cautery with what is here its form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After cauterize on the drawn image that you have signed, dot by dot many times until the heart is burnt at the spot.
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	And the sign of success in this work is that you see the paper curling back and the hairs rising to the height of the eye.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	Then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then put moist cotton in butter until the scalding is removed.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of healing until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if after this, the hair grows back, and the skin is softened again, then repeat the cauterization on the same spot as before, just as you did initially;
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	If the hair falls out, cauterize it until the skin rises to its natural position, and is even, without irritating or pricking the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The burning medical cauterization is when you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow large and evenly, then make a parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf;
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	Then take French soap and quicklime, one third of each, and grind them well together;
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	and let it harden so that it does not cool down, then spread it on the mold you have made like a myrtle leaf, and place some from the eyes on paper.
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	and if the disease is only in one eye, you should operate on that one, and if it's also in both eyes as well;
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and place underneath the eye cotton moistened with egg white.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	and let the patient's head be in your lap and put your index finger on the medicine, and press it once and move it around every time the patient feels a tingling sensation from the medicine, for they will feel a burning sensation as well.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, remove the medicine with your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the tingling has passed, remove your finger from the water and check if it has risen, and look to see if the paper has also lifted as though raised by fire or incision.
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And if it is so, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If not, apply more medicine to the place where it was opened for treatment, until your work is even and your eyes are precise.
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place moist cotton soaked in butter until the burned heart is covered, afterward treat the area with an ointment called 'diaphenes' and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to, be careful in your work with great vigilance so that the medicine does not touch the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes soft afterward and hairs grow in the eye, repeat the treatment on that spot where it has softened due to the paper, just as you did before.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Afterward treat it until it is healed.
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And you should know that the eyes of men differ in size and smallness, and according to this, be your restraints;
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and may the correct path never be denied to one who studies this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	on the treatment of fistula by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit it, then you must perform cauterization in this way.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to place their head on a healthy shoulder;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	Hold the minister's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or twist his head;
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	Afterwards, apply moist cotton dipped in egg white or parsley juice onto the eye;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	After that, heat the cautery iron which is such:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and it is shaved at the head like the shape of a vaulted arch, together with which the cauterization should be performed;
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	if you see, it should be pointed from one side of the head to the other, and if you notice, it should also look like a tent;
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	but nevertheless, this one who is shaved is better for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	Afterwards, press the fistula if it is open, and drain out the pus, then dry it.
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and if it is closed, operate on it, and draw out the pus forcefully.
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	Afterwards, apply the hot cauterizing iron above it, and hold your hand over the cautery with your thumb on top of the eye, so that your hand does not slip.
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	and place the cautery in the grease of the eye, and it corrupts.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you reach the bone with the cautery at the beginning, it would be beneficial.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If not, restart the cautery again once more, and another if you need it, then leave it for three days.
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	after, place cotton soaked in butter on it, and treat the affected area with drying ointment until it is healed, but if forty days pass without healing, apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed.
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and treat it according to what comes in its chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	There is also a method of cauterizing a fistula, which none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Examine the fistula, and split the site open.
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	after place in the fissure one subtle probe of which this is the shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	Et they make it to the quantity of one third of a pound;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	Et hold your hand or paw firmly, and do not move the patient at all, so that the molten lead does not run into their eye;
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	And it is necessary to put on the patient's eye moist cotton with egg white or butter;
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	The lead enters the place of the fistula, and it heals with wonderful health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, you must administer the perforation to the nail, and restore the fistula to the body of the nail according to what is necessary in its proper place.
des crevaices en levres	Cracks in lips.
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often occur cracks in lips called "hairs," especially in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as described in the previous sections, and the treatment is ineffective, then heat a small knife-shaped cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And place cauterization in those crevices until it reaches the bottom.
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards, treat the area of the cerate until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	on abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess forms at the root of the throat or in the uvula, on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it causes decay and swelling, becomes inflamed, and turns into a fistula.
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you treat it as we have said in previous sections, but it does not heal:
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	then you must apply cauterization according to the size of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	after the botch or hole of the fistula, hold your hand so that the hot iron reaches the bottom and behind it;
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this once or twice, after treating it as we have said in previous treatments, until it is healed;
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	And if he is cured thus, it is good.
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	And if not, you must uncover the site and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in this chapter.
dou movement des dens	Through the movement of teeth.
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it is not effective, then place the patient's head on your lap.
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	Afterward, heat the cautery, which will be formed as follows: place a cane over the tooth;
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	And put the hot cautery inside, holding it there until the patient feels the heat reach the tooth's root.
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	Afterwards, lift your hand and resume the cautery according to your will.
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	Afterwards, fill the patient's mouth with salty water, hold it there for an hour, and rinse vigorously.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	In this way, the moving tooth becomes confirmed in its place, and the softened gum is restrained, while any corrupt moisture dries up.
de la dolor des dens	From toothache
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When tooth pain arises due to coldness, whether from cold air or water, and medicinal treatments are ineffective, then cauterization is necessary according to two methods:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	One method involves butter cautery, the other fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Butter cautery is performed thus: take butter from a cow, and heat the end of it with an iron or brass spoon;
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	Afterwards, take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a pen, soak it in melted butter, and place it on the aching tooth until it cools down.
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	and so it often happens that its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you wish, moisten wool and cotton in cold butter, and place it on the aching tooth, and apply a hot iron until the heat reaches the end of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The cauteries with fire are such that you take a rod of iron or copper, and it should be thick enough so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth;
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	after heating the cautery, from which its shape will come afterward, place it on the tooth and hold your hand there until the cautery has cooled down.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	do this often, for the pain will be relieved on that same day or the next morning.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary for the patient to fill their mouth with good butter during the preparation of this cautery, and then let the cold go afterward.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make the cautery for whatever jaw you want, and according to your ability;
et c’est li forme de la caine:	and this is the shape of the chain:
des scrophules	scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When scrofula is of cold moisture and phlegm, and it does not respond to digestive medicines, then heat the red-hot cautery which follows after in this shape, and make two openings for the smoke to exit on the other side of the cautery;
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	and apply the hot cautery to the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the base of the abscess.
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to its size, leaving it in place for three days.
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	and put moist cotton smeared with butter on top to remove the burn.
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	afterwards treat the wound with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When moisture prevails over the channels of the body, especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then the patient must first be evacuated through dissolvant medications.
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	Afterwards, apply cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful not to go beyond that point or burn any part of the heart except a little bit.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After treating it with fire cautery, perform another cauterization at the neck's junction with the spine, and use the clavicle-shaped cauterizer as described previously.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat the site just like we mentioned before until it is healed.
de la toust	Of the cough.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	Whenever all lung diseases are caused by cold dampness and the patient has no fever or dry cough, and it is a chronic condition, apply two cauterizations on the arm above their armpit.
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	And another one in the middle of the chest between two nipples.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	Let it be that the cauterization is done with what we call a "clavicle", according to the shape described before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see fit, perform cauterization by pricking with the point, as was described before in the treatment of ear disease;
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and let the points be up to XXX or thereabouts.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the site as previously stated, apply three-row cauteries in this manner:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And for these cauteries to be lighter, do three at a time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	Of the shoulder dislocation:
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	Afterwards, remind the patient of their illness on their back and side.
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	then lift up the heart, which is inside the thorax, with two fingers of your left hand.
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cauterization iron which has two handles; this is its form.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	cauterize the heart until it is pierced to the side, and the form of the cautery will consist of four pieces.
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	and for this reason cautery is performed with the three-pointed cauterizer, which creates six shapes of cauterization.
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and the nerves, according to their subtle nature, require the form of the three-pointed cauterizer:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	and at times it is adjusted on this one nerve so there are eight cauterizers.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	Then place the cautery tool and grind it with charcoal;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	afterwards let the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until it is properly healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated again soon after, then immediately perform a cauterization on the thick part of the collarbone, or many cauterizations at once with intensity.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joints are closed, and moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When cold and excessive moisture arise in the stomach to such an extent that they remove it from its normal state, and catarrh is multiplied within him, and with usual treatments he does not improve, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on their back, and extend their legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	make three cauterizations afterwards: one below the heel with an area equal to that of a thumb, at each corner of the square (the four corners are the locations for the first cautery), and two cauteries outside these two sides so that the shapes of the cauterization form triangles, and there is enough space between them such that they do not touch when they cause suppuration;
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	And let the cauterization be so thorough that it reddens the two sides of the heart, and let the shape of the cauterizations be according to this form without any adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you wish to cauterize with a large cauterization on the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	And for those who fear this type of cauterization, cauterize by pricking and bleeding on the stomach in that place. Prick according to the quantity you wish to introduce;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	Then cauterize with a total of six "pricks".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the previous condition, once it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When the liver experiences pain from cold and moisture and excessive windiness, to the point that it is removed from its natural state due to excesses;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	The sick are cured of what we have said in division, and it does not benefit them, so the patient must be reminded of their ailment.
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	And for the third sign, apply cauterization in this manner and with this design, and this quantity on the liver, outside the hypochondrium, where the man's ribs come together.
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	Allow space between each cauterization equal to the width of a finger.
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	Let the length of each cautery be that of your body, but do not press too hard with your hand throughout the entire process.
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	Only burn halfway through the heart, and let the patient stand upright on their feet.
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if he cannot, let him lie down, and stretch his legs, and lift his arms;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the method:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if your intention is, then cauterize these cauterizations with the knife, if you are skilled and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn through the entire heart, as it would cause drying of the whole body;
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and do not let it reach the mouth, as the heart is very delicate in that area, and you would cause drying for no reason.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you wish to know if it is within the flesh of the liver or the membrane:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	If it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too strong.
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	And if it is in the membrane, they feel excruciating pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And so when this treatment is needed, the patient must be reminded of it on their head;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	Then lance the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a rod, of which this is the form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	Cauterize the wound with the hot iron until the core is burned, and go up to the surface, so that the pores are all closed.
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment, treat it according to the treatment of linen cloth until it is healed.
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And it is not suitable for anyone other than those who have studied extensively in the art of medicine and whose hands these illnesses have been cured before.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then one may operate boldly, yet it seems to me that leaving [the wound] be is better.
dou cautere de pleuresin	The cautery of soft wax
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancients said that one should make several cauterizations with the roots of aristolochia, and in this manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take one long root of aristolochia, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and also as thick and as long as your two fingers;
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	Oil the root and place it over fire. Cauterize with one large cauterization between the forearm and neck, and two smaller ones just below in the area under the beard;
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	Two more cauterizations between the fifth rib and sixth rib, sloping slightly backward;
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	and one cautery between the breasts, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on either side of the breast outside the cautery that is between the two shoulders;
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	and do not squeeze hard with your hand, but apply pressure gently, as if perfuming.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And some ancients said that no man should use a fire cautery like the barber's, heating it and placing it between the ribs until it reaches this abscess;
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	and if pain is felt, just as we said for the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work, there is fear that the patient may die now, or a fistula may form which cannot be healed.
de la mice	From the mouse.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the sections on treatments, and it does not improve, then there are three types of cautery which are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	Of which there is one way that you should make three cauteries, or four, in a line according to the length of the mouse, following the shape of the liver cautery we mentioned before;
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	And do not rush your hand with the cautery, let the patient lie on their back attentively.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	And another method of cautery is to heat the cautery with two cords, just as we have demonstrated in the case of shoulder dislocation.
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Lift the heart which is towards the armpit, where the patient's wound faces left, and let the elevation by which you lift the heart be according to its height, along the length of the body, and let the cautery be placed across the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After placing the two flaming cords so that they pierce through to the other side of the heart, then pull them tight, and thus there will be four of them.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see fit, cauterize with a three-ner cautery.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has gotten rid of the inflammation over a long time, and this is better than the other treatments mentioned above.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not useful for treating dropsy, except in the manner known as 'ascites'.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you treat it according to the methods we have mentioned in our divisions, and your treatment does not bring benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations around the swelling, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back along the spine, and one towards the breast;
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and let the cauterizations be close to the base of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	Afterwards, leave the cautery open to drain pus over a long period of time, and do not cease treatment of the patient after the cauterization.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	And healing will come sooner, combining these two intentions with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The form of the cautery for the belly shall be the clevis we have previously shown.
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	And that for the back is an olive-shaped tool, according to what has been set out above.
de l’enfleure des piez	The swelling of the feet.
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical, and are full of yellow water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger.
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	And lift your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not go in too deeply, lest you puncture the yellow water, and let the cautery be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	Afterwards, make two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the little finger.
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	And let the long cauterizations be below the knee in front and the other behind, halfway down the leg.
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	And leave the cauterizations untouched for a long time without treatment, until it comes out.
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After curing other treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	By the house
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When the distension of the belly comes from cold and moisture, such that the retaining and digesting virtues which are in the stomach and intestine are weakened, and cannot be cured by natural means;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	And you see the patient in great suffering and of strong constitution, then make a large cauterization on the stomach according to what has been discussed previously for the stomach cautery, with the circular cauterization.
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	And four subtle cauterizations around the navel with each cauterization being slightly smaller than the other, and two on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, perform a cautery on the wrist, one cautery on each arm, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	For the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When hemorrhoids are located at the fundament, whether there is one or more, and they are ancient, consisting of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and have been treated as we said in previous sections, but to no avail, then perform cauterization:
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	On the spine of the back, where it is entirely outside the medulla oblongata and gradually tapers to a point in a triangular shape, perform one cauterization beneath the bulge two inches.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	And if you think their stomach is cooled and the meat is not cooking, and one can see swelling of the face, then perform a large cauterization on the stomach as mentioned before, another one on the liver, and yet another on the spleen with all three cauterizations being fastened together.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	And leave the open cautery for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, let the wound heal.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	Of fleshiness which is named 'thelul'
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you treat the anus, heat up the cautery which resembles a plane, and then place it fully ignited on top of the treated anus;
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	And leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the opening of the wound, from which the blood flows out;
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	Do this once or twice, and if there is much of the anus, cauterize each part as we have said;
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	After the treatments with ointments, let them heal until they are cured;
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on alum, it will provide greater relief.
de plaie mal curee	Of a poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When a patient cannot endure any cutting or opening, as we will explain in this place, then such an illness arises that can only be cured by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When someone has a fistula and it is filled with pus and corrupt moisture, you should treat them with great care and ensure that you know the entire extent of the abscess.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After heating the cautery which looks like a razor, insert it into the fistula according to the size of the tube that has entered there, and restart the cautery until those corrupt parts are burnt, one by one, or twice, or three times, depending on the amount needed.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	And take care not to burn the nerves which are close by, or large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	If the fistula goes into the body of the bladder and the intestine, avoid those areas and only perform the cautery on fleshy tissue, while taking care that it does not penetrate.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	Afterwards clean the wound until it is dry, and if the area has been dry for a long time and matter has been removed, then know that the wound is completely healed.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	And if the matter is not removed, know that the bone has been pierced, and it has corrupted the marrow.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	And thus as one of these we say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	Of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When pain from cold arises in the reins, and there is severe flatulence, and it does not resemble a woman's condition, then you must perform a cautery on the reins, one side and the other, with the clavicle cautery we mentioned earlier;
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	And if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a row, which will provide greater relief.
de la vessie	On the bladder.
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then cauterize outside on the bladder, where the arm hairs begin, on the right and left side, with each cautery as long as a thumb's width.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	and do this cautery outside the back, or two if you need to.
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	and let these be the clavicle cauteries according to the form previously mentioned.
de la marris	Of the marsh.
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the womb is cold and moist, and does not allow conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends come late;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they arrive, one feels great pain.
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	then it is necessary that one do three cauteries around the navel, as we have said for the bladder cautery, and two outside the back.
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and let these be the clavicle cauteries, as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the hip.
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When the viscous moisture descends into the hip joint, and due to this it moves out of place, and the sign is that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	And you will find the place of the nerve origin, then you must cauterize the patient on the hip joint with a circular cautery, and make an incision in front of the joint around the bone as it turns, so that the bone is within the circle;
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	and let the cautery be such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	If this type of cautery is not present, make three olive-sized cauteries, and let the cauteries be as perfect as all hearts;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat him until he is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain in the hip.
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes to the hip joint, caused by cold and moisture, and the patient has been treated as we have said in the previous section but is not healed, and the illness is long-standing:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	Then it is necessary for you to purge the patient of excessive foul-smelling humours with pills or other suitable good medicines.
Aprés li fai cautere;	After that, cauterize him.
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	And the method of cautery is according to two methods:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	That is to say, by means of all burning medicines together, and by fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Cautery by fire is so according to many methods, of which some are such:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	That you cauterize on the hip's box with three triangular cauteries in this form, making them deep and large, leaving space between each one equal to a thumb's width, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped;
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle above the head of the hip, so there are four of them arranged like this:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you wish, use the circular cautery we previously mentioned for the hip's dislocation;
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	But do it in such a way that the circles encompass the whole hip, and all the flesh of the heart be burnt.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	This is the method used for sciatica when the pain is confined to the hip and does not extend down to the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it comes down to the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations where the patient says the pain is felt, and one cautery above the ankle, slightly more on the left side.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	let the cauterizations be made with a spatula, and burn off any excess fat around the heart;
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	and if the patient feels that the pain extends down to the toes or nearby, cauterize where they feel the pain with three points or four at the 'point' cautery.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if necessary, make more [cautery marks].
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	and if it seems that the pain is below the knee and towards the thigh, make a cauterization with either a spatula or circular tool, and be careful in all your cautery marks to not leave them so long as to burn nerves and large arteries, and cause more harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who had a fire cautery performed on their ankle, and they let it be until the leg was completely swollen, as well as the foot, and all of the feet were pierced and corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After an abdominal operation in which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, apply a fire cautery to one part and then the other, following this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the wise men said about the cauterization of the hip: thus is its nature, make such an iron tool and let it be at the top as thick as a navel of a date fruit, or a little less, and [let] it be serrated with each tooth being as wide apart from one another by the distance equal to that of a bean.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	and let the serrations be cut in two parts, and also like knifes, and there is one well-made iron handle.
et c’est li forme:	and this is its shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And it should be heated until it is glowing red and emitting sparks, then place it over the affected hip bone, and rotate it along its healthy side.
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	et le cauterizes une fois, puis retires le cautère et laisses [la plaie] trois jours.
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	ensuite fais un emplâtre de beurre, et laisse la plaie ouverte pendant longtemps ;
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	après le traitement, jusqu'à ce qu'il soit guéri.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasis dit que nous utilisons peu de ce cautère à cause de son aspect, et si peu l'utilisent.
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	et pourtant c'est un bon cautère, quiconque peut le supporter, mais laisse là où la peau se durcit.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	Les cautères médicaux ardents sont faits avec un instrument à deux branches où descend le fil de la porte, soit en cuivre ou en fer, sur une paroi longue, et à une hauteur de deux coudées, avec entre chacun l'espace d'un pouce.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and are exposed from below and above, and they join together like this:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	Then place the box of the hip on the patient lying on their healthy side, and quickly press your hand firmly onto the box of the hip;
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After that, pour the two circles of warm wax, heated over one firepot, in between them and leave it there for an hour; let the patient endure the heat and burning sensation.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For they will feel stinging as if from fire.
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	And when the stinging sensation has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip gently, leaving it like this for three days, and apply butter until what is blackened by the burning has gone.
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	Et leave it three days until it decays straight away.
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this would be the final aid after the treatment of ointments until it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, make him an instrument that holds tightly according to what you did on the hip equally.
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And this is the way of the hot instrument, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, equal parts of each, grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	Where there is a small opening so that the point of a lancet can enter.
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	And place over it another vessel well sealed, and put on alkali and heat it with gentle fire until there are two fingers of liquid above the powders when you have gripped it in your hand.
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	And let it sit until water drips down to the lead and tin or can plumbebate, then take all that water, and pour it over heat and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And then there will be much water, which is administered in many works of medicine and cauterizations of other limbs.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it performs another work like fire, and has other medicines that are used for cauterization such as the hip with wax, honey, and hot soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a treatment in which a man was cured of hip pain and sciatica; he suffered greatly, and says that no other treatment was used, and that he was healed immediately after this cure was performed, and he bathed as follows: as it is taught hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And it says to do so that you take fresh and dry green litharge, and grind it very well with one pound of grease, and apply it onto the hip, thigh, and leg where the pain is, then bind it.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And let it sit for three hours, depending on how long it takes until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then have him enter the bath until his body is a little heated, and make him get into bed, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such medicinal cauterization unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat dung, it helps greatly;
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and the cautery must be done in such a way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take woolen cloth and grease it with old oil, and place it on the hollow between the big toe and the one next to it, which is called the "fossa".
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After that, take dry goat dung and heat it until it becomes charcoal, then place it on wool and leave it until it is extinguished.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	Repeat this process again, and continue doing so without ceasing until you feel that it has reached the hip, and the pain has ceased.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	and this manner of cautery is called "goat cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	From the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether due to falling, being struck, excessive strain, or similar cold substances spreading through it, no type of cautery is suitable except for that which comes from an influx of cold material.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	It is necessary that after the patient has been cleansed of fetid pills or other similar remedies, which are placed on their back where the pain persists, three lines should be marked with ink, and in each line V cauteries or more should be applied depending on the strength and tolerance of the patient;
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	and these cauteries should be made according to the method called 'point' cautery;
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	and if you see fit, apply III or IIII clavicle cauteries in the middle, according to this pattern;
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	This illness often affects young children, the initial signs are narrow chests when they rise and fear;
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	And you find in the last vertebra of the spine, as we do in ours, a resemblance that arises on other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this one and cure it, cauterize with the clean cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery touches every part of the vertebra evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see it, cauterize around the vertebra with the cautery making two or three lines, and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treat the place until it is healed according to what we have said, and take care not to apply cautery on a hump that is over a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	Of the pain of joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When joint pain is caused by moisture that spreads to each part of the body, and when pain occurs in the foot, which doctors call "podagra" specifically, and when it is due to coldness and medicine cannot treat it, it should be treated with cautery in the following manner:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Make several cauterizations around the ankle joint, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a need to apply it to the front of the foot, perform a cautery at every point where one would make a "dot" cautery.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains extend up to the knees and other joints, which happens frequently, apply three or four cauterizations on each knee or every other part, always using the olive-shaped cautery.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you need to do more, then make more incisions, but keep your hand away except for when the tip of the heart's spear is burning.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knees and back, apply the cautery as we described in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pain is in the hands, make incisions around the wrist two lines long.
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	and if there remains no pain in the fingers, make incisions on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	and if the pain reaches the arms or shoulders, cauterize each affected part, and provide good care to the patient and administer medications.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you provide good care and cleanse the humours, he will be healed by God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	From a fracture of the sacrum
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When a rupture occurs in the groin, and the testicles descend into the scrotum, if it is a recent occurrence, on the day you treat it, ensure he does not eat.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	And let him use things that loosen the belly, so that the feces may descend from his abdomen.
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	After this, have him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his breath until the nostrils are repaired, then pull them towards your fingers, and cauterize below the rupture onto the wrist bone, and make an incision in the form of half a circle above the body.
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then heat up the following instrument for this procedure:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	As long as they are white and cast no shadows.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Afterward, reset the balls to their place.
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	And have your assistant hold his hand in place so that it does not return backward.
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	and work well the thighs of the patient, and place a cushion beneath him, with a strap on the thighs, and another [strap] above his hips to hold down his hands;
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	then place the cautery over the mark with all your strength, and hold it straight and press until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat again until you come to the bone;
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and be careful that the lip does not jump when you apply the cautery;
que tu ne le brulasses;	so you do not burn it;
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and so the patient does not die from this, or other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is necessary that the child's cautery marks be subtle according to their size, and for adults they should also be large according to their measure.
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	After three days, treat the site of the butter cautery until the scalding is gone;
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	After the treatment with other ointments until it is healed, let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the wound is fully sealed.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is important that their nourishment be sufficient for a long time, so that the wound does not break open when they attempt to go into rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after forty days, when they wish to get up, have a well-made bandage ready for them, and wear it for another forty days.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	and have good rest, let him work little and guard against too much drinking or eating, and from shouting too loudly;
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	and when he follows this treatment, he is entirely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will now say after this the treatment for cutting, in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Of the rupture of the belly.
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When worms come into other stomachs and are known to be there, and you see that they no longer grow, if you wish, apply a hot iron cautery according to its quantity, and burn one-third of the heart.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	after treatment according to what we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	and none of the ancients have said that one must cauterize with a three-angled iron according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But first mark the place of insertion and make a line across the width above the rupture, then another one outside, and hold your hand in the middle throughout the whole procedure of cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and milder.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and medical treatment is ineffective, then it must be cauterized with a cautery called "point", and the cauteries should be applied according to the length of the limb, its size, weakness, strength, location of torsion, and the severity of the pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	if he is healed from the first cautery, it is good.
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If that name should be repeated for another cautery on it, as this custom is such that it must change to the member which is closest, therefore you ought to perform cauterizations until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	surgery
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The month is aided sometimes by cauterization for great help, especially the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	When you are about to perform the cauterization, be cautious if the illness is in its early stages and if it has been treated according to what we have said regarding treatment type. If the disease does not subside or remain dormant, and you doubt that corruption could spread throughout the patient's body then apply 5 cauteries on their head:
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	One at the nape of the neck and another towards the forehead near the end of their hair:
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	And two on each temple, with one behind on the occipital bone.
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	And leave your hand there until the cauterization reaches the bone, and until the scabs come off so that the vapors from the thick humors can escape.
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	And cauterize it on the wound according to what is required.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the injury is dispersed everywhere;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and it clearly deteriorates, then you must cauterize it with these cauterizations we have mentioned on the head, and one cautery on the neck spine, two cauteries on the back spine, one large one on the upper back, another nearby, and two on the shoulders.
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and two on the elbows, and two on the heel tendons, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and in the hollows of the hands.
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	And beware of the nerves located above your heel so as not to burn them.
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And sometimes you apply the cautery to the bone of the wrist, and another on the stomach bone, and one more above the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	Know that the more you use cautery, the more help you provide, and it benefits them.
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	Understand that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as a healthy person would because their body is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cautery be large and small depending on the limbs and joints, according to what you find in the handling of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment, apply flour paste to the wound with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When inflammation arises in a limb and is treated with medicine, oils, and poultices but does not heal, then apply cautery to the limb according to its size.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	and let the cauterization mark be a little inward from the tip of the heart;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And sometimes one must make a cauterization mark on the hand, foot or back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thereby removes the inflammation.
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	and in any case, do not intervene if you are not knowledgeable about the limbs and the paths of the nerves that move the body.
de albaras	Of erysipelas
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the disease called "albaras" is cured, and medical treatments are of no use, then cauterize it with a perfect cauterization mark, according to the size of the tip of the heart, until the white spots are removed, and its colour changes.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	Then treat with flour of vetch and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and the blood of pigeons and larks, one part each;
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And mix everything together, bind it with cloth, and apply to the wound until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of cancer with cautery.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When cancer appears at its beginning, and you wish to stop it, cauterize it with a circular-shaped cautery, all around the circumference of the cancerous growth.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	Moreover, wise doctors say that one should apply a cautery to the middle of the cancerous wound;
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	But I do not think this is good, for I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, which I have already seen happen a few times.
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And rather it should be cauterized around the edges with the so-called 'circular' cautery, as we have previously mentioned in the section on types of cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When someone has an illness called "adubelati," and it delays death either due to the excessiveness of what it does or because of the patient's water when they are decrepit (meaning very old) and have little blood, or because of the weather;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you want to hasten their death:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	then cauterize it with many small cauteries, pricking around the area;
aprés le laisse ensi.	Afterwards, leave it be.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierce through the entire cautery, heat up the cautery with what it is made of:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	Place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the heart, and let it be such that the patient feels the cautery externally so that the course of corruption is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Afterwards, treat until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The fire cure with iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than the wasting away of limbs, for it eats away at the limbs just as fires consume dry branches.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this illness in a place that can bear fire cautery, then heat the cauteries, both small and large nails, according to what is appropriate for the area or the severity of the illness;
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	After the cauterization of all parts, make sure to remove all the corruption, leaving nothing behind; ensure that everything corrupted is extracted.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Leave it for three days, then apply to the cauterized areas a soft ointment with oil until all scalding from the fire and corruption is removed.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	Afterwards, treat it with an ointment that produces flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if after three days no inflammation appears, it's good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	If not, restart the cauterization on whatever remains corrupted.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this inflammation has sometimes been treated with medicine instead of fire cauterization;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	However, fire cauterization is of greater help; I have already mentioned the treatment with medicine in the section on inflammation:
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	boils that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times there occurs in the foot a disease that is called "claws" according to our understanding, and it is a faulty bulging thing that wounds the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterization for this disease has two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cautery, and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Cautery of fire is that you heat one cautery like a feathered pin, and it should be made of good iron with the measure to fit the nail from all sides, and have fine edges.
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	After you place the heated cautery on top of the nail, turn your hand around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail.
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	Leave it like this for three days until it starts to discharge pus.
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Then make a poultice of wild mallows crushed with salt, and leave the poultice on overnight; the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its root.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wounded place with an ointment made of fat until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are converted by force in the body, and occur often in hands or feet, then you should treat them with hot water cautery.
et est en teil maniere:	et it is in such a manner:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	Take a cane of brass or iron, or a feather from an owl's wing, and place it on the nail and wart, that is to say for warts.
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	Place the cane on it so that it touches all around, then put a drop of hot water on it, and hold your hand firmly, pressing your hand while turning it so that the edge of the cane reaches the root of the nail, and allows the hot water to penetrate deeply down to the root.
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	Let the patient endure the stinging of the hot water for an hour.
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	Then leave it like this, and it will be uprooted with all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another until you eradicate all those which are within the body, then treat them with ointments that produce flesh.
li cure dou trembler	The doctor for shaking or trembling disorders.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When some shiver from cold due to nerves, or quartan fever, or other causes, you should apply four cauterizations on the spine of their back, one between each vertebra.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and one cauterization on the foot, and one over the stomach with an olive-sized cautery.
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	Allow them to tremble, it will hasten recovery from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	Pustules that stink or smell foul.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes one notices breaks in the body with baths or stinking pustules which come from large corrupted substances.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	When they first appear, it is necessary to cauterize each head of the pimple.
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	A subtle cautery with myrtle wood, whose tip is seized by fire, or with the root of long aristoloche, or with a lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And sometimes they cauterize at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and it prevents them from growing any further, but the excess from which they come is broken down, and they are healed.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is severed.
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	There are often great outpourings of blood from the artery that is cut open at the wound that comes to the surface, or during the incision of an abscess, or when cauterizing a limb, and in similar situations.
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and it is quite difficult to staunch (stop the flow of blood).
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And yet, when this happens to someone, quickly place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and press firmly until the blood is staunched beneath your finger, with no more drops flowing out.
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	Then put the olive oil cautery to the fire, multiple small and large ones until they are all red.
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Then take one, either large or small depending on the wound and the place where the artery is exposed, and place the cautery onto that vein while holding your finger on it, keep the cautery there until the blood stops flowing.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it sparks when you lift your finger above the wound, and the cauterization is complete, then quickly take another of the cauteries from the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not stop doing one after another until the blood is staunched.
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	Beware not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and that other mischief does not befall the patient.
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	And know that when blood escapes from the artery, it cannot be well staunched especially if the artery is large, unless it is by one of the four methods we have mentioned.
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with thread, or by applying medicine which has the power to staunch blood;
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	and bind it tightly and hold it still.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	That which will bring about stanching by binding tightly with bandages or applying hot objects, or other similar things, is of no avail unless it be done promptly.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if it should happen to anyone and they have no mirror or medicine present, one must place their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it well until it is staunched over the wound and over the vein;
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and do not move the finger, but keep it moist with cold water often so that it is very cold until the blood is frozen and thickened and staunched;
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	and prepare in advance all that is needed for cautery and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book on surgical procedures.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases that require fire cautery or burning medicines, and we described the operations, their causes and instruments as well as the shapes of cauteries.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	And I have set forth this chapter on the head down to the feet, and I will proceed in this same way in this chapter so that what one seeks may be more easily found.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, as I begin this work, dear child, it is important for you to understand that in this chapter there is greater danger and fear than in the previous one about cauterization, thus requiring even greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	Where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For there are many ways in which people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	So there are those who become so fearful with their illness that they die quickly due to the confusion caused by their condition and its great severity.
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And we must fear these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	Among them there is one who will give you his advice and tell you:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am healed";
et li maladie est despitouse.	But the illness is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	You should not give in to those who come to you with this manner but put more trust in your honor than in your greed and do not act rashly but wisely regarding what you are sure of and can gain rightfully.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	Use prognostics and diagnostics for treating your patients so that their health can be restored.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And this will help you to gain a good reputation, glory, and long-lasting fame.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Tres chier fil, Our Lord give you good understanding and righteousness, and may he wish to inspire you with the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or je vous ai ordonné ce chapitre en le divisant par chapitres, selon qu'il est présenté avant celui sur les cautères, que je vous ai déjà décrit du haut de la tête jusqu'aux pieds, afin que vous trouviez plus facilement ce dont vous avez besoin.
dou chief plein d’aigue	tête pleine d'eau.
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Know that this disease often comes to children during birth when the midwife grips the child's head too tightly.
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	And sometimes it happens for reasons that are unknown, as yet.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this disease occur in adults, but it brought death to all the children that I have witnessed.
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And for this reason, it seems best to leave the work of treating such cases to others.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw that child whose shoulder was full of water, and his head swelled each day until he could no longer bear it;
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and the moisture increased so much that he died, and this moisture had gathered beneath the bone above the shoulder-blade, between the heart and the bone;
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and the procedure is such if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a wide incision in the head;
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and let it be as long as two thumbs, so that the moisture drains;
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and see here the shape of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscesses are larger, then make two incisions in the form of a cross, according to this shape:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see signs of the skull being open at the sutures on every side, and water spurts out when you press it with your hand inside, and this has not responded to treatment:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	So you must make three incisions within the head like this:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After the incisions are clean with gauze and powder, apply wine and oil, and leave for five days.
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Then unwrap it, and treat the wound with dressings and ointments, allowing the head to remain extended evenly, while providing the patient dry meat from a pig without moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	Another method of incision is to look where the swelling of the abscess appears, and its collection of pus.
car aucune fois est elle devant;	For sometimes it will be in front (of you).
aucune fois derrier;	For some times behind.
aucune fois en destre;	Never once to the right.
et aucune fois en senestre.	And never once to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Cut therefore at the place where the abscess appears, and treat the fluid accumulation, and open it according to your ability.
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	And take care not to cut an artery.
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	If there is bleeding of blood, the patient may die due to loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of rheumatism
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When someone has a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or throat, and it is an old illness that does not benefit from medical treatment, then the last resort is cauterization along with cutting the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	Therefore, when you must cut the veins, it is necessary for the patient to lean back their head.
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	After you rub the place with a coarse cloth until the arteries appear, then choke the patient with all your might using this cloth.
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	Then look where the vein beats, and the bones of both are behind the ears, and they are covered with skin.
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then mark the bones of the neck, then strike both with a sharp spatula twice as thick, so that the cut reaches the bone, and it is made on the wide part of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see it, push the spatula under the artery and cover above it, cutting as deep as necessary across the wound.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is cut open, blood spurts out continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not open to the touch, you must measure three finger-widths, then mark the neck and cut down to the bone.
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	And the amount of blood to be let out is six ounces, and perhaps a little more or less, depending on how much the patient can bear and the fullness of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	Then look at the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If it remains on top of the bone without a splint, remove it so that hot abscesses do not form there; then open the wound and bind it, treating with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	Of migraine.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migraine comes with a cold and due to the moisture of tears and heat in temples and an old persistent headache and similar things, and it is medicated through various medical treatments but nothing helps, we remove the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the way of arrow extraction is as follows: have the patient grasp their own hair from their temples and feel for the artery that beats in the temple, for it shows clearly by its pulsation, except in some men who are too cold-blooded.
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	And if it is recessed, let the patient grasp their own neck with some fabric and then rub the area with a rough cloth, moistening the spot with hot water until the artery becomes plainly visible.
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	then take the spatule of which this is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it upward with pincers, and remove any membranes that are underneath on each side;
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	and if the artery is thin, turn it to the tip of the hook, then cut it from that part according to the quantity of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut off, the blood cannot flow out everywhere all at once.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	and draw out blood for six quarters, down to three;
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	and if the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with a strong doubled silk thread, so that blood cannot come out before the wound heals and flows continuously.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	Then cut the superfluity that is between the two ligaments at the same time, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a knife-like cautery down to the bone until the head is cut.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And it is a dangerous procedure if the patient has no fever and they are of hot constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For cauterization helps to dry up moisture:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	because it is of greater help for moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries, one should fill the place with old cotton and put well-made bandages on top;
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and when one releases them, let it be cured with dry medicines that promote flesh growth and with bandages until it is healed.
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if you sense blood flowing from the artery while operating, quickly cut it off with a cauterizer, or use a mixture of vitriol and alum to stop the bleeding;
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	If you don't have the aforementioned available, place your hand directly on it until the blood is frozen, and pour cold water over it until the bleeding stops, keeping it tight as required;
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	What is easier and lighter in extracting the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery into two parts, but make sure the cuts are wide to retain heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too thin, they retain less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	There should be a thumb's width between the two knives, and once you have joined both sides together, place the heated iron on top until it reaches the bone, then cut the vein into two.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	and they must be separated between the two shoulder joints for it is not completely welded with this cauterization.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	Tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears of the eyes are flowing down from veins that are above the top of the head, and no medical treatment is beneficial, and you see the patient's face turn red, and they feel a sensation of trembling across their forehead;
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and if their skin is taut and moist so that the hair on the eyelids has fallen out, and the eyelids are burned and scalded by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	The ancients called it "contusion treatment," and what you must do for the patient with this ailment is to shave the hairs from their forehead, then make three incisions on the forehead evenly spaced along its length;
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	et soit l'une des fendures ainsi comme deux doit tout emmi le front en avalant aval jusqu'à neif, et les autres deux aux côtes par-dessus les poitrines, et te garde de l'incision des artères qui sont aux côtés par-dessus les poitrines;
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	et éloigne ta main de la continuité des deux mâchoires, et que chaque plaie ait une profondeur de trois doigts en travers joints;
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	et aies préparée une pièce d'éponge avec beaucoup de chiffons secs pour essuyer le sang, puis introduit l'écope pointue en deux parties dont voici la forme:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	de l'incision qui est sous le tempe jusqu'à la deuxième incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	and scrape out all the heart that is between the two clefts to the entire surface that is above the bone, then make another similar incision from the middle one until you reach the other second [cleft], and then extract this spatoulina.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Insert into the first slit the instrument which is called a 'cultellarium', and it is very sharp on one side, but soft and not sharp on the other side, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	Place the sharp edge towards the flesh near the core and the soft edge towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle slit.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes so that the incision is continuous until you reach what appears of the heart, and then make another similar one in the middle cleft up to the other exterior [one];
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	and then extract the blood equally, and express the place for taken blood;
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	then put in each cleft a tent of old cotton, and place on it dressings moistened with wine, oil, and egg white, and ensure that no hot abscesses come to the surface;
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	On the third day, untie the bandage, and apply a large compress of warm water, then treat it with basilicum ointment mixed with rosehip oil, and other remedies used to treat wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	Of eye rheum.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When someone has chronic inflammation of the eyes with recurring episodes, and you notice their eyes becoming sunken and small, weakening their vision, and the eyelids burning;
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	And their hair falls out, and there is pain throughout the head, and the patient sneezes frequently;
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	Then you should know that these symptoms and this inflammation arise from multiple causes, and the only true remedy is as follows:
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you should instruct the patient to lie on their back, then make a big incision in the middle of the forehead, and another from ear to ear.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	Start by making an incision from the left temple to the right temple, cutting down to the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples which move to eat
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is exposed, wipe away all blood with a sponge, then dislodge between the two lips of the incision and place old cotton and linen bandages;
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	then bind moistened cloths soaked in wine and oil on top, and beware of warm abscesses;
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	when it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat it with drying agents that promote healing.
En teil maniere:	In this manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	take two parts of wheat flour, and four parts of colophony, and make an ointment.
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	And apply medicine to these wounds to generate flesh throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stuffing of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	Whatever falls into the ears is one of four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	Or grain, or beast, or mineral stone like iron;
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	Or seed, such as beans, peas, lentils;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Or flowing things like water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When a stone or any other object that does not fit the ear falls into it, and cannot grow in the ear, place the ear under sunlight.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the stone, apply a few drops of violet oil or oil of cicely, then administer its extraction.
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	And have them sneeze with cumin, and block their nose when the sneeze comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear.
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and lift the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Many times one sneezes due to this treatment;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	and if there is no sneezing, they administer an extraction with subtle pincers, which are shaped like this:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If one sneezes from the pincers, it is good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	if not, they administer an extraction with a small subtle curved blade;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	and if one does not sneeze from that, they make a reed cane and insert the end of the cane into the ear hole forcefully, then plug what is around the cane with soft wax so that no air can enter alongside the cane.
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	Then treat the fire severely, for often it comes back as we have said.
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	And if it does not come back in this way, take glue and cover the instrument with it as birds are caught, then put a piece of cotton around [the instrument].
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	Then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and treat the fire.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if it cannot be treated with all the methods we have mentioned, then hurry to open the ear rather than an abscess so that heat and spasms may come.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	The manner of the incision is such that you first bind the patient's head with a headband and draw some blood according to his strength, then make him sit between your hands and turn his ear upwards, and make a small cut in the root of the ear at the fat or tissue underneath.
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and let the fissure be like a crescent moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck swiftly towards your mouth;
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat [the wound] until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if there are grains present and they swell, administer their removal;
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if it cannot come out, use the spatula very gently in this way:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	And bring about an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not attempt this if you think the grains are moist due to ear moisture, until you have made many small incisions;
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	then extract [the grains] with fine forceps and by sucking, as we have said, so that the extraction is alleviated.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case of water that falls into the ear, the patient should first sneeze and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let them lie on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it should jump out because of this, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	If not, then take many stones according to the length of your thumb, thin and light, and warm them slightly over the fire.
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	And place the patient's ear over an opening, with their feet apart on either side, and strike another stone upon the stone in the ear.
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	Do not stop striking stone against stone until the water comes out completely, and thus it will all come out.
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	And if you see this, take a reed and insert one end into the ear, and blow on the other end with fire until the hottest part of the reed is burnt.
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Then repeat this process with other reeds until all the water flows out, as we have said about stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the extraction of a small creature, such as a flea or similar, treat it as described in the section on divisions.
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	But if it is of a large body that one can feel, then prepare an extraction with pincers.
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	And this is the lightest thing to remove that could be in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the extraction of worms lodged in the ears, when you treat it as described in the section on divisions and deal with the distilling process, and the treatment is not effective, then one must examine the ear in sunlight.
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	If no worms appear, then remove them with fine pincers; and if none are seen, take a thread of the same kind.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it is narrow beneath and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And press the most subtle part of your head into the ear according to the amount of suffering felt by the patient, then suck strongly along the entire chain.
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey and come out, then plug the chain with cotton as I have said for stones.
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	and if they do not crawl out as we have said, then administer the distillations that ancient doctors have proven in the treatment of worms, and you will find them in the treatise on distillations.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	and then distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all these tools, of which this is the shape as you see it.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And whether it is made of silver or copper, place it narrow below into small holes, and above cover to distill.
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	to compress within the distillation with an instrument made of copper for this purpose, and if you wish to take a razor and wrap around its point like cotton.
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	then pour in your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you wish from your vessels into the tube, and let the tube be in the ear.
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	then insert the razor with all its cotton inside, and press your hand steadily until the oil is distilled or reaches the end of the ear.
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	and let the patient smell it inside [the ear], and be its distillation either warm from the fire or fresh as you distill into the ear.
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And ensure it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stuffing of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born without an opening in their ears.
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	And the same thing happens to men due to blockage of a wound or wax inside the ear, and this blockage sometimes becomes so severe that it cannot be seen.
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	And at times the obstruction appears outside of the opening, which is clearly visible.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	The one that becomes severe and cannot be seen is quickly treated in multiple ways, and for this, it is necessary to expose the patient's ear to the sun.
et regarde dedens:	And look inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	If you see the operation revealed, work with all this spatulum which is its shape:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And let it be sharp and cutting in front and behind, all evenly so that it does not wound the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	If the operation is on the ear lobe or body, hold it with subtle pincers and gently cut away until all flesh is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the suppurations are complete in the ear, take a delicate, lightweight razor and warm it slightly over fire, then place it on the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you sense an operation causing the patient to feel itching when heard, pierce lightly and be careful not to damage the ear's nerves.
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	Then place in the ear a tent according to the width of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do this on any day when the wound is healed, or take a tent-shaped dressing and dampen it in pink water, then powder it with ground vitriol.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And if you see the ear swollen, it is necessary that you remove the dressing and apply another, dampened in a paste made from rose oil and wax, until the swelling has gone.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is loss of blood, immerse a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and employ other remedies that stop the flow of blood as described in the chapter on distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the paper flesh
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	This remedy for rheumatism which comes in paper rolls for the eyes when they are moist and dry, it is necessary that you spread them with tongs and pincers, and remove the rind from its roots using a spatula.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Then place ground vitriol on it.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if you strip off the skin, cauterize it with a subtle lenticular cautery, and afterward the cauterizer moves following the incision.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	and often return, whenever something remains from their roots;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned away and do not return.
de la gresle	of the hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Often come in the eye papilla things that appear gritty in its form and hardness, and for this reason, this illness is called "glaucoma," which is an assembly of thick moisture on both sides of the papilla.
li ovraiges est telz:	The work is such:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	Take care if glaucoma moves from one side to the other, which is a minor thing to know;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Making it thus wide, then lightly scrape each part, then take it with pincers, and cut it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	If you cannot cut it without piercing the skin slightly, it does not greatly harm the patient.
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	And if the wound is large, join it with a suture, and treat it until it is healed.
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	And if it is small, do not use force, for the ointments will restore it quickly and generate flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the hailstone descends into the ear towards the upper part, turn it over and extend the hailstone with pincers, cut it and press from one side to the other.
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	and if the paper is separated by incision, it matters not;
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	and when the cataract is couched, apply warm water to the eye, and treat the place from which matter proceeds until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	from the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinach is a grease which gathers on the paper-like membranes above, and this happens more often in children than adults, greatly affecting their eyes, causing catarrh in the mornings, and they cannot bear to look at the sunlight because tears well up in their eyes;
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	and for this they lay on their faces thereafter, and sleep with their paper-like membranes beneath their eyebrows moistened by the vapour and appearance having covered them in exinach which appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press down on the place with your fingers and feel the exit point between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the manner of treatment is such that the patient places his head on your lap.
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the form of a circle according to the quantity that extends beyond each part, then place it on top.
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	press with your hands on either side, so that the excess is gathered within the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	then make in the middle of the moisture with the sharp spatula a slit no wider than the wound made when opening a vein;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and cut the skin perfectly until you reach the excess;
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	and in various arrangements, moisture appears from the slit, like the form of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Extract it therefore with one piece of padded cloth between your two hands on the outside, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out.
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	And take care not to adjust it in the groove, lest you come into contact with the entire spatula up to the eye, and cause an injury.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the bone does not emerge at the beginning of the groove, slightly increase the size of the groove gently until it appears.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	Then extract it as we have described, then wet the cloths in warm water and place them on the site, and bind firmly.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	For such people who grind herbs and place them on to corrupt the moisture that has remained.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to a hot abscess, treat it with soothing emollient plasters until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	hairs of paper.
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When hair grows in places other than where it is naturally intended to grow and becomes ingrown, this can be detrimental to the eyes, leading to various ailments such as habitual tearing, softening of the eyelids, and discharge, ultimately resulting in eye damage.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	and the treatment is carried out according to four methods:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	by means of fire cautery, or by medicinal means according to what is presented before in the chapter on cauterization, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by canes, as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	Place the patient's head on your lap, then turn their left eye towards your left hand;
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	if it faces inward, that is good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	if not, insert a needle with thread into it;
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and let it be near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs grow or above these hairs, and pull the thread through to the other side, then turn it with the back of a razor;
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	Then make an incision beneath the paper-like membrane under the hairs, cutting all of it away until the large bone (humerus) and its projection is exposed.
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	Remove the thread and place beneath the membrane a small tent made of cotton and linen, then suture over it an anchor-shaped figure as in myrtle leaves; however, be sure that its size fits your intended elevation of the divided membrane.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if necessary, cut away large portions of the membrane according to how softened it is.
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	Then make an incision across the entire humerus along both lines you have marked, starting from its large projection to its smaller end.
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	and be one of the incisions close to natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the uncinus into one of the two corners of the heart, and then remove the skin completely;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	then bring together the two lips with a seam using a needle and any fine woolen thread, wipe away the blood, and remove any excess thread on both eyebrows or any sticky substances if you wish to perform this.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	and if not, have no concern for it, then leave the seam and threads until three or four days have passed.
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	then treat the wound without a seam using drying and binding substances, for paper lifts upon the healing of the wound and its reunion, but a seam is dangerous (as the ancients said), and these are works without fear.
et si a une autre maniere:	and if it is done in another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and you should bleed the skin to produce a shape that is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have described, with three ounces of salt removed according to this form:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cut this which overcomes the small forces equally according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you are unable to hold the forceps, and the thing is not even, then take a needle with one thread, and place it in the middle of the figure;
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and place another thread near the larger lobe, and the second thread near the smaller one, and join between your two fingers the threads evenly;
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin that you have bled, as we have described, then join the two lips of the wound by suturing, and treat it until it is healed;
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	and if an abscess forms at your incision site, soothe it with a cautery and similar soothing ointments.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	and sometimes the hairs of the scrotum become twisted:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	then you must use what we have said about incision.
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but the suturing on both sides is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment of canine bites follows this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	You must turn the scrotum inside out according to what I have said, and then make two incisions per side, as well as two fine threads of suture as long as the width of your little finger.
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and hold both shoulders of two parts where you are holding the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then join one and the other delicately onto what is above the paper of the eye, and stretch the two chains of the two parts formed;
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and leave it like this for a few days, and the skin that is stretched will die and blacken and rot until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it takes too long, apply force to it, then treat it until it is healed.
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	and when the wound is healed, if the paper is lifted, the hairs will no longer prick.
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	and this is the form of the two chains that you will make according to this figure, and with these measurements in length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	The works are such that you take a fine needle, and insert into it a soft and delicate silk thread;
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	Then join the heads (of the bones) together and knot both sides delicately, and let the length of the thread be one palm in length.
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	Then arrange another fine silk thread inside the wound, tie the ends of the threads together tightly.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	Then place the patient's head on your lap.
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	And be by the sunlight so that the work is illuminated, for it is delicate and fine work. Then insert the needle into the wound all the way to the root of an adjacent hair, piercing through until you draw it out above a natural hair.
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	then extract the hair up to the shaft, and push into the shaft that hair, whether there is 1 or 2 or 3 or more.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	then extract your hand until the hairs come out fully into the shaft in the paper with its natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the shaft is intact and the hair does not come out with it, you will treat the shaft from below along all of its length that you have instructed, until the shaft comes out through the hole above and you see it by the eye's vision;
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	then treat the shaft and its length, close the eye and leave it closed for 2 or 3 days until the hair dries in its place and flesh grows over it;
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	and if the hairs are small, accompany them with a long hair from their natural growth pattern, and raise it along with the one you leave [alone], until they elongate and then remove it.
de la porriture de l’oil	From the corruption of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or the scurf arises in the eye, it occurs in two ways:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	one naturally, and the other unnaturally.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And this occurs suddenly due to a wound, or from a cutting instrument or cauterization, and through similar procedures.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the way of treating it is that you split that weld [wound?], and separate its lips, and place inside linen bandages, and bind it until it heals.
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	and it is not suitable that you use in its treatment things that dry out and constrict [the eye?].
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before.
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but use softening substances like fenugreek.
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and the decoction of water or other liquids with flax seeds is cooked, and ointments made from melted diazion are mixed into any oils, and a poultice is prepared; treat this condition as described above.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the secret of your treatment is that you must be cautious not to let it heal in a form different from its original shape.
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And these treatments we have mentioned are only meant to address this illness so that it does not return in its original form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	from flesh which comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease, which is dislocated and truly called "axacrati", is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	Accidents arise from wounds, fractures, cauterization, and similar procedures.
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	And the way to work on it is as follows: take a needle with doubled thread and insert it into the flesh, piercing from the left armpit to the right, so that the thread comes out through two points of the flesh.
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Then stretch the flesh above the entire needle and strike it with a broad spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the appearance of the flesh returns according to what is required, it is good.
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	If not, take a razor and place it in the wound, turn back the flesh, and make two incisions on either side inside the flesh.
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	and let the two sides of the incision be placed at the two corners you have marked, and make these angles so that when they are assembled together the shape resembles that of the Greek letter "I";
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	then remove that flesh according to its quantity from underneath the skin on either side of what follows the paper, then join these two parts together, and sew them with a woollen thread;
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with the softening medications as we have said earlier, and dress it with bandages until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the wound comes from a split or a stitch or a burning, then you must make an incision in full underneath the skin of the flesh and according to what is described above.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	Then sever between the two lips of the wound, as I said;
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	and one must perform the operation according to the form of the illness, as it is very diverse in its forms, and wise doctors devise every means within their power to restore the shape to its natural form;
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	and the patients themselves, according to what is required of them in terms of operation and instruments in various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	Suddenly from paper...
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this adhesion occurs in the hands of men in such a way that the paper over it is stuck with the white part of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must put the tip of a razor underneath the paper and lift it up;
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	and extend them to the pincers, so that you cut off what is hard with the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too cutting, so that the patient does not suffer from the spatula being too sharp and injuring the eye.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	and let your incision, where you peel away the assembly, be light, so that the paper returns to its natural form.
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	and is cleansed all that assembly, and they sometimes make an eye-wash with salt water, and add fresh water, and collorium.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	then place between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and put on the eye wool moistened with egg white.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	and after three days, use collorium and soothing things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	Know that a nail (or claw) is of two types:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	One is nervous and resembles hard skin, and another that is not nervous but resembles white frozen moisture, which when touched with iron and treated with pincers, one cannot do so;
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	And both of these appearances start towards the upper eyelid, and grow piece by piece until they cover all of the eye's vision, light, and movement.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the manner of incision is that the patient should place their head in your lap, then open their eyes;
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	And lift the paper to your hand, then coil the nail with small pincers, extending it above;
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	Then take a needle, and insert a horse hair, or cow hair, or oxen hair, and strong thread.
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	Double the tip of the needle slightly and insert it between the nails, piercing through with the entire needle, then tie the nail with a thread and stretch it upwards, scraping away all the hair on the side of the nail that covers the grape-like growth and the sinew up to the head; cut off what remains at the root of the armpit using a subtle spatula and small forceps, leaving the natural flesh in the armpit so that the body's fluids do not flow out through the incision as is customary.
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	And sometimes stretch only the nail with the spatula, and with the thread, as we have said.
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	Then you must flay the entire spatamil, soft from which it is so formed:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And take care that the spatamil does not touch the fleshy membrane and tear it, nor should the marrow be pierced;
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	After the incision, pour a pinch of ground silphium into the eye, and apply collar made of litharge, leaving it until the next day;
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it with what is necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, nor can the hooks enter it, this similar case of a nail has often been treated by physicians;
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and they grow as I have described in the division, and if you see it cut, operate on the eye of the patient, and take a light spatula with a sharp edge according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	and lift the eyelid carefully, and if you see that it doesn't reduce [the inflammation] and the reason presses you, then distil into the eye a collar made of litharge and red copper sulfate, which is finely ground, and plug up the eye until the next day;
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	then restart the other work according to this same operation, until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing opposes you in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then milk it, and treat first the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh in the eyelid causes great harm to the eye, then suspend it with an onion, and cut away part of it but not all, so that a body of tears doesn't come out.
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	Then drip into the eye red colloidal mercury which is made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	Some men's eyes are born with a red scar, which covers the pupil and spreads over the whites of their eyes to the outside corners, resembling a red rose.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	And the procedure is that the patient places their head in your lap, you then open up their eyes and roll back all of this flesh with suitable hooks and hold it firmly.
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	Then cut the first layer of flesh and keep on cutting with a razor until you reach the end, being careful not to damage the eye during the procedure.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	And the incisions should be made with a spatula, as we have mentioned before in the chapter about nail incision and small forceps to remove them, as this chapter shows.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	and when the incision is complete and all flesh removed, apply ground linseed oil or if you wish to distill red mercury and similar corrosive medicines, place on the eye outside a cotton pad with egg white so that it is covered from an abscess of heat.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	and if nothing remains there, and warm blood rises above it, and you suspect a hot abscess, leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with soothing things for a hot abscess.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	then return to your work until it is healed, and so do likewise whenever flesh has been removed from the eye in this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	However, you must ease the treatment of each weak eye according to natural ways.
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	And for accidental wounds, in ironwork;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	Nor should you thrust your hand into any of these works until you see that this limb is capable of bearing the treatment.
des voines des eulz	the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Below the veins are red lines that cover the eye, obscuring its sight and weakening it daily.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	Therefore, it is necessary for you to first examine the eye, in what state it is, whether it is healthy or diseased, and that there are no other ailments beyond this.
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	Then treat it as follows:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Instruct the patient to place their head in your lap, then cleanse those veins as thoroughly as you know how, and ensure that these cleansings are doubly subtle according to this method:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	Et let there be two ounces by degrees in the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	Then cleanse those veins thoroughly with the fingers, and wipe away the blood one hour later, until you see the veins of the eye become strong again.
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	And be careful not to injure the eye with the sharp edges of the spatules, and perform this procedure at noon in front of the sun, and be very diligent in your work so as not to cut anything but those veins.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	And when you have done this, then distill into the eye green and red collyrium to corrupt what remains of the film.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you cannot gather all these things at that hour, then make a plaster over the eye with soothing substances for the pain of the eyes, and leave it there for some days until the pain is eased and the hot abscess assured, then begin again according to this method until it is healed.
et c’est li forme des forces:	And this is the form of treatment:
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the eye's fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The doctor calls them "arissati" when they are fistulae:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	When you treat it with cauterization and medicine for a burning ulcer as I previously mentioned, and it is not healed, if there is pus in it that you must open over the abscess, leave where it should die, and drain all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then remove all the instrument by which it was formed.
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	It is called "aspre chief," and it should be made of iron going to the head, and pointed like a file as it currently appears:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	Place it on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that corruption is removed.
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And do this once or twice, then apply astringent medications to the site.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the wound has healed over and grown flesh, and the body of the vein is also healed, remaining so for forty days without reopening or becoming abscessed, and no ill accidents occur, know that it is cured.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If not, there remains the procedure of reopening the fistula to the sinus using this method:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	And it is that you reopen the bone a second time with an iron instrument and caustic medications, and when it is reopened take a trephine of this design, and let the tip of the bit be three-sided, tapering to a point as shown here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	Then place it above the bone near the armpit, and move your hand away from their eye by one thumb's length, then turn the drill completely until it pierces through the bone and they feel it because the wind passes through if they hold their hand over their nose.
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	And then apply the place of dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the scar forms and hardens the places, it goes to the nose.
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	This is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eye has opened fully without any obstruction or reduction of breath, you must bind the patient.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	Then clean it, then apply cups or hot iron without wounding to suck, then place on the eye a poultice made of aloes and incense and sarcocolle, then strain the eye, and apply plaster over bandages and cloths.
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	and the manner of bandages is such that you take soft enough bandages, and fold each into four, then place one upon another according to the quantity that the eyes need.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	then strain it through a hard and tight bandage, and repeat the cups to suck without bruising;
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	then remove the cups and keep the eye tightly closed day and night, and if the ties loosen, you must strain it greatly.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	afterwards, remove the ties after day and night, and if you see that the eye is restored, it is good.
se ce non;	if not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it starts again, apply the plaster, cloth dressings, bandages, and cups until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	From the rupture of a hard membrane
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When ruptures occur in the cloudy cornea, it opens up, and something hard comes out like resin grains, which is dreadful to see.
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	Then if you see it cut, the work is such that you insert a needle into the root of one part below until reaching above and then insert another needle with a doubled thread from the orbital fissure.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	And pierce it, leaving the first needle according to its position.
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	Then cut the place of the doubled thread and bind part of the cornea around it tightly, then remove the needle and apply moist lint soaked in raw egg onto the eye.
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	And leave it until the son of onion grows with the egg, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed.
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And sometimes the wound is restricted by an egg on each side with a circle of cloth until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the eye shows great signs of injury, pierce it with a subtle spatula that comes out through the eye and drains the white moisture and lowers the eyelid, entering immediately.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then remove it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the eye's bowels
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This illness, called "alconatti", is caused by foul matter assembled in the eye, appearing like descending water but it is not water.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	and the manner of appearance for the operation is that you make the patient sit on an equipped and straight chair, then take their head between your hands from two sides, and move it until you see the bow coming above your eyes.
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	then be fixed, and do not lower or cover the light, and let the patient see things as they usually would.
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if it does not descend below, know that this is due to water retention, and if the descent of the bow is not equipped as we have said earlier.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	have the patient sit between your hands, then take a fine spatula and make an incision on the corneal tissue through a pore by following the continuity of the conjunctiva with the corneal tissue and the cornea, until the bow comes out.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and when it has been removed, drip warm water mixed with honey into the eye, or water boiled with fenugreek and honey; then treat it with another remedy until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	Watery eyes
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have seen the appearance of fluids during the procedure, and what is required to puncture it;
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	so act according to good health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	You should make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from direct sunlight for the eye to be bound very tightly.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	Then place the paper of the eye on your left hand if the eyes are left-sided, or on your right hand if they are right-sided.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	Then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument called "almagda", or with your left hand, if the eye is right.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Then place the tip of the instrument near the cornea at the thickness of a hair in that whiteness of the eye towards the lower part of the tear duct, then push the instrument called "almagda" skillfully, and turn your hand until it pierces into the whiteness of the eye, and feel that almagda reaches the empty space.
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	And it is necessary that the length of almagda matches perfectly the space from the pupil to the end of the black part.
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	This is the cornea of the eye.
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	If you see the bone in that paper due to the clarity of the horny membrane, then you can place the instrument up to where the water is, and express it underneath a way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the swelling goes down now, the patient will see before them and the instrument in their eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After rest the small one, and if the water rises again through a second way, place force with the instrument, and when it is fixed in there and does not rise, then extract the alum gently by turning your hand back and forth.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	And then pour in a little sealskin, and lift out the eye from it.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then place over the eye with dry lint or wet wool in rose oil and egg white, and bind it with a healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, put on it crushed cumin with plenty of egg white.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called 'alberit', of which this is the shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	Pierce only the conjunctiva, do not go too deep, but make a subtle hole, then put in the alum, as we have said.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	And upon completion of the work, prepare for the patient an upcoming pleasant bed, so that they may sleep on their back in a dark place.
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	Let them abstain from all movement, and eat light food, moving neither their head to the right nor left. Bind them according to their condition until the third day.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	Then release them in the same dark room and test their vision. Show them various objects to perceive and then rebind until the seventh day.
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	You should not perform this during or immediately after the treatment but rather in anticipation of water rising quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	If an abscess develops, that you release the eye before the seventh day and address it with treatment for abscesses.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	And when it is eased, release the bandage and place on their face a small kerchief to cover for one day, then remain in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	Then remove from the house little by little, and accustom them to these conditions.
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And remember that no disciple should interfere in this matter.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And a man came to us from Iraq, who told us that in his country they make pierced alembics for distilling water, but I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients.
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And perhaps this is a new invention.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the appearances of the forms of almug, because whoever does not know them will see them.
et soient d’arain proprement:	and be made of pure copper.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And the head is of the same subtle material, and the end is in three angled corners.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh above the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	Sometimes there arise joined cars diverse, from which some appear like scorpions with many feet;
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	And if there be such, where it has chariot enhanced with red fox fur, and also soft chariot of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In this soft chariot that is not enhanced, you must make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun.
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	And open their nostrils, apply ointment to those chariots, and draw them forward.
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Prick with what you can hold steady at the spatule's sharp point from one side, so that you know this flesh is all removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if anything remains which cannot be cut, open it entirely with the delicate instruments lightly, so that nothing remains there.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and if it overwhelms you, with abscess cauterization, do the operation as required;
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	and if they are malignant abscesses, hurry and cauterize so the blood is stanched and all flesh is removed; then apply warm wax or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the wound operates and moisture comes as far as the palate, know that it is healing;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is cartilage in the bone above, which prevents instruments from cutting.
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	then you must insert into it a length of linen thread somewhat thicker than the others and tie a knot at each end leaving between them an inch or less of space.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	have the patient grasp with his hand that end of the thread which is attached to the shoulder and draw it in gently until he can smell it coming out into the mouth through the nose;
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	and this is often done to children at school, and it is an easy thing for whoever wishes to do it.
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	then hold the end which comes out through the nose with one hand and that which is drawn from the mouth with the other, and draw the two ends together being careful to keep your fingers on either side of the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this so that you know that the night has corrupted that flesh, then draw out the son, wipe away the blood, and dampen the thread with Egyptian ointment, and replace it back into the nose as before.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Do this for three days or more, so that the ointments erode all that remains of flesh;
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	And then place in the nose a leaden tube for some days until it is healed, and if there is need of drying medicines, use them.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	And this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, through which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose;
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And it should be made of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, just like a tube and its handle.
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	and if you see fit, make a tight cage, and have the instruments ready to cleanse the head.
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	hold the handle firmly against the head to keep it still when heating oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh above the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Often a tumor is born in the head which grows large and becomes visible to the eye.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	And for this, you must cut it at the beginning, removing all of it, then apply a cauterizing agent or burning medicine to the area.
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	and if it is left to grow large, take note if it is hard, dark in colour and has poor sensation.
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	Do not touch it with iron for this is a festering abscess as when one pierces through it once there comes great pain to the patient.
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	And if the abscess is soft to the touch, not of fixed colour, and you see that it can be entirely cut out, then empty the patient's bowels and cut it without fear, treating the wound with drying and constricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when the operation of continuing into one of these cartilaginous works yields little benefit, except for some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	Therefore, when it happens to anyone, one should look to see if the wound is fresh and full of blood.
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then bring together the two lips in a seam, afterwards treating it until it is healed.
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	And if the lips are torn apart on both sides, one should scrape away all parts of their hearts until they bleed, then bring together the two lips in a seam, binding them tightly, and dusting it with powder made from dragon's blood and ground frankincense.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and place a piece of strong plaster or another sealing plaster on top, and leave it until it hardens by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The way of the suture is that you gather the solution:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or with needles, as we have said in the suturing of the abdomen;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or by thread, just as I made you aware.
des apostemes des levres	Of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	Men's hands develop inside the lips as hard abscesses, resembling warts, both smaller and larger;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	then it is necessary that you turn the lips back, split each one open and take pincers to extract its contents in each part;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	Then apply the place after the incision with powdered vitriol, until the blood is stanched;
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then leave it to heal easily, and treat the area with dry substances until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	On the flesh of the gums.
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Often there arises on the gums flesh that grows in an unhealthy manner, which the ancients call 'albulus';
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	You must hold it with forceps, cut it at its root, and let the bowels or blood run out;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	Then put on the area powdered vitriol or other restraining and drying powders;
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	And if that flesh grows back after the incision, which often happens, then cut it a second time and cauterize it;
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	If it does not return after the cautery;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are the shapes of the instruments to cut.
des sordens	Of sores.
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Sometimes in the gum area of the mouth, hideous and rough bark-like objects form around teeth.
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	And sometimes the tooth turns black or yellow-green, indicating decay has spread to the gum and causing foul odor.
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	You must have the patient sit between your hands, their head in your lap, and you remove teeth or bark-like growths until nothing is left.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	And do the same for blackness, greenness, yellowness, and other stains until they are cleaned.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	et if one removes what is at the root cause, it is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	if not, start again on the second day and third, until you have healed everything.
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	and know that teeth require various types of instruments to extract them depending on the work that needs to be done because the rasp used for extracting teeth protruding from the gums has a different shape than the one used between the teeth.
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	and these shapes, and others, should be prepared for you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	When treating tooth pain, it is important to delay the extraction as long as possible because this should not be done lightly.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	For it is a very important matter until such time as one has no excuse to exclude it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is forced to extract (the tooth), you must be certain of which tooth is causing pain.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the pain deceives the patient, and they believe it is in a healthy tooth, so they have a good tooth drawn.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	And yet the pain does not leave them for this reason, as the bad tooth remains, for we have seen it happen with these sufferers.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	And when you are certain which tooth is causing the pain, it is necessary to scrape around the tooth on all sides with a spatula, taking care not to damage the gums.
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	Then grasp it with your fingers or with delicate pincers at the first blow and blow, until it is well loosened, then close the pincers tightly.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	And let the shoulder of the patient be on your lap between your knees, and hold it firmly so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it cannot be removed, use one of these instruments and gently insert them on each side, moving it as you did initially.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if the tooth is pierced and worn down, you must fill it with small pieces of cloth where the hole is.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	And extract it carefully with tongs so that it does not break when you remove it.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And one must work very carefully around the gum with great bleeding to extract the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	Be careful not to break the tooth, leaving a part of it behind, as this will cause the patient even greater pain due to the remaining root.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And beware that you do not act like the ignorant surgeon, who in their haste and boldness sometimes breaks the jawbone, and does not attend to what we have described.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but sometimes cause great illness through their roots that remain, or the cart that they break, just as we have often seen.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	and when the tooth is drawn, wash the place with wine or oil and salt;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and if blood flows from it, which often happens, apply crushed vitriol to the place;
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	and if that is of no avail, then cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The shapes of the instruments, with which one first loosens teeth, should have long points and large handles, so that they do not bend when you draw the tooth.
et ce sont les formes:	and these are their forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should have thick shafts so that they do not bend when pulling, and be well-made iron with teeth to grip the tooth.
de la racine des dens	From the root of the teeth.
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains intact during extraction, you must place moist cotton with butter on it over the area for one or two days until the tissue softens, then insert the forceps known as "algefri", which resemble a stork's beak.
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	and they should be shaped like a file on the inside as well, which is their form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not wish to come out with all these tongs, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root, and place the instrument which is called 'althali', that is to say, a scalpel, of which this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And let it be strong and thick so as not to break, and if the root jumps out in this manner, it is good;
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	but if not, use all available instruments, for which the shapes that follow are provided:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one requires assistance with this instrument, which has two blades, of which the form is as follows:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron instruments that are positioned at the root of the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large tongs, of which the form is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And let these instruments be strong so they do not break, and know that there are many dental instruments;
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also other instruments, which are not mentioned here;
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and wise master doctors find their own instruments themselves, according to what their practices and the disease require; for there are such diseases that ancient scholars did not teach any instrument for them due to their diversity; if a bone of the shoulder or other bones is broken, one should search for the suitable tools I mentioned to you earlier, and assist with gestures, this is how it is formed:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And they should be thick and sturdy to hold the bone firmly, so that it does not slip away but can be held and removed;
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	then restore the medicine to its place accordingly, and if there is any rotting in the bone, and it is small, then use all these instruments:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the teeth appear not according to their natural form, and they are ugly, especially in young women, you must know if the tooth is newly born after another one, and it's not in its right place, and cannot be treated or filed.
adonques lou raie;	Then remove it.
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	And if it is hollow with the tooth, take this instrument which has this form, and resembles a small beak, and let it be sharp iron at its tip.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And strike it several times with a hammer during the day for its hardness, and so that you do not move other teeth, and if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it with this kind of rasp whose shape resembles this.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	And it is also like the file used to make needles.
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	And use the file to smooth the tooth back and forth gently so that it does not move until it is finished.
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	Then the full cure for everyone who shaves; and if the tooth is too sharp and injures the tongue, you must file down its roughness until it is even so that it does not injure the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	When teeth loosen
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the front teeth become loose due to impact or falling, and the patient cannot chew without them dropping out, and you have treated them with constricting medicines but it doesn't work, then...
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	In that case, you must restrain them with a gold wire, because silver wire turns green and decays, but gold never changes.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	And make sure the wire is neither too thin nor too thick, according to the space between the teeth.
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	and if you wish to align the teeth, take the thread and pass it double between two healthy teeth, then place the head between the damaged teeth, whether there is one or more, until you come out on the other side of a healthy tooth;
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	then restart the covering until you reach the part where you began, and carefully extract your hand skillfully and gently, so that it does not move.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	and make sure your tie is at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then cut the head of the tooth with some pincers, and put it back together, and replace it between the healthy tooth, so that it does not injure the tongue.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	and then leave it tight as much as it can stay put, and if it loosens or the thread twists, tighten it with another piece of thread.
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	if it stays in place and serves like this for a long time, and that is the form of teeth and the arrangement of two healthy teeth and two moved teeth, as you can see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when the tooth falls out, we put it back in its place, fresh to fresh, as we have said before.
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and do not let anyone who is not skilled and patient interfere, and sometimes we make the form of a tooth out of cow bone, and put it in place where there is a missing tooth, and tighten it as we have said, and it stays and serves like this for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cut loose the tongue's bond
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Sometimes this ligament comes from under the tongue naturally, as one is born this way.
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or by accident from a healed wound;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the work is such that you open the patient's mouth, and hold their head in your hand, then lift their tongue.
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	then cut the nerve of the tongue, so that the tongue is separated from its attachment, and if there is hardness or knot, and it is a recent wound, then cut out the thorn and sever widely this ligament.
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and take care that the incision is not too deep, for the artery which lies beneath.
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	and when you have done this, raise the place with rosewater and oil, or cold water, then put beneath the tongue a linen cloth.
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	And let the patient have baths each night so that the wounds cannot heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if bleeding occurs, apply crushed vitriol onto the wound.
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	And if the blood flows excessively, then cauterize it with a small cautery, which is beneficial in such cases.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	Then treat it with another remedy until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	And if you see it turn a different colour, be it black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is cancer.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	And if it is turning white and there is moisture present, then drain the pus, and cut it open with a thin spatula, releasing it from both sides.
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	and if blood overtakes you during your procedure, apply crushed vitriol immediately until it is extinguished, then return to your procedure until everything is completed.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then clean the place with ash and silk, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	Sometimes lumps appear in the throat which are called "godaths", and we properly call them tonsils, and when you treat them as we have mentioned earlier, if they do not heal, be careful:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	if it is an abscess with little pain and a pale colour, do not treat it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red and the root is swollen, do not treat it with iron due to blood flow concerns;
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	But leave it until it is dead, then you will cut it off, or it would break by itself.
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is of white color and the root is delicate, prepare the instrument for cutting, but first ensure that the abscess has cooled down and is calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then have the patient sit facing the sun, with their shoulder in your lap, and open their mouth while you take hold of their jaws between your hands, then press down on the tongue using all the instrument, this is how it should be positioned.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	And let it be made of silver or fine copper, just like a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	When you press down on the tongue with this instrument and see the abscess, take the needle and insert it into the almond, then pull it out forcefully from above as much as you can.
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and draw all thread out of it with a hook, then shape the tool from this material so that it looks like tongs.
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	but nevertheless the head is curved, with one end fitting into the other, and it is very sharp, and is made of iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you don't have this instrument ready, then cover it with the tongs, of which this is the shape:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And be sharpened on one side, but blunt on the other.
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and once you have shaped one of the mandrels, shape the other in the same way, and after making the incision gargle the patient with warm water mixed with alum, and if there is an outflow of blood, then gargle the patient with water or with boiled pomegranate peels or myrtle leaves, and similar things until the bleeding stops.
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat until it is healed;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two tonsils, so treat them just as you would the two tonsils alike.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	I treated a woman for an abscess that had formed inside her throat, specifically a small abscess;
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And it had almost completely blocked her throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the obstructed passage, nor could she eat or drink, and she would have died if she remained like that for even one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	The abscess was so swollen that it had burst, with two streams of pus escaping through the nostrils.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	So I immediately made an incision, and inserted a hook into one inch of the throat, then pulled out a large portion of bowels;
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	Then I reinserted it through another hole of the nose, and the worker opened his mouth and pressed on his tongue.
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	After inserting the onion into these abscesses, and cutting off a part of it, only a little bit of blood came out.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	And thus the woman's throat was unblocked, and she began to drink water, then wine, and did not stop having this abscess cut for a long time.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	And the abscess reformed again, filling up the space I had emptied until it became very large.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	Then I tricked her and cauterized inside her throat.
ensi demora sens croistre;	Thus it remains without growing.
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I depart from these parts, and be that God made of me afterward.
de l’uve	Of the eye.
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When a beam descends to the earth, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular".
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	And if it is thick and round below, it is called an "egg".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is hollowed out as we have said in the division, and the ulcer does not heal, and you see that the flesh around the abscess is calm and delicate, then you must cut it.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	And that which is round and gathered together, not long;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and if it is bloody or false colored or black, you must avoid incising it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner I mentioned, considering its whiteness and length, make the patient sit facing the sun, and press their tongue against the instrument we previously discussed.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Then insert the needle into the eye, draw it out from underneath, and cut at the intersection of the two instruments that I mentioned for incising both testicles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And you must not cut any further than the superfluous matter that is beyond the natural limit.
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	for if you cut any more, it will harm their voice and speech.
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And after the incision, use what we have said regarding the incision of the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient fears cutting, you must employ an engine for cauterization to ease their fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is quicksilver.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And have the patient put their head in your lap, and then press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and mix it with hot water that is neither too thick nor too thin;
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	use the tip of this instrument, which has this shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And on the head, make a hair-like incision where one would apply the medicine, like the teeth of a spoon, and place the instrument over all the medicine applied to the eye;
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	And have the patient lie on their side so that the saliva and mucus run out of their mouth, carrying the medicine with them, to prevent it from going down their throat and harming them;
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the eye, for a quantity of half an hour, until you see it blacken and the stinging from the medicine subsides;
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	And if you see this, take some cotton and wrap it around an instrument, then dampen the cotton with the medicine and insert the instrument through the cotton into the eye until the cotton rests on the eyeball.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	Do this frequently until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry out, and it will fall off after four or five days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	If you need to repeat the medicinal cauterization then do so and afterwards wipe around the eye with cotton soaked in butter, cleaning away any excess medicine.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is immersed in cold water, and it is healed with gargles until it is cured.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This treatment is safer than incisions or cauterization;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	if it is treated with fumigation in this way, take gentian and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and similar herbs, and combine all or some of them in one pot, adding easy-to-find items, then boil it;
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and the pot is well-glued with strong clay, and inside the pot have an instrument carved in this way:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And it is made of silver or copper, and one end is inserted into the patient's mouth so that the vapour rises to the affected eye until it is mortified.
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	After you restart it often, until the wound dries up, and take care not to do this at the beginning of the appearance of the abscess being hot, because many things happen there.
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and do not attempt to do this for the decline of a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put a piece of egg white into the patient's mouth so that their mouth does not get too hot.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	because the egg white will not let the steam harm the mouth, and this is a good treatment for overall health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Many times it happens to the throat due to a fish bone or spine, or some other object.
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	So you must treat what you can see, and press the tongue with the sun towards the instrument so that you can see the movement of things.
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	And for that which does not appear to you and is stuck in the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit before the meat is cooked in the stomach.
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	Perhaps by this the thing will be expelled through vomiting.
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	Or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of sailcloth, or a lettuce root, or a crumb of dry bread.
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	And tie to the sponge a thread, then swallow it.
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	And when it reaches its place, it will be expelled, and then you will pull on the thread.
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come about from what we have said, then take a lead instrument of this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	and let the instruments be curved towards the head so that they may more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised upwards.
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and ensure that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest choking occur, nor push against the bone within.
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	and it is better that the patient inserts the instrument, because he knows where things are located.
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	then insert it downward or pull it out forcefully with all the instrument evenly until it is fully removed.
de la sansue de la gorge	from the phlegm of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	In some cases, surgery may be the treatment of choice as I have mentioned before in our classification system;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	and when this does not work, then look into the patient's throat in the sunlight, and press their tongue with the instrument I mentioned to you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the leech, draw it out with a very small hook, or use delicate forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, take a hair from the tail of a horse, insert it into the patient's throat, then attach a hot iron to the end of the hair, and repeat this frequently.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient has water retention all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	then take a full glass of cold water, open their mouth, pour it in as if they were swallowing, and move their hand frequently;
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	and as soon as the tongue feels the water, it will stop.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	If it does not stop as we have said, then smoke the patient with asafetida, using the instrument I mentioned for the fumigation of the eye.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	Do this many times, for it will stop without fail.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the manner of the fumigation is such that you take a pot with visible coals, and cover it with a perforated cover in the middle, and through this hole place the head of the instrument.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	Then I throw my fumigation, and the patient places the head of the cane in their mouth, closing it so that no smoke escapes, but rather goes up to the tonsils.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	And now the tonsils will fall out, and if they do not, restart the fumigation several times;
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	And let the patient feel thirsty, eating salty things and such, but not drinking water;
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And then it will be necessary for them to go outside due to this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the instrument used to extract leeches is like bent tongs when one can see them, with curved arms for insertion into the throat.
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	and it resembles the beak of a bird with its roughness like that of a file, such that what it grasps, it cannot release.
et vez ci la forme:	and you will see here the form;
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	There are many variations of abscesses as the following accounts from one source and another in this book describe, differing according to whether they are punctured or cut.
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and it is in two ways first according to its appearance itself, and second because of the moisture it holds.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second kind is according to their location in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and abscesses in fleshy places are different from those that come to joints, and each has its own treatment.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if there are abscesses, one must not pierce them as long as the bowels remain dead according to their condition.
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if there are such cases that require piercing when they are ripe, and the bowels do not die according to their condition, like abscesses near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses develop near joints, and one leaves it until it rots all around, perhaps the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which is why this causes contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	When the abscess is near the main limb, and if you delay the piercing until it dies, it will harm the principal member.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	When the abscess is near the fundament, pierce it without waiting for it to die.
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	And one must not pierce a ripe abscess without completing the digestion process unless it is near the fundament and cannot rot in place, and become elongated inside with the development of a fistula.
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And it cannot heal within a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And you should know the stage of the abscess' perforation which is ripe according to its development, and this is when the pain eases, and the fever breaks, and there is lessening of the pain and redness, and from the softening and pointing of the head of the abscess, and other signs;
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	and you must make the perforation sit where the base of the abscess is, and where it appears softer;
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and let the perforation be along the length of the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and near nerves and arteries, and in all places equally where there is no bending.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those that bend, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when the abscess is in fleshy tissue, it is better that you allow the perforation to remain until it is confirmed as healed by complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce it before this, then the body would be elongated by the venom from it, and it is full of much filth.
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and perhaps harden the lips and its depths.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And for any abscess that is pierced according to the breadth of the body, according to what the member requires.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And you must treat small abscesses and minor injuries;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in large abscesses, big wounds, and many cracks according to the resemblance of the size of the abscess;
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if at such abscesses where it is necessary to sever the heart, and cut;
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	when it becomes young like wool, and is soft, then you must do as with boils;
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	And there are some that are split into three angles, and there are others from which one also scrapes like the leaf of myrtle, just as in abscesses caused by gangrene.
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And there are some where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar cuttings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those without a head, such as soft superficial abscesses, should be pierced fully through;
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	And when the abscess is large, and it has formed a great amount of pus, and you pierce it, do not extract all the pus at once that hour, but only some.
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	Then pack the abscess with wool until the next day, then extract any remaining matter immediately.
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	Do this several times from place to place until the bowels are completely emptied.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or elderly decrepit men.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the spirits sometimes twitch with the exit of the bowels, which by chance may kill the patient, and you won't realize it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	So use this chapter with great caution and, when you have pierced your abscess, dry the wound, then examine whether the wound from the abscess is small.
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	And if it is an open gash wound, pack with linen bandages or old cotton rags.
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	And if it is a large abscess with many openings, you must insert a bandage into each one so that they touch each other.
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	and if you have cut into the abscess and a portion of the skin, you must fill it with old cotton or lint from linen cloth without moisture, and bind it until the third day;
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then remove the bandage, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if there is bleeding during your procedure, bring cold and light water, dampen the cloths, and place them on the bleeding area multiple times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the discharge of blood persists, apply medication and ointment, and the powders I have mentioned in various places in this book, and if it is during winter, and the wound or abscess is very raw, you must place tents and moist bandages with wine and warm oil on them;
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	and if it is during summer, and the wound is fleshy, you must apply moist bandages with water and oil, or cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said;
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then unbind the abscess, wipe it clean, and treat it as necessary until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	This must be known universally in the treatment of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	I have told you how one should proceed before treating an abscess, and here is the chapter.
des soros	abscesses
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where the skull of the head is soft come small abscesses, and they are like cloth, similar to the inside of a hen's egg, and there are many such things (abscesses).
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are fat ones and hard ones where there is also moisture like pus;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	And there are hard ones with stones in them, which are not dangerous if the arteries do not behave contrary to expectations.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of cutting is such that you must test every instrument which is called an "entromissoire", from which its form comes afterwards, what thing it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if there is moisture present, they do so above the long bone.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is drained, one should carefully remove the skin that contained this moisture without leaving anything behind, for it will return if you leave any.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	Then dip cotton into Egyptian ointment if present;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	If not, dip it in water and salt, apply it to the wound, and leave it there until the next day.
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And this will cure what remained from the night before.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And you may replace the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know for sure that nothing remains from the night.
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscess retains its fat, cut it open in this manner, from end to end.
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	And you throw your relatives aside, flay them from all sides, and pay close attention to drawing out the bone where it lies.
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the artery makes you hesitate, do as I have told you after that.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also of the abscess if it is full, and of cutting and treating as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the incision on the full abscess and moisture is lighter, as they have little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if some of these abscesses or heads lack moisture, like the one I cut from an old woman's head;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and I found the abscess like a hard stone, rough and white, and it could not be broken.
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if one were to have cut it open, they would have also made a wound as deep as that of a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses occurring on the head, whether those that come to children's heads or at the roots of ears, the opening should always be in the lowest place, so as to let out the pus;
et les cure si com il covient.	and treat them as they ought to be treated.
des scrophules	scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Often these abscesses occur on the neck, and beneath the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes elsewhere on the body, and they are numerous, and connected to each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each scrofula is properly within its side, just as the knot and abscess of the head, as we have said;
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and there are many similarities to these scrofulas.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones that do not want to obey the rules of health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	in that which you see is of good disposition to touch, and is similar in colour to the body, and moves from each side and is not empty towards the nerves of the neck nor the artery or the passage, and it is not deep;
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	You must cut it from above and peel the skin away in each part, stretching the two lips of the heart with pincers if you need to, just like we said for head abscesses;
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Keep jabbing it back and forth, making sure you don't cut the nerve or vein, nor use sharp spatulas that might slip from your hand, lest you cut too deeply without seeing what's ahead, cutting something you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cut a vein or artery and it will not stop bleeding, apply powdered glass or herbs that staunch blood to the wound, binding up the injury tightly.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	Leave it alone until the abscess is drained, and the wound softens, beginning to fester with rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the blood is stemmed, return to your work until you complete it.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	Then examine with your index finger if there remain any small boils; remove them and clean them thoroughly.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is a large wound at the root of the boil, it is not advisable to cut this boil in its root, but bind it with a strong double thread and let it fall off on its own, without harm.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	Then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then heal it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you remove the entire scrofula, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound, and suture them now, given that there has been no delay in treating the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	you must proceed to cut the root of it, and draw out the humors, and suture it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Boils that hold excessive pus should be lanced where they appear to die off.
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	And pierce it like that one mentioned before, depending on the situation, then apply tenting with ointment and similar treatments so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the wound is well cleaned, treat it with ointment to encourage flesh growth until it heals.
de squinance	of dislocation
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancients spoke of the incision in the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	But I have never seen it done in our land, this is merely the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those with difficulty breathing, it is necessary that the flap in the throat known as the epiglottis be removed.
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	And if no help is given by this method, it is because all the veins and passages of the patient are affected by abscesses hot in the mouth, or in the throat or both tonsils.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the channel of the pore, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to escape the destruction that comes from suffocation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is necessary, then, when we wish to split the epiglottis, that we divide it beneath three circles or four with a small crosswise incision between two circles or in accordance with the quantity of the incision on the surface, not at all in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And these veins are suitable for the division of the epiglottis because there is no flesh at this point, and the vessels are long in quantity.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is afraid, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat entirely around, then divides the heart until he reaches the trachea.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And remove the vessels of blood, if you see anything, then cut the surface as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	And it is proven by the cutting of the dog's windpipe that death occurs from the place where it was broken and through the fault of the voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	Leave the wound open in one piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the time has passed that one doubts strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound from the heart, and sew it all up without the cartilage.
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then administer medicine that promotes flesh growth until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Al-Bukhari states that one should not do this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dying, and breathing becomes impossible.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Therefore make a hole in the epiglottis for when the patient cannot breathe, and they will inhale through the wound, thus saving them from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And for this the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the poison of the disease has passed, and it passes in three or four days. Then they would command to sew up the wound and treat it until it was cured.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a damsel took a knife, and thrust it into her throat, cutting part of the veins of the heart.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	And I was called upon to cure her, but I found her as good as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found blood flowing from it; I knew she had not cut a vein or damaged her lungs, but air was escaping through the injury.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, sewed up the wound, and treated her until she was healed.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	And all it took for the damsel was to clear her throat, and she returned to her normal self afterwards.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	Therefore I say that there is no fear in cutting the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	Of the swollen throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called "hernial goiter", and it is a large abscess with a yellow colour, which occurs often in women.
et est selonc II manieres:	and it has two types:
naturez, et accidens;	natural and accidental;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	or natural has no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental type has two forms: one similar to our fat, and the other form resembles an abscess caused by our artery;
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is fear, and it should not be treated with fire cautery except in the small one, proven and sought after by all those who are involved:
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	If you find it as hard as our fat, and cannot reach any vein, cut it like one cuts nails, and draw out all its skin if there is no hair.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And cauterize it quickly, and treat it as required until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	Des nous
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways to do this, of which I will describe all the similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And it is necessary that I explain all the differences between our method and theirs.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that theirs is hot and feverish until the ebullition passes, and the putrefaction is complete;
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	Then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the nut there is no heat, fever, or pain, and it contains one cystic, which is its own sack and matches the body's colour. It starts like a pimple and becomes swollen
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they come in two forms: hard or soft, and very varied in colour as I have said before.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to treat the shoulder, that you first examine and inquire about all the instrument which is called an 'entromissoire', according to how its form will appear in the following chapter.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	The way to examine abscesses is as follows: take the softest spot you can find on the abscess and rotate your fingers back and forth until you feel the instruments have pierced through. Make sure this is proportionate to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then withdraw the instrument carefully so as not to spill anything.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If running moisture is clear, whatever its colour, treat it as I have said for other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And if no moisture comes after the opening instrument is used, know that it is greasy, so treat it in a cross shape, and take pincers to gently peel away the skin from each side and keep the membrane where it lies so you draw it out clean with the knot.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot draw it out clean, then pull it out by pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything remains, the wound will return many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if a little remains and the blood bothers you, then fill the wound with some sharp corrosive powders, tighten the wound, and put on hot substances that ease abscesses, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if it is large to us, then cut the two lips of the wound, and treat that which produces flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	And if the beating vein is contrary to you or otherwise causes hastiness, use a place of powdered vitriol, and leave it bound for two days or three, until the wound rots, and stops the boiling of blood.
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	Then return to cut away that which has remained from the night.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	See here the forms of instruments for insertion, and they are of three kinds:
grans et moien et petit;	Large, medium, and small.
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	And there are three types of squares, which are called "albaret", and one type is called "breb", and they come in three ways:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Large, medium, and small, to surround abscesses of fistulas.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	And they are like the needles with which we sew seams, and they are made of yellow brass, or iron, or silver, and those that are golden are better suited for treating gangrenous fistulas.
et sont de III manieres:	And they come in three types:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the wound.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The shapes of the probes are very similar to these:
grans, moiens, et petis;	Large, medium, and small.
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	And there are probes that have two curves of three types as well;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and so for those who have three dislocations, and they are also of three kinds;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and also for those who have two dislocations or only one dislocation, and they are of three types
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and all these [dislocations] are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these [dislocations] is where they are sharp, and there are some that only cut from one side, which can strip away the nerves because the vein or nerve is not severed.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and these intrusive ones [dislocations] are the raised responses in many cases, so that the patient does not perceive them when abscesses open.
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three kinds:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	large, small, and medium, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and one should not use fire there unless it is in fleshy areas like legs, arms, breasts, and similar places;
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and sometimes one makes another small instrument, similar to the bark of fig trees, according to this form, with which blood is stopped:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is placed back into position to heal by compression of the veins, arteries, and sometimes according to this large form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Sometimes men's breasts swell when they begin to deteriorate, so that they resemble women's breasts;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and they remain ugly and swollen, and for those who wish to cure them, one should proceed according to this form of the following lines .b. until .g..
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then scrape away the fat, and fill the wound with medicinal flesh-forming paste, then join together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	And if the nipple sags downwards, and is softened due to its size like what happens in women, make an incision into it in two parts above with similar cuts;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	so that one part holds the other at their end, so that the greater line contains the lesser according to this form, from this line (b) up to the line (g);
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scrape away the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have mentioned about stitches and powders, and whatever is necessary for treatment, until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully complete, due to the patient's unwillingness to rest, or because of blood loss, you must fill the wound with moist cotton soaked in corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and leave it until the membrane and fat separate, then clean it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	Of abscesses under the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses which come from under the armpits are like hard scrofulae when they have sides, and if there is moisture contained within them.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those which contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b. to line g.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the matter within the abscess is evacuated, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton, and dress it gently until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles a scrofula, treat it as we have said for scrofulae incisions; and if the wound is deep, apply cauterization as mentioned before.
de la routure de l’artere	From the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is torn, and the skin above it is sealed, many abscesses often occur, and likewise, swelling and abscesses appear in the vein.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if you recognize it as such for the artery, then the abscess is long and perforating.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and when you feel it with your hands, you sense a tightening.
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when it is for the vein, there are clear reasons to act;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is foolishness to cut this abscess, especially when it is below the armpits and on the neck and many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	One must therefore avoid iron treatment, and for the one at the head, it should also be avoided, as well as in cases of an arterial swelling that breaks through above the long skin.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then operate at the waist with a lancet, and carefully separate the artery from the veins until it is exposed.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	then insert a needle below it and pierce through to the other side, and secure the artery with a doubled thread in two places, according to what I taught you about extracting the two arteries located at the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then mark the place between the two ligaments of a tourniquet so that the blood there comes out and the abscess is loosened.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then bring about the treatment that drains the pus until the ligament falls away.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat what is next to it, proceeding in order until it is healed.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	And if the abscess is on account of the size of the vein, then you must grasp with your hand as much of the abscess and skin as possible, then push the needle beneath the place that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce through, and have a double thread so that you draw it out from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	Then bind the abscess, as I have told you, with a ligament of one part to two parts of the thread.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	And if you doubt that the thread will not go through, insert another needle along its path beneath all of the abscess to the incision of the first needle and hold the threads in four places.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then lance the abscess until all of its excess comes out, then lance the heart's superfluity and leave what is bound.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Place upon it a cloth moistened with wine and oil, then treat him with tenths of the ointments until he is healed.
des apostemes des ners	Of abscesses of nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Likewise abscesses come to the arteries and veins, abscesses come to the nerves when they are torn, or due to excessive heavy labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	These happen more often in the shoulders and hands where there are joints, and they become abscesses, taking on a colour resembling that of the body with pain felt across many areas.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when it is held tightly, the patient feels pain, and it is not complete within the body, but beneath the heart.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	It moves well from all sides, it neither goes forward nor backward, not below or above, and one that is dislocated should not be cut with iron.
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	Perhaps there would be contraction in this case.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And one who is at the head or forehead should make an incision with a spatule.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, hold it with forceps and cut it at its root.
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is large, suspend it with a hook and remove the skin; then take out the abscess and sew up the wound, treating it until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	large boils hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	Sometimes occurs in bellies and nowhere else an inflammation, and it is a disease called "fungus" due to its likeness with mushrooms, and its root is subtle but the head large.
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	and in it there are small ones and very big ones.
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw a man who had two in his belly which resembled mushrooms more than anything else, and there was no difference, they were white, had fine roots, were slightly split, and moisture came out of them.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I cut them open and found one weighing eighteen ounces, while the other weighed six thirds. The procedure for incision is to check whether the patient is moist, and if the material's colour is white, moist, with a fine root. 
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	If you treat the broad spinal bone, let the fire cautery be present before you.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	As there is often too much loss of blood from the cutting, and if you faint from it, then quickly begin with cauterization.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	And if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the incision with iron, then take a well-made thread of lead, and bind it to the arm as we have said, leaving it for two days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	Then restrain them, and do not stop tightening the lead thread until it reaches the arm bone, each time feeling for work by it.
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	And if the roots are thick, fear to cut them especially in the belly, but you can well cut half of it, then cauterize so that it does not return.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then treat the wound, and make sure you do not cut the tissue that is of a pale colour and poor texture and has no veins.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an aggravated abscess, and I shall come to the treatment of cancer afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	When it rages with hunger.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of swelling comes from a wound cauterization or tear caused by poison, and it is on the abdomen and affects some of the intestines, as happens in other injuries, or from blood flowing from veins or arteries according to what was mentioned before, or due to windiness;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is due to the tear caused by poison and the release of pus, then its colour is similar to that of the body, being a mild condition without pain and appearing with multiple discharges.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to an intestinal discharge, then it becomes more varied: when pressed by two fingers it retracts and reappears, or perhaps it stretches out, becoming enlarged at the entrance of the bath and after heavy labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it is due to moisture, it is a minor issue, and it becomes apparent when you press it with your hand, but it does not cause any restriction.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	and if it is due to blood, it shows these signs: large, hard abscesses that are fixed in one place according to a certain quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is due to wind or gas, it is soft to the touch; and for the treatment, you must examine whether its appearance indicates arterial blood, venous blood, or wind/gas.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	You should leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For he has doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	and if it appears to be related to the intestines or the stomach, you must instruct the patient to hold their breath and lie flat and straight; then bleed them all around the navel.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then have them lay frequently in your hands, and go around the place you marked with all your fingers; then extend half of the abscess above all the large thumb.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then tie it around with a strong thread or a cord of sturdy silk firmly, and let the knot be secure.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Next, open the extended half of the abscess over the knot, and insert your index finger, searching for the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it trapped by the knot, untie it, and push the intestine out of the abdomen.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find the wound, grasp it with a hook, and cut away any excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	If the artery or vein opposes you, go around it carefully, then return to your work and take two needles, insert two strong threads, and pass the two needles through what you have pierced in a cross pattern.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then extract the abscess in four locations above the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, leaving the place to rot, and let the dead flesh fall off by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	or you must cut it when it is soft and rotten, then treat it with what is appropriate, and heal the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the place with what is necessary, and heal the wound.
dou chancre	Of cancer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have spoken about the likenesses of cancer in the division, and how to treat it with medicine, and how one must avoid iron treatment.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	And we say that cancer engrained in the flesh requires great caution in its treatment, and the ancients said that when cancer is in a place where it can be scraped away like cancer of the breasts, thighs, and similar places, one must remove it entirely at its beginning.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	And when it is large and old, you should not attempt to treat it, for I have never been able to heal anyone in such a condition.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	No one has ever healed it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And for the treatment, when it is in place and can be removed as we have said, you should purge the patient of black bile once.
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	Then make the patient bleed if there is evident congestion, then prepare him well to undergo the treatment.
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	Then remove your ulcers or cancerous growths, shave him all over, and extract it completely from every part without leaving any remains.
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And let the blood flow freely, press the area well with your hand or an object, and if the outflow of blood opposes the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the bleeding stops.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat with another treatment until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have already spoken about the different types of dropsy, and how the accumulation of water is formed, along with the signs of each type, and the cures that can be achieved through medicine or surgery.
si est eclites soulement;	So it has been written.
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	And one should not use iron in these two types (of dropsy).
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	That is to say, tympanites and yposarche, for they are mortal afflictions.
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	Therefore, when you treat this type of dropsy called 'eclites' with medicine, and the cure is ineffective, consider if the patient is weak or suffering from other ailments like constipation, stomach issues, and similar conditions.
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	If you use iron [instruments], then there is doubt [about the outcome].
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	And if you see the patient is strong [has a strong constitution], and he has no other disease but only dropsy, and he is neither too young nor too old, then proceed like this:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	Make the patient lie straight on your hands, and press his abdomen with your fingers to release water from the lowest part of the stomach [abdomen], then take the sharp-edged instrument in this manner:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	Et let it be divided into two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	It should be sharp-pointed but not so much as to reach the intestine when inserted and cause injury.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	Then examine if the dropsy is directed towards the intestines.
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	You must cut above the hump three fingers directly above the wrist.
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	And if it is due to liver disease, your incision should be on the left side of the hump at three fingers' width.
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	If it is due to the spleen, then make your incision on the right side, and ensure that the patient does not lie directly over the wound so as not to weaken the afflicted area with their weight.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	Then pierce the entire skin with your instrument and push it through, lifting your hand to take all of the excess skin between the hide and the subcutaneous layer just like you would when skinning an animal down to one nail's width or less.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Pierce the subcutaneous layer until the water cavity is reached and then drain it by drawing out all of the fluid, using this tool which I will now describe.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it is similar to a subtle silver cane, and is made of light brass or iron, and has on its underside a small hole.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and where it ends on one side, there are three holes.
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and two at the other end, and one on another side;
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	and the tip is cut like a quill, which is the shape of the incision as described by the writers who cut quills.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	at the top is an arm, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it immediately rises up onto the instrument.
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	empty it then by half or a third part, because if you empty more than is appropriate at that time, perhaps the patient will die due to their spirit leaving the body, or they may fall unconscious, or they may come close to death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but evacuate it according to its quantity of virtue, and according to what the condition of the patient's virtue signifies, and his pulse;
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	then draw out the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now for the heart which stops up the perforation that I spoke of on the surface, in this way that you pierce it;
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	then reinsert the instrument the next day if you see the patient suffering this, and draw out a small quantity of water;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	do this every day, and be careful not to draw out too much water but only a little bit.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you are doubtful about the patient and leave a lot of water inside them, it will destroy the heart due to excessive sweating or bathing in hot sand or sun, and prevent them from drinking.
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And treat with drying medications until it is healed, and cauterize over the stomach, liver, and spleen after draining the water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Of the stopping of the penis.
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	There are times when children are born without an opening in the penis, or with a small one, or it is not in its correct position.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary to pierce it sometimes with a very fine spatula in this way...
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	Then insert a soft tube into the bladder, and bind it, holding it for three or four days. When he wishes to urinate, remove the tube, let him urinate, and then replace it.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	And perhaps it is not necessary, for the urine that comes out will not allow the tube to stay in place.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those in whom the fistula is small will be treated with the white lead plug as we have said and this will widen it.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the tube in its proper place are distressed, as some people are born without a tube at the head of their penis, which is why they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis upwards.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	and cannot heal because the material cannot reach the marrow, and it is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	and the method of treatment is to have the patient lie on their back, then stretch the head and neck as if they were extending an arrow, so that the hole pierces through in the middle, just as it should be.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and beware of the escape of blood which often happens, and if it does, stop it with what stops bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	Pustules on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	This inflammation often occurs in the throat, and it is an appearance of ugly flesh.
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and there are malignant and non-malignant ones.
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	You must take them with a subtle pincers, grasp and clean them all, then place cotton moistened with Egyptian ointment over it.
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat with fine healing Diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, of a foul colour and stinking, then you must apply a cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have cleaned it, and if the albath is on top of the rod, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then you must first remove the albath that is inside.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	And when it is fused, treat it from the outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you treat them together, the head of the rod is not secured so it may be pierced, and blackness and decay will come inside the rod and joint.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	You must cut away all that is black and corrupt, then bind it with a plaster made of honey and flour which has been prepared from pomegranate bark and figs, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, apply the lunar caustic according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The cauteries assist the two dispositions together.
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	That is to say, in the evacuation of blood and in corruption;
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	And if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, you must insert a hollow reed into the penis and make the patient urinate through it.
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And when the skin is tight at the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or it occurs due to a wound or abscess, then you must peel it with a sharp instrument so that the ties are loosened, and release the head of the penis from all sides.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	and if this is an important thing to discuss, you must then peel it with a spatula on some part of the head of the penis and skin.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	then carefully remove it between two [fingers], and place a fine linen cloth dampened in cold water, so that it does not dry out again.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision.
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	circumcision is not like the separation of continuity as with other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	nevertheless when we do this work of our own accord, and especially for children, it is necessary that we perform the best work, and the most gentle for their well-being.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcising their children, for they do not practice it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	for I have seen most masters and doctors performing circumcision around one day, with forceps, and all at once [i.e., in one cut];
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	If the heart was pierced because there were two knives, and perhaps one of them fell out while the other remains inside.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	Now you must cut it out again, and the pain is doubled, and during the removal which comes from its root, the tip of the knife was not properly secured inside the body.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	And during the removal of the nail, perhaps the iron slips and runs wild, and many times it happens that they do not need treatment and I wish to share this with you.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le lien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	Because when you press your hand, you cut evenly across all the flesh beneath it.
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	But make sure that the knife is tightly wrapped in leather.
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and let the method of the first operation be such that you make the child believe, if he understands, that you are not tying a thread around his penis just enough, and then you can make him ejaculate in any way you can;
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	then make it stand straight between your hands, and hide the cords between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments;
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	then put your hand on his penis and blow into the heart, and pull it upwards so that the head of the penis is inside;
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	then clean it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the place with a doubled thread, and bind it below with another link;
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Et hold it with your two fingers - the thumb and index finger - and cut between the two lines, then lift up the heart quickly and draw out the head of the penis.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	Then let the blood flow forth repeatedly, for this is an injury.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put powder on top and cover the powder with a cloth glued with raw egg cooked in rose water, prepared with good fresh oil, and leave it there until the next day; treat him with other remedies until he is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The shape of the forceps for cleaning is as follows:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The two blades should be curved and sharp, and the blades should also be as big as the handles equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	The error of purification is when the heart within escapes to the incision.
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	Therefore, you must stretch it with your nail, otherwise the flesh will form an abscess.
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	And cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, then grasp it with pliers, and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if it exceeds three days, and that which is beneath the ridge becomes swollen, then leave it until the hot abscess subsides, and gently pare it.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	Then cut it as you can move, and take care of the part of the ridge, this will not harm anything.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Cure therefore the location of burning wounds with powder, as we have said in the treatment of powders, and if it bleeds excessively from the heart outwards, and it goes above (the wound), it will not harm.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat it therefore, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	where there is retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is caused by the obstruction of stones, or frozen blood, or faeces, or new flesh (scar tissue), or similar things, which we have mentioned in the section on obstructions.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	And if the urine is not released, and you find that the retention is due to stones in the lower part or neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent forward over their knees.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	and place his feet on his back, and stretch out his belly from the upper part of his back, and restrain the patient's elbow as much as you can;
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and then the neck of the bladder is constricted by the expression of the stone above it, which loosens the urine and allows it to pass.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	and if it doesn't come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must perform an extraction with all the instrument which is called "syringe," this is its form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and made of fine silver, light as the feather of a bird's wing;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and be half a palm in length with a fine point at its tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And for the method of urine evacuation, you must take a doubled thread, and tie it to one end of a wool or cotton bag, then insert the other end of the thread into the syringe.
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	cut the excess wool and push it up to the end of the syringe, then lubricate the syringe with oil or butter and a raw egg yolk, and have the patient sit on a stool, anointing their bladder and penis with moist oil, olive oil, and warm water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the organ, and bend the penis upward toward the belly.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	push the syringe forward into the bladder, and have the patient feel it until the bladder is empty, this cannot be done correctly if the guide (the syringe) has gone astray from its intended path.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then stretch the thread through all the wool here and there, and the urine will follow the wool, then extract it out, and make the urine flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And restart the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and let the patient rest.
des maladies de la vessie	Of bladder diseases
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scalding or blood enters the bladder, and putrefaction has gathered there, and you wish to see urine and medicines distilled, then make the whole instrument which is called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed and has three openings:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	And the narrow end which the doctor cuts should be such that it stops up the tube well without addition, so that one can draw out the moisture and push when necessary;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	And when you see that your medicine is being put into the bladder, place the head of the syringe into the moisture, and draw out what comes next;
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	If you draw out the moisture with a caustic agent, then firmly reset it by pulling on it.
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	It will enter the moisture within, and come to the bladder immediately so that the patient feels it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	And this is the subtle form of the enema with which we enema the bladder.
si est ci:	Here it is:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And it is made of silver or tin, with the head being at the top.
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	And you loosen it at the side where the ligaments fall.
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	Then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture you wish to enema into it, then tie it between the two breasts with a strong piece of thread, and heat this pouch over fire.
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	Then insert the head of the clyster into the urethra, then press your hand onto the bladder with all your might until the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	And if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle, then pierce it roundly all around.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	Then insert a strong thread through this hole, then gather the circle as one would gather a bag, and put in whatever you wish of oil, moisture, and water, and tie it to the instrument.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	Of a stone.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have spoken of the types of stones and their extraction along with treatments.
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	and explained the distinction between kidney stones in the bladder and all their symptoms, as well as which stones require surgical intervention.
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	in the bladder and in the urethra;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that stones which form in the bladder occur more often in children, and it is a sign that the urine escapes from the bladder like water in its subtlety.
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and it makes the patient's urethra hard and rough, causing them to urinate frequently, and then it scabs over.
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	And to many of them it causes their foundations (to fail).
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	And healing is light for children until the age of four years, and it is very difficult in the elderly, and it is average for those who are young, for those who are between youth and old age.
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	And the treatment is lighter for those who have large stones, compared to those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to draw out all the bile that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it sometimes impedes trying to reach the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the feet, lift them up and move them downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it falls out from above.
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	Then have the patient sit between your prepared hands, with their hands placed below their thighs, so that the bladder is completely declined downwards.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	Then you grasp it and feel inside.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	If you feel the stone in space, then quickly proceed to cut above the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not fall upon touch from all sides, then wet your index finger with oil from the left hand if the patient is an infant, or your middle finger if they are a grown youth;
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	and push it into the base, and feel for the stone, and when you sense it with your finger, then direct it toward the neck of the bladder;
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	then press down on your finger, and push the stone outside at the place where you intend to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with their hand, and tell them to pull up the testicles with their right hand, and with their left remove the skin below the testicles in the area where the incision is made;
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Then I inserted the spatula cutting, which is its shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And splitting what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the groin;
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	and be straight over the stone, and place your thumbs near the anus or foundation, and make the incision so that it is wide on the outside but narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	if by chance the incision hurts your thumbs that are near the anus, it may need more work;
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and know that there is such a stone where it has corners and edges;
si est griés a issir;	It must be pulled out gently.
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And if there is bone underneath, similar to a pea, and round with a small opening.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	Where it has corners and edges, make the incision wider;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	And if it doesn't come out, you must extract it with tongs that are like a file at the end to grasp and pull out the stone so that it does not escape.
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	Or you push aside the delicate curved instrument from its head;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	And if you cannot manage it this way, then enlarge the hole with your finger, and if blood flows, extract it with vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	and if there are multiple stones, push the largest one first towards the neck of the bladder, then cut above it, pull out with forceps, and treat the smaller ones afterward if there are several.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, you must take care of it, and make a bigger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	where either they die, or urine returns due to the wound being unable to heal;
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	nevertheless, make an effort to pull it out or crush it with tongs until you extract it in pieces.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	and once you have completed your work, fill the wound with incense, aloe and dragon's blood, hold it tight and place on top a cloth moistened in oil and wine or in oil, rose water and cold water to soothe the hot abscess.
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	Then place the patient on their neck, and do not loosen the binding until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you release them, thoroughly wash the wound with oil and water, then treat it with ointment of daffodil and an ointment of basilicon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if an abscess develops in the wound and there are blood clots in the bladder, causing a retention of urine, which is known to occur in such a manner that it comes out with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	Push your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will affect the bladder and cause damage;
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then clean the wound with water, soap, and silk, and aid it in every way you know until it is healed;
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And during every hour of treatment, bind the two thighs together, and apply the remedies in place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small, and it is lodged in the urethra, stuck within, and the urine cannot exit;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	if the treatment I describe here requires cutting, you are excused from performing the cut due to this therapy.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proven this thus.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take iron forged with three-pronged ends fixed on one spike:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot retreat into the bladder;
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	then gently insert the probe into the penis until it reaches the stone;
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	and turn the probe with your hand within the stone gently, until you are able to pierce it from another side;
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	the urine will come out immediately, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	If it is dislocated again soon, and urine is passed quickly, then the patient will recover.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	And if you cannot do this for any reason that hinders you, then tie a thread under the stone and another above it, then make an incision in the flesh towards the stone between the two threads, then extract it quickly, and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood from the wound.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat them until they heal.
de la piere des femmes	Of women's stones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	Sometimes stones form in women, and if this happens once, then the treatment is quick, but it is prevented by three things:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	One is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	And secondly, one cannot find a woman who is an expert at revealing herself to mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third manner is that, by chance, one cannot find a woman who is an expert in this craft of hands;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	And the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman may be more perfect than that of a man, which requires a deeper incision and there is great fear involved. And if necessity arises for this, you must take an expert surgeon, and rarely can one be found, and if not, then seek out no chaste but subtle mirror;
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And the present is a wise counsel in the life of women, or a woman who knows one part of this art, and instruct her to do what you command regarding the investigation of the stone.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and carefully check if the woman is a virgin;
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then it is necessary to insert one's finger into her anus and search for the stone.
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she finds it, push the stone away from your finger, and advise her to insert her finger into her vagina as deep as possible, and press and massage with her left hand firmly on top of the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	If she finds it, move the stone gradually from the bladder entrance to deeper inside until reaching the root of the thigh.
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	Then squeeze the stone in the root of the thigh towards the middle of the vagina where it is located, and feel for it in this area.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	And do not move your thumb above or below the stone, let the incision be small at first.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	Then push the rod into the incision; if you feel a stone, widen the wound so that the stone can be extracted and know that there are many types of stones.
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	That is to say, small and large, rough and soft, long and round, and those with cracks.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you know these similarities to understand the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if the blood defeats you, quickly apply powdered vitriol, holding it there for an hour until the bleeding stops.
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	Then return to your work, ensuring the stone is extracted and having the instruments I mentioned for extracting stones from men ready to assist you.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	and if the blood overtakes you, and it is from an artery that has been severed, place the powder on the wound and apply the juice of tents and bandages, do not restart this procedure again, leave the stone alone and do not extract it, as the patient might die.
puis cure la plaie.	then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is cooled and the site is accessible, return to your work until the stone is expelled.
de hernie carnouse	Of fleshy hernia.
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Ramus aqueous is nothing other than an accumulation of moisture or white of egg, which lies beneath the heart of calves and is contained within the egg.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	and it is called 'albumen', and sometimes it is properly contained within the membrane of the egg, so people think that it is another egg.
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	and it is the calf's skin between the white of egg we have mentioned.
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	And this does not happen unless the patient agrees.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ruminant aqueous is due to weakness that comes to calves, and this matter is spread.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And sometimes it comes from blows to the hips, and this moisture has many colours:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	where it may be discoloured to yellow, or there is redness, blackness, white watery fluid, and this happens more frequently;
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to recognise this dislocation, for if it is white and soft like we have said, then the abscess is ripe, ready to burst as with an egg, but does not open the hip joint because it has moisture all around it.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the surrounding tissue, then the abscess is ripe with part of the egg inside it, and for this reason people think that there are more than one.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	and if moisture is between the skin of the calves and the white sinew, one will feel it well;
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	therefore when you wish to know the colour of the moisture, test all parts as described above, from which its form is derived.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the introduction, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we treat it with iron [instruments], the patient must be bled according to their strength and the fullness of their body;
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	then place them supine on their back, on something slightly elevated, and put a lot of cloth underneath them;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	then sit on their left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on the right, and stretch out the leg towards one of the two sides from the centre of the calves;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the spatula and peel back the skin of the calves between their length to just below the wrist, and make your incision straight while dividing the calf muscle down until you see white fascia, then carefully remove it according to your ability.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	Then pierce the white fascia with an aqueous solution through a wide orifice and extract all of the water and then place your fingers there to stretch out the fascia.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	And do not touch the heart of the calves but only the white fascia.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Peel it all or in pieces especially the side of him carefully so that if you don't remove all the water sufficiently it will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	And if the egg pops out during your work then replace it in its place when you have finished treating the fascia.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then join the two sides of the heart of the oxen with a stitch, then treat it like other wounds until they are healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then you must bind the suspending vessels, fearing blood loss.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	Then cut open the oxen along with its suspension, extract the egg, and treat it as we have described.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if fluid gathers in two parts together, know that these are two branches.
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	Cut open the other part as you did with the first one evenly, then wipe away the blood and place moist linen soaked in rose oil onto the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	et put defoer auter lane moilli en vyn eyn oylye, eyt syx lycyon, eyt dyssys drapayz doblyes, eyt ly lye syx tot ly lyn qe st sylons cesth forn
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	puys prayn syx drapayz, eyt llys emplye de lane charypy sylons cesth semblans eyt syont asyambley pyr custuure en la ghorle des brayes, eyt ly yns ddes chyays preynt sus ly fondymyn jusc’aw dos, eyt ly ytare a la partye du poynyl;
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	eyt ly ytare duy cheyf syx lyssynglys, eyt syot tute asymblye ly restrynfor en la blyq du bayere;
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	et sometimes this type of cautery is used instead of cutting with an iron knife, and you should take a thin scalpel-like cautery, and slice the skin from the testicles, and heat it as we have said so that the white part containing water is exposed.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	then take the cautery in this manner, and pierce that white part with your nails, and scrape it with this heated fine cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And you should scrape it in every way possible until everything is scraped out.
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg.
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	and know that this work is safer.
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And watch out for bleeding, and beware of operations involving cutting.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if anything opposes you, whether it be a hot swelling or bleeding or any other thing, then treat what opposes you according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	If the patient is fearful and unwilling to undergo this procedure due to its horror, then administer an anaesthetic as I have told you, and when you are confident through the signs we have discussed that water on the brain is present, make the patient sit on a raised seat.
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	Pierce the abscess below at twice the width of the thumb, and make the hole as long as the body.
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	Make the openings wide so that all the water may flow out.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then place cotton on the spot, bind it, and leave it to drain the rest of the water, then treat until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	And if the white membrane does not allow water to escape through the wound's mouth, you must insert a feather or the instrument used for drawing water from hydropic patients, which is shaped as previously described.
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	Widen the wound's cavity, and know that water will return; it is gathered after six months or so, and when it has reassembled as before, then the patient will live through their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Be aware that in many situations when dealing with this branch of medicine there is much fear involved, therefore it seems to me better to leave it alone.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I will tell you about the procedure and similarities of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I say that many abscesses come from boils, especially on the head.
et c’est par mout de cas.	And it is due to these circumstances.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It arises from the excess of sour and sharp humours which is spread over the head, or by concussion.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	And its colour matches that of the boil.
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	It does not cause pain, but is a deep abscess.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	Sometimes a deep, fearful, stony-hard abscess is of a dark colour and originates from a new artery or the swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is due to arterial blood, it is recognized by the hot abscess-like disposition when you press it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and you must not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	One who is afflicted with edema of the vein is recognized by its feeling when touched with fingers, and one can properly make an incision on this as well as other similar swellings;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is that you cut the heart of quinsy, then break the egg above, and drain out its white substance, and remove the covering membrane from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already solid with these new growths, then you must drain out the egg and cut it.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	For air is in the wound or within the vessels, you must release all that pressure and round off the edges.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is at the place behind, then you must cut it all away and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Once your work is completed, cover the wound with wet wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess wrapped in a swelling resembling a boil, with the softening of the flesh, and the patient becomes ill when it bursts.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And the treatment of this disease is almost as fearful as the one before it, yet we shall tell you its work, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	You must have the patient sit on an elevated chair, then place the flesh-softening suspension below your two hands, at all vessels near the shaft, and hold them firm, while stretching it hard.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	Then cut with the sharp-edged spatula across the vessels until they are exposed, and then remove the skin from each side as we have said in the extraction of arteries found in temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then insert a needle where there is a doubled thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein has come, and then tie it again to the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then cut them in half straight down the middle, along the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound as with other bow wounds, so that no vessel bleeds to nourish one of the portions.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	For in this way there is no harm done, and if all the vessels have become veins, it is necessary to drain the portions from all the vessels.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	So that the wind does not escape its direction due to the incision of the vessels, and they dry out and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	From a fracture of the sacrum
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The events of this branch are due to the rupture that occurs in the diaphragm or its extension on the abdomen in the area of the omentum, which causes the intestines to descend through this opening into one of the cavities.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	And this rupture is either in the diaphragm or its extension, and these two types of hernia arise from many causes:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	due to impact, jumping, straining, lifting heavy loads, or similar actions;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	The signs that it is an extension of the diaphragm are a gradual development over long periods and do not occur suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And the abscess is equalized towards the surface, so that the skin covers the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are that when it's a case of sectioning in the sacrum, there is sudden pain at first and the abscess appears differently just below the skin, due to the intestine protruding through the body outside the sacrum.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the tendons descend with the intestine, getting caught, which causes great pain to endure for the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments with iron [instruments], there is fear, so it must be abandoned.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the method of treatment is that you instruct the patient to gather the intestine with their hand into the wound if they can reach it;
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then support his neck between your hands, and lift up the thighs;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then extend the heart upwards, and cut all the skin from the hips down to the length of the leg;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then push the hooks of the scissors into the abdomen, making an incision according to what is needed to open the wound, and make it such that the stomach can emerge;
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then scrape off the sinew that lies beneath the hide of calves, so that the white hard sinew is uncovered on all sides;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	Then insert your index finger into the calf, in that which is between the white sinew lying beneath the hide of the egg, and the second sinew, separating what lies behind the egg from the second sinew;
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	And move your right hand inside the calf's heart, stretch the white sinew upwards towards your left hand, and lift the egg towards all of the sinews at the waist;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	Instruct your assistant to stretch the egg upwards and untie that which is tied behind it;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	And look with your hands for signs of intestinal swelling or white hard cysts, and if you find any such things, push them down into the abdomen.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	Then take a needle with a thick thread made of six strands, and insert it into the rear part of the cyst, which is beyond the sinews.
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	After measuring, cut through the head until you see four strands of thread appear.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	Then bring them together one on top of the other in a cross formation, and bind the cyst, which we said is beneath the sinews, with a strong two-strand thread.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the head of the thread and bind it with a two-strand thread so that none of the nourishing vessels can enter us, preventing an abscess from forming.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and place again the ligament according to the first long ligament two fingers from that, and after these two ligaments leave a depression which is below the heart of the thigh the length of a finger.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and after all this, follow the curvature that the egg presents
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	then cut into the part that is below the skin of the thighs, as far as the blood and bowels run, just as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then apply damp wool with oil, and put it on the wound, and attach the ligament that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white skin we mentioned is cauterized after incision due to fear of excessive bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this happens many times, and leave the ligament until it dries on its own.
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	And if it takes time to fall off, let it be soaked in warm water, and place on it what we have said [earlier], until it falls.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then treat the wound with another ointment, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	Of fleshy hernia.
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to treat it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said it is made like a screw thread that holds together a nut, in such a way that you bind the vessels, after making an incision below and above [the wound] lightly.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	Then cut into the middle [of it], and treat the abscess with what works [on it], until the vessels fall out [i.e., are severed].
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	Sometimes rupture occurs in anger, as we have said, and the skin tears.
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	And none of the intestines fall into the wound, but if they do, it is bad, and repair them every hour.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	However, if it remains too long at this stage, the wound or ulcer grows until the intestines fall out.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	This happens due to the extension of the ulcer at the wound, as we have said, for it is spread out, then softened and swollen, and the skin tears.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	And the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before.
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	Sometimes it is treated with iron in this way:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	And it is that the patient often lies on their back between your hands, then feel the place of the rupture swollen as wide as three fingers.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	then extract the sinew that lies beneath the skin, then take the thread and place it on the surface of the wound.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	press it at the front of the belly, then cut two places visible on the wound above the head of the thread, and stitch one after another.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then extract the head of the thread, and do not cut or stretch the sinew in any way, as I have instructed you for the treatment of intestinal rupture.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	then treat it with the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the sons' hairs, clean them thoroughly and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The surgeon is compelled to act; there are no signs of healing in the wound, and cauterization here is necessary for recovery.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	from softening the skin of the calves
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Many times the skin of the calves is softened in some men, because the muscles within are weakened, and it is visible.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	And it is necessary, when one wishes to treat it, that the patient be made to lie on their back, and cut away the skin which has softened, down to natural flesh;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	Then join the two lips together with a seam, and if you wish to see it first sew away any excess of the softened skin with three or four firm stitches.
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Then cut between the seams, treat it like any other wound, until it is healed, then remove the thread.
dou chastrement	L'amputation
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Know that such procedures are taboo in our law, so it would please me to not speak of them in this book.
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and it is necessary for two reasons
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	one of which is that the doctor should be able to provide an answer when asked, and know the treatment.
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the other reason is because we often need to castrate some animals for our benefit, such as goats, sheep, cows, and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say therefore that castrations are performed in two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	either by traction or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In the method we use traction, we make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles are softened and relaxed.
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	Then grasp them with your hand until they are reset and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	Of circumcision:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	you must hold the animal and press its skin with your left hand, then tie the suspension bandage, and cut each testicle with one stroke when you have properly skinned them;
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and leave no pouch of the fat nor the subtle fat which lies upon the vessels;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	and this method of castration is better than the one done by traction because in that case some part of the testicles may remain, causing the animal to still have sexual desires;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Il sont bestes monstrueus qui ont les deux membres et ont la vertu de copuler comme l’omme et la femme, ce sont por ceu des bestes impures et abominables.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermaphrodites occur among men in two ways:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	One way is when between the two testicles there appears a structure similar to the female genitalia, where hair grows, and sometimes urine flows out of it.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And this other type [of dislocation] occurs in women, affecting the wrist like a rod and with two knobs.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	The treatment for men and women is that you should separate the joined parts completely and then treat them like any other wound.
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	In the second manner, for men whose urine escapes through the skin of the testicles, there is no treatment needed.
de la tentigene	Of tensioning.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	A fistula is a joined part on the natural body that is too ugly to look at.
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	And some women have them as large as a hand, which is the treatment for it.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	You must hold the excess of the tendon in your hand or pincers, and cut it lightly.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not cut too deeply, lest blood flow out, then treat the other side until it is healed.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and in another case where it appears at the mouth of the wound, and fills it; and perhaps falls out, and is similar to cow dung; for this reason the ancients called it "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	You must cut it off, as we have said with tendonitis, and treat it until it is healed.
de erratique	Of erratics
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	It is erratic when the woman's nature is not yet pierced or the opening is small;
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	and it is natural by birth or accidental due to illness that has come upon her.
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	Where it is fastened by a bandage, or with fine silk thread, or thin metal, and is tied securely in the groin, or on the side, or below, or wherever it may be.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	and prevents conception, and childbirth, and perhaps the flow of menstruation.
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	And this knowledge is gained by observing the bathing place.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the obstruction is close to the surface, take it with your fingers or a rod.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is secured with fine silk thread, and it is close to the two fingers, be quick, and tie it like this:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	Place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread apart;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	Then stretch the two lips wide apart until the fine silk thread is tight and covers the vulva.
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	Then take wool, dampen it in oil, and place it on the site; make the woman lie with her husband each day, so that it cannot heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the wound is hard and thick, you must cut it with a spatula similar to myrtle leaves.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the blockage is made of native wood, suspend it from the ceiling and cover it.
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	And have the hemostatic medications ready as needed, such as dragon's blood, incense, along with some egg whites.
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	Then bring an open trough of bronze, wide enough so that the wound cannot heal.
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	And it should be this way for some time, and bring him a dry linen tent.
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat with other treatments until he is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when a tumor develops in the womb, it should be removed in this manner, unless there are embedded abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the abscess that is embedded in the womb, one should not attempt any treatment involving fire.
des emorroides	Hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins from which blood normally escapes, and when hemorrhoids are old they become tumor-like.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	And we have already mentioned in the classification their similarities with other ailments, and the signs, and now I will tell you which ones can be cured.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and hard tumors, when they are perfectly located in the anus and do not protrude, should not be treated with fire.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the mare's [illness], one can feel, are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	You should thus place the woman in a cold house, then stretch the tumor with forceps, and cut it at its roots, then apply powder made of blood-coagulating medicines such as dragon's blood and incense, and similar things.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	Then make her stand with her feet against the wall for an hour, then place her in cold water.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	And if there is bleeding, have her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate bark, and galls, and similar things; then take barley flour, mix it with honey and egg white, and apply this poultice to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops bleeding, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If not, have him apply cupping glasses to his back and breasts without injury;
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	Then take linen, dip it in plantain juice or hawthorn juice mixed with old wine, and apply it to the affected area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess is healed, treat the area with an ointment until it is fully recovered.
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	And the one called "albathir" is red, similar to a harsh head, it should be cut like the teething ring that I mentioned.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is fully recovered.
des apostemes de la marris	Abscesses of the cheek
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscess arise in the cheek, such as cancer, stone-filled abscess, herpes, shingles, fistulas, haemorrhoids and hot abscess, along with numerous other diseases that I have mentioned in my classification.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	It is therefore necessary for me to discuss in this treatise the hot abscess that appears on the genitals, which is not among the abscesses that should be lanced.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	And if you wish to know the work of iron, look to see if the abscess is acute at its onset, full of heat and fever, and becomes red when visible to you.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Then do not hasten to pierce, but let it die until the pain subsides;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	And then have the patient sit on a chair, and place two small stools where they can lean, supporting their back and bringing their feet outside the legs;
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	And have their thighs spread apart, place their arms beneath their knees, and bind them well with a good bandage;
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	Then turn them towards their right side and bring the instrument used to open the joint, which then takes shape;
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	and it is necessary that when you go to introduce this instrument, that you first insert the tip in order to know the depth of the wound so that what enters within from the instrument does not go deeper than it should and does not injure the patient.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with cloths so that the instrument does not harm them.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	and it is necessary that he places the handle of the instrument above and holds the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscess opens, and it is done with the hand softly, it is necessary to cut at its head, or with a spatula gently.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	And when the bowel is empty, you must place into the wound moistened tents in rose oil or in dry green oil.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	place the tent far outside of the wound in front of the orifice, and put on top of the orifice and over the wrist clean linen moistened in water where mallows have been boiled.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it after two days of this treatment until it is healed.
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and every so often irrigate the orifice and wound with enema of water and honey, then with water where white lily roots and long aristoloche have been boiled.
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then return to the treatment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is red in the flesh, you must be cautious of applying hot iron, but treat it as we have said in the previous section.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	Mestier est premier a la baile 
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	Then the child must hurry to get out of fire.
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	Therefore you know that these births are according to natural position, and the child comes out under its head, with the secondary (midwife) helping it.
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	And when you see these signs, you should gently apply pressure on its belly so that the child comes out soon.
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	For when it descends onto its head, the secondary helps with it, and the man is rid of his excesses through a good cleansing.
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	And this one who comes in another way does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For sometimes it comes out on its feet, or from the body or shoulder, and with hands, or it comes from the belly, or often, and is turned by chance onto its neck, and in other evil positions.
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	If it is necessary at the bath that she should be wise and skilful in these matters, avoiding error and deception, I will show you all the ways in which one must help her.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the child comes out head first due to natural delivery, and the woman labours intensely during childbirth, and her strength is weak, let them make her sit on a saddle or seat which women hold for her.
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	And her nourishing broth of oil or fenugreek be boiled, then pour some bathwater between her two hands with the small spatula of this shape:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	And open up the amniotic sac, and cut by her fingernail so that the fluids which are within flow out;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	And press on the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must administer an enema to the woman with a mixture of fenugreek and sesame oil.
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	Then make her swallow coltsfoot and sneeze, holding her mouth and nose closed for an hour.
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	Now proceed to extract the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if both hands appear first, you must gently return them, one at a time.
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	And if they cannot enter, place the woman on a chair and lift her feet upwards.
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	Then raise the chair from the ground, supporting the woman so she does not fall when rising.
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if your hands cannot enter, and the child dies, then cut open their hands with the knife that was mentioned before, extract the child, and reset them evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	At the child's birth from its feet.
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child starts walking on their feet, you must push them upwards.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	And then turn it over repeatedly until it is even.
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then take one of their feet and stretch it again and again.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	When they jump up to their thighs, instruct them to grasp it, and make them sneeze frequently.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If jumping happens, may God want it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump as we have said, turn it over and over until it is according to its natural form.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it will be lightly done.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it does not happen as we have said, then take mucilage from flax, and oil of lilies, and melted gum, and grind everything together in a mortar.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and place this ointment on her feminine nature, then have her sit in warm water up to under her ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is moistened underneath, make a collar of myrrh for her, and place it beneath her, leaving it there for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then have her sit on a seat, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose shut, and press gently on her belly, for the child jumps now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	Of the child's exit onto their knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this manner, he puts his hands first forward and then backward.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	Then she should be supported under her neck, with her feet hanging downwards, and let her lie on the bed.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and folds his hands back and forth, then he presses his hands on the stomach, and removes the cushions from underneath, until she is aligned downwards;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the child does not jump, take his feet and move them vigorously, then massage his stomach upwards, then put your hands on him.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and rock the child back and forth.
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and tell the woman to hold herself as long as the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	Of the child's exit from the broad side, with one hand hanging out.
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	I must devise a way to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If one cannot restore it, then make the woman get up and go away.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot walk, then have her lie down on the bed and lift her legs vigorously.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	Then bring forward the poultice I described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	And if she does not give birth, make her sit on the chair, then help to bring back the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	And turn the child according to its natural position, make her sneeze, and instruct her to hold on until the baby comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	Of the child's emergence from its collarbone, let it spread its hands, with its face turned towards the back of its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary for the midwife to hold her hand, then turn it gently back and forth, and lift the child lightly;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when it is equalized, place the natural poultice of fat and oil on it, as we have said, then instruct her to move gently back and forth;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	and when you have done this, make her sit on a chair, and instruct her to grasp it.
et la fai esternuer.	make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in this same manner for all secondary dislocations
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes out forcefully in this manner on the first attempt, scoop the moisture away with your nail, until it is emptied.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if any of it falls on her face or neck, wipe it off immediately, without delay, and remove the child.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then insert the child, ensuring it is placed correctly, and instruct the woman to hold onto something once.
adonques si istra legierement.	afterwards lift her gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	Of the dislocation of the hips
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; 
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	And this is not a strange thing, and often happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two such things are strange occurrences, and they do not live long if so named.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know these, that they multiply, and are dispersed by the surgeon who divides them, which is connected to the scabbard.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	And sometimes they emerge naturally just as toes do, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they emerge severely, then the treatment should be as we have described, and the surgeon must be skilled, acting swiftly and lightly in their actions.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And act accordingly to bring about recovery.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	Some are formed in the womb I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or many up to XV, and they are all shaped in the form of a child by the measurement of the glorious sage, and it is necessary that the nurse knows all this, for perhaps similar things happen to him.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	He should do as he ought.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat the woman for a dead child in her womb, as I said in the previous section, and it does not come out easily, and you are forced to perform manual labor;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	It is necessary that you know if the woman has sound virtue and no mishap, or she fears death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	The woman should be positioned on her back with her head inclined downwards, and her legs raised;
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	And the minister holds her down with two parts of his body, or she is tied to the bed so that she cannot move during the child's descent.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then rub the mouth of the pregnant woman with moist oils, a mixture of alum, fenugreek, and flaxseed, then anoint her stomach with these oils and mixtures.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	Gently shake the pregnant woman and place her in a position where she can easily expel the fetus, ensure that it is well-aligned with the birth canal, take care if the child's head has already appeared.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	If the child's limbs are entangled in its eyes or neck, mouth, palate, under its beard, clavicle, or near its sides, and if it is descending feet-first, then push with your hand, holding firmly on to their middle and lower ribs.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and he must hold the hook with his right hand, and place the curve between the fingers of his left hand, and push gently with all his might, and insert the hook into one of these places that we have mentioned, until it reaches the empty space;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the shape of the hook:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then insert another hook opposite it, or the third if you need them, so that the extractions are even;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then stretch them evenly by moving one way and the other, to take it out, and let the hooks be toothed so as to hold [it], just like this is the shape:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if any part remains inside, anoint the hole with some of his fingers' oil, and push those fingers into that part, then pull out the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if there remains none, then place this sling higher up, and do so until he can pull himself forward with it.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot pull it back due to tightness, then you must wrap a cloth over it until they are both even.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	Then wrap the cloth around the junction of the palm or wrist, and do likewise for the other hand and both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the child's head is large and it is stuck in the passage or has an acute presentation, then you must insert the sharp-pointed spatula between your fingers, split open the head and extract the fluid.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	Ou you la ront a l'estrument qui est apelez "almidach", de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est apres cestui;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	Et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	Et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	Et s'elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	Et s'il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre;
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on their feet, then the traction is light, and the adjustments at the mouth of the womb are slight.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if there is constriction in the belly or chest, it is necessary that you extract it with a cloth wrapped around the hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and open the belly or chest until the moisture within is released;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if the other member is removed and the head remains, push your hand along its length from above the joint to the mouth of the socket;
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	then insert one or two fingers and draw them out forcefully;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the mouth of the socket is narrowed due to hot inflammation that has arisen there, it should not be disturbed but instead softened with moist and greasy things.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and administer plasters, as well as moistening agents in water to soften and moisturize.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is lying on their side, and you can position them evenly, administer what we have mentioned for a living child;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	If there is no other option, pull it apart piece by piece, leaving nothing of the caul (membrane) behind.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, administer what we mentioned for hot abscesses that form in the groin;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	If there is bleeding, apply cold water compresses to restrain it, and provide further treatment as needed.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly a child had been dead, then another was born on top of it, and the other one died as well.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess formed in the jaw, swelling until it burst open, and began to rot (or stink).
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat him, and I thought long about it, but could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a plaster of strong attraction, and an object came out, seemingly like bone, then after some days another one did too.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly puzzled as to why the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it might be the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I treated the wound, extracting embedded bone fragments until the woman was in better condition;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	And the woman lived a long time like this, and there was now a small piece of flesh from that place.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	And I have recorded this chapter only for those who, when the masters find a strange case, may know how to provide assistance.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To bring back the bone to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	After this comes the form of the pressure bandage, for which we have the books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	And on page two, at the second head of the second line.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	However, the horns should be more subtle than the restraining device, and they should be made of ebony or boxwood.
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	And the mouth of the wood should be two fingers wide, and the edge of the tree it bites into should be one palm and a half long.
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and between the two limbs there should be two joints of this same wood, which are firmly attached to each other, half a palm in length or slightly more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	and these two joints are inserted into the mouth of the socket to open when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more delicate and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, resembling the shape of pliers.
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and it has two joints at each end, as you see, one palm in length, and two fingers in width.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you see that the socket needs to be opened with all the instruments, have the woman sit off the edge of the bed, her feet hanging down and legs open, then insert the two joints, which are attached together, into the socket, and hold the head of the instrument underneath between her thighs.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then work your hand with all the instruments, just as you did with the equal pliers, according to the amount you want to open the mouth of the joint, so that the bail can do what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	This instrument is fully mounted, and its shapes are multiplied;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	And when you have these instruments ready, the work is all the more urgent, and it brings greater esteem to men for their skill.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not despair of the instrument which you have prepared, because their need is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the afterbirth is retained in childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze vigorously, and keep your hands over her mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she succeeds with this, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, take a pot and make a hole in the lid, putting into it herbs that can open the pores of the skin as gently as possible: rue, anise, chamomile, wormwood and centaury.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	All these herbs or some of them should be boiled in water inside the pot over fire.
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	Then put one end of the tube or hole from the pot into the patient's mouth and the other towards their nose, holding it so that the steam enters the patient.
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	Then make them sneeze as we have said before.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the injury is caused by a fall.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	If it remains after this treatment and does not work, command the nurse to wet her left hand with oil of sesame or muskroot juice, then put it inside the patient's anus and massage it; she must also check the womb.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and when she has found it, then grasp it and extend it little by little straight, so that the husband does not suffer during extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	but it must be moved lightly to the right and left, and then pulled.
si venra et se desaerdra.	then it will come out and dislodge itself.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the husband's throat is narrowed, we have mentioned the cure of sneezing and herbal fumigation;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it does not respond to all that we have said, take care that you do not rush when pulling it out;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that he who is at the husband's throat be bound to the wife's thigh and enema her with ointment of four-fold composition.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	If there is inflammation and it returns afterwards, you must treat it again.
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	But nevertheless, when inflammation occurs and it leads to foul smell in the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	It is necessary then to use suitable fumigations for this:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	None of the ancients have tested fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates a woman to retain her flowers and second-course is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it should be similar to the appearance of a dog's head, with the subtle parts placed above in nature, and the larger parts over the fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	The fumigation should be above the coals, and let it last as long as is necessary, then start another one anew.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the fundament.
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born without an open anus; instead, it is sealed by a subtle membrane.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	Therefore, it is necessary for the nurse to pierce this membrane with her finger, and not use a sharp spatula, being careful not to harm the child.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place soft wool soaked in wine and oil on it, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will heal, insert a plank peg into the hole, and leave it there for several days; remove it when the child wants to go outdoors.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And sometimes this sealing occurs suddenly due to a wound or abscess.
si covient coper celui soudement:	It is necessary to cut through this sudden sealing.
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	Treat it as described for the anus of a newborn.
de la fistule dou fondement	From the anal fistula.
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	and when this old dislocation heals, it forms a white or subtle scar, and sometimes these are piercing fistulas;
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and they are recognized by those who have experienced it through evacuation or flatulence when the patient evacuates, and sometimes a worm jumps out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if there are fistulas that penetrate up to the bladder, and up to halfway down the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and they reach up to the hip joint, and up to the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one recognizes a piercing fistula in the anus, but not a non-piercing one:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and that you insert your index finger into the anus, and gently push a thin needle made of brass or iron into the fistula if it is not twisted.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it is twisted, insert a slender probe made of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or hair with your finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge of pus or air nor a visible wound as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	know that it does not perforate;
si te haste dou curer.	then hasten to treat it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula pierces through to the bladder or the urine passage, it leaks urine, and cannot be healed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is perforated up to the hip joint, then the probe has reached its destination.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	If there is no twist and the pain is around that area, then it is likely in a curved section of the intestine, and neither medication nor immediate treatment through poultices are effective.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And for these persistent fistulas, there is no cure but toil, and the foolish pride of surgeons who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In that which is not persistent and not ancient, there is hope for healing with iron, as I have proven, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back;
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	And lift their legs up to their thighs, and have their thighs inclined towards their belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then insert a tent of iron, or brass if there is torsion, until you know where the tip lies.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels it around their anus, then you must insert your index finger, and when you feel that the tent has pierced [the fistula];
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	And if it is uncovered where you feel a fissure or flesh, then know that it is Persian.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If it is not worked on, one cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One says nevertheless that they may be well healed, but this happens rarely.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	And the treatment one applies is to heat the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	And place all of the hot [tool] into the fistula until it reaches its base.
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	Do this twice or thrice until you know that these faulty tissues are burned, which resembles a bird's feather.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then treat wet bandages with butter until all moisture has left, then treat the ointment by drawing out matter and sealing it together.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If this, no other way can be healed;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if the tent enters, and does not pierce all the way through to the right side of the anus, and between your finger and the tent is a thick layer of flesh or sinew, and you see the fistula at that which sews together the covering from within;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	then cut off the beginning of the fistula, and push it back before the tent, and then cauterize after, until you reach the head of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and the tent will be released, and fall out.
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	Then avoid those damaged parts that look like a bird's feather, leaving them untouched.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if blood rushes into you and comes between your body and the work, cauterize it with fire or with medicated paste.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For fire cauterization combines two things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	that is to say, the burning of these damaged parts and the stemming of blood flow along with drying out moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then treat wet wounds with butter or ground substances until the skin turns pale, and remove burnt flesh from the wound.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then treat open sores with soothing ointments for hardened skin, using dry medications.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For once it is reset, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes right up to the anus, and is away from the body, put your finger in the anus and ask the patient.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you notice the wound and there is either skin, membrane, or flesh between two parts that are about to break through, with no apparent way out and little hope, then administer one of the three methods below:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	where you cauterize as we have said, or you cut to the bottom, or if you can, apply tents and treat it as first described;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too deep, lest you cut the membrane that holds the foundation and cause involuntary evacuation.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then treat it as we have said.
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	perhaps it will be ulcerated, so you remove the covering and clean it once cut near the foundation, either with a tent or another pointed instrument.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then remove that faulty flesh which is in the wound as much as you can.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	then consider restoring the wound and removing the fistula from the part outside of the foundation.
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If it were a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And sometimes they form fistulas in this way:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and it is when you insert the tube into the fistula, and it is near the fundament next to the skin above, take a perforated tube with this shape:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	...and insert the thread awry into it in II, and pierce the tent with the thread into the fistula until its head is reached.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is pierced in the margin of the fundament inside, then remove the wire from that perforation, just as you would insert your finger into the fundament;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	And pull the ends of the wire together, bringing the two sides into contact, and clamp them tightly to each other, leaving it for one or two days;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	And clamp it periodically until the wire cuts through the flesh between them, allowing drainage;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then treat the wound until it is sealed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not rupture, make it burst in every way you can if it is not too deeply embedded.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not suitable to treat a wound that deeply embedded with cauterization; and then you must cure it as we have said until it heals.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spinal needle used to make the fistula is very sharp and pointed on one side, and serrated on the other.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	On the other side it is not sharp because we do not want to cut what should not be cut, as you can see here:
des emorroydes	For haemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Hemorrhoids are of two types:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	They are found inside the anus like small grains of resin, and they can be small or large, with some containing blood, and there may be one or several. They also protrude outside the anus and at its opening.
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	But those which are deficient have little moisture, and also here or a little yellow water or a little blood, and they have the colour of the body;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	And the treatment for those who have them inside the rectum is that you instruct the patient to strain when going to the bathroom until the faeces exit and the object appears.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you hurry, grab it with forceps or hold it with your nail, then cut it at its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	And if the forceps cannot hold them due to moisture, grasp them with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamois.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	Pull them out with your hands, then cut it, and sprinkle some hot powder on top as a caustic agent.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	Where you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then treat other treatments until they are healed.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	And if the foundation cannot come out, administer to the patient a biting and harsh enema to wash what is in the fundament, so that it may exit clearly.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	When the patient asks, and if the filament is forced out of the fundament, then the treatment is light.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And it is that you grasp them with your nail or with pincers and cut them off, then treat them as we have said until they are healed, and be wary of cutting with a blade.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	Thus it is appropriate that you apply the suture in this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take a twisted thread, and pass it through a needle, then draw the thread up and pierce the needle from the other side, turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and let them hang loose.
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	Hold the thread tightly, then tie a knot in it, remove the needle, and do this for all of them, leaving one to draw out any excess blood.
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Place on the bottom a damp cloth soaked in rose oil or wax, and put it over the wound, then instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Leave it in place until the poultices fall off, and once they do, treat with ointment and other remedies until it is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	By drying out of faeces from the bowel/rectum.
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often there is drying out of faeces in the intestine, due to constraint by natural forces and when illness is longstanding and does not respond to treatment.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	You must remove the bark with the tip of your spatula or nail, making sure it doesn't get wet.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	Then treat it until it is firm as needed.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	And if it cannot heal, begin the rasping again more vigorously than before until it bleeds a lot and becomes raw.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is healed.
dou fremit	From swelling.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A fistula is a small faulty appearance between the body, which goes deep inside.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And sometimes it goes numb, and one feels it like a dead limb due to the tremors, spreading throughout the body, mostly in the hands more than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is such that you take a quill from a goose feather, or a strong vulture's feather, and place this quill onto the trembling, so that the purple circles touch the trembling all around;
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand over the entire quill so that you cup it all around the trembling, and put it in perfectly, and eradicate the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see fit, make such a cane from copper or iron according to this form, and let it be thin below and thick above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	Do not pierce at all, but hold it with your finger, and press it firmly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see fit, then cauterize the trembling, as it is described in the previous chapter on cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	Of the form of the clyster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Sometimes an argentum, or arquus, or molten iron alloy is made into a clyster.
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	And sometimes one makes these instruments small and large, according to what they are adapted for.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those which we adapt for the treatment of children and those who are weak and full of pain are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small and great clyster is thus broadly as follows: the bellies are tied according to this manner
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	And if there is an opening or the belly is tied like this, as you see, and the head is pierced inside;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	And has one side with two holes, and on the other side, one hole.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	And let the belly where one places the medicines be made of an animal bladder or parchment, and pierced all around with small holes, and have one finger's width between each hole, then thread into these holes a strong twine woven in a crisscross pattern like an X or tied tightly around it, and sew together the belly as if it were a goat;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	and when the physician is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then clyster.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and this is the shape of the circle;
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the physician not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or egg white, or something similar, then gently insert it;
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	then grasp the ministers with both hands together until it is completely visible, then remove the clyster and lift the patient's legs against the wall, and if the physician wants to exit, hold them as much as possible;
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he sleeps for an entire night nearby, it is even greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you give him an enema for a bellyache, and the medicament comes out quickly, repeat it until he is cured.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the haemorrhoids are either on the anus or abscess, let the clyster be as subtle as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of the subtle clyster, upon which the skin is stretched:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have already spoken about the treatment of wounds in the previous section;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	and we shall tell you the treatments of hands and medicine, according to their practice.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what has caused them, where they have been inflicted, and by which means.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by the striking of stones, and cutting by sword or knife, or by lance or stick or arrow, or by similar objects;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or by the location of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar parts;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, beginning with simple head wounds, since their memory will return in its own chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it is due to a blow from a rock or similar object, and the skin is still torn and the wound is large, and you slightly suspect hot abscess.
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	then make it bleed a little with the cerebral artery, especially if only a small amount of blood comes from the wound, and let the bleeding be on the opposite side of the injury.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and purge the patient of fullness from wine and fatty meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if they do not wish to bleed, their meat intake should be reduced, and they should refrain from drinking wine or eating meat.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and place on the wound, if a hot abscess appears there, cotton moistened with rose oil only, or in styptic wine;
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no hot abscess, apply on the wound, if it is fresh and full of blood, and has not been moved by air, a powder which I will mention shortly afterwards;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the air has moved it, apply some ointments until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	Et if the wound is large like that of a sword cut or similar, and the lips cannot be brought together with stitches, then bring them together by sewing, as I will explain for wounds in the belly, regarding suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound exposes the bone, is gaping, and only hangs by a small piece of flesh, then cut it off.
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	Then treat the wound with medication and restore hard flesh in place of leather, and instruct the patient to eat coarse meat, such as beef and wheat pudding, as well as poultry, and similar foods.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find skin with a rash that does not reach the bone, then cut out all of the affected area, discard it and then treat [the wound].
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if there is an artery in the wound or incision that does not stop bleeding and cannot be staunched with medicine, then seek out the artery and if you find it severed, tie it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if this does not bring benefit, then cauterize [the wound].
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, their treatment is also light [and straightforward]:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	It matters that you put this powder in, which seals [the wound] instead of letting it heal on its own.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the manner of preparing this powder is as follows:
pren encens une partie;	Take frankincense, one part;
sanc de dragon II parties;	dragon's blood (resin), two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	quicklime (calcium oxide), three parts, and finely mix the powder, then apply it to the wound, pressing it firmly, until it dries completely and seals with all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	bind it well, and leave it untouched without unbinding it, if there is no swelling;
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	for the medicine should not be removed until healing has taken place.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And at times one uses only lime [calcium oxide] when there is no frankincense or dragon's blood available, but the art has healed the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the burn had caused the wound to die, especially inside (the body), do not use this powder there at all;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply some digestive ointments, or poultices made of barley flour with water and honey until it becomes soft;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat him with other treatments until he is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the bone fracture occurs with the wound, and it is small, extract it with fine pincers;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you about skull fractures hereafter.
de la plaie dou col	of the neck wound.
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound occurs on the neck and it is straightforward, there is no distinction between this and a head injury; however, if the carotid artery or the jugular vein in the neck has been severed, this is critical.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the brain, there is no other treatment besides letting it heal, and do not apply anything constricting, for it harms the brain and causes it to retract.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not apply anything cold to the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuity is with the brain, which is the highest organ.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but let the medicine be washed in warm water sweetened with rose oil, and cooked cabbage also washed in sweet water, and other stones of salt according to this way, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, cut it and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep, and it is covered with hair and full of bowels, then pierce it in a lower place.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is severed, and blood flows out, then uncover it, tie it off, and cauterize it if necessary.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	and if the windpipe of the throat is severed, or the heart, and breathing is maintained, as the flesh still lives, then cut the heart above the neck of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then restrain it carefully, leaving it for a few days, then treat it with draining ointments until it is healed.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	And if the wound has penetrated into the bone, treat it with cautery.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	If there are bone fragments, remove them forcefully if you can, and for those you cannot reach, leave it to let the wound rot, and ease the discharge.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle it with the powder I mentioned earlier.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound with a fistula, treat it as I have described in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	Of the wound from a lance or knife.
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a wound from a spear or knife, and the injury is deep, observe whether air escapes as the patient breathes in.
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	Know then that the wound is mortal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	And if it is not deep, and fresh with all its blood, do not apply the powder in the first hour, nor bind it to stop the blood from escaping entirely, and returning to the heart, which would kill the patient;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	But apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	And if you have no ointment, then place old cotton in the wound to draw out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	And there will come no spasm, nor harmful trembling of the heart or breathlessness;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	And when you see good signs, know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Treat it then with tents and other remedies until it is cleansed.
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	And if it cannot be healed, and the wound persists, then know that there is a fistula present.
si la cure si com on doit.	So treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, be it on the chest, arm, or back, treat as per the front.
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	If it is large, suture it.
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	And if it is small, treat with powder, and if it has penetrated the bone or broken into pieces, clean the wound, and realign any displaced parts.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not removed, let the wound fester, it will relieve the extraction.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds on different limbs, the judgment is the same as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	Rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The ruptures of the abdomen are large, medium, and small.
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	From the large wound, sometimes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines protrude, leading to the introduction of others.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	The suturing is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound causes more trouble than the large one, because one must put back the intestines more carefully, unless they are placed back step by step.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	Because the intestines swell sometimes when they feel cold, so they retract more tightly, and thus the medium-sized wound is preferred, because one must put back the intestine to its place rather than the other parts of the abdomen.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And know that a rupture of the belly occurs according to four manners:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	the two common sutures occur in the suture of the belly, and the suture of other wounds of the body, and two other proper sutures are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and nevertheless they are more specific with the suture of the belly, and I shall say each one and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and a part of the intestine comes out, and it is difficult to replace, this can be done through one of two methods:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or due to the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, heat it in such a manner:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	Moisten a sponge or soft cloth with warm water only, or cook it in water infused with vinegar and spice, then apply to the intestine until the swelling is reduced.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And having made this constricting wine, it becomes mature under the sun to reduce swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the swelling start to subside, dampen the intestine with water or other soft cloths that have been cooked in malves, for by this method it is alleviated of much discomfort.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	And if it cannot enter, then make a small incision in the wound with an instrument used for cutting haemorrhoids.
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	and the first treatment is to close the wound by cutting it so one must not cut unless there is a great need for it.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this is the instrument to open it with:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	when cutting inside along its curve and not outside, and see here the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines have come out, then replace them carefully according to their natural form into their proper place, if you are able, for this is better.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is wide and it is located in the lower part of the abdomen, one must lay the patient on their back and elevate their legs higher than their head.
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	And if the wound is in the upper part of the abdomen, place the head and chest higher than the lower parts; also, when the abdominal rupture occurs on one side or another, position the patient so that the affected part is higher than the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And thus you must manage what I say for large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	For small wounds, use what has been provided to you, take it in your hands and carefully apply a gentle medication that covers the entire wound, bringing its edges together.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	This is the common method for stitching: take a needle or multiple needles according to the width of the wound and leave two inches at the tip of the wound before threading it with strong thread.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	Pierce the two sides of the skin with two ends of the siphac, which is beneath the skin on the inside, so that you make it pierce through from this part, and bring together the two ends of the siphac in a group of four.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	then strain a double thread around the needle in two parts, then bring together the two sides of the wound appropriately, and then leave one finger's width, and insert another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop until all needles are tied according to your need, until the entire wound is closed.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	and let the needles be medium-sized, between fine and thick, for the fine ones cut through all the flesh, while the very thick ones cannot enter properly.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	hence it is necessary that they be medium-sized.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and one should not insert the needles too far beyond the flesh and skin, lest they cut and open the wound before it is sutured.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and then cut the skin around the needles so they do not wound the patient while sleeping, and place tents or bandages over the needle sites to hold them in place, leaving them there until the wound is healed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	This method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds because it only requires one or two needles.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second type of suture is common, and it involves gathering together the two sides of the skin and the two sides of the subcutaneous tissue with one needle or a strong medium-sized thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	And when you have pierced these four sides together, draw the needle back to the starting point, like one would sew fabric.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and place a space between each stitch equal to the thickness of a thumb.
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	these stitches will be used by the man, and I sewed a wound that a horse had on its belly, which was pierced by a knife, and the wound was larger than a palm, with the intestines protruding by two palms, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned his intestine after it had been outside for twenty-four hours, and the wound was healed up to fifteen days, I treated him, and he was cured.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the doctor had judged that he would die, but it was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not treat it with ointment, as I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and I placed old cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with water and honey until it was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Now I shall tell you of the two proper methods of suturing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle, and push it from outside to inside through the wound;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	When it has pierced the heart from right to left, leave the tip of the needle where the vessel rests or pierces where you have pushed the needle through, and make it go through again from inside to outside.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And the method of this suturing is that you sew it like a peltier sews furs, leaving one vessel on one side and taking it up again from another, until the entire suture is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second method of suturing, as Galen describes it properly, is done by bringing the two edges together naturally and pressing one tip of the vessel onto another in such a manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Insert a needle at the base of the nose, and pierce that place only, leaving two holes on either side.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	Then turn the needle, and pierce it outward from that place until you reach inside, at the two holes on either side.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Pierce one and then the other outward from that place until you reach inside, at two more holes of the nose which are on the opposite side.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And this is the modern method, and the most common way of suturing.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Galen said this word, and many witness that one must suture the belly with two needles, having thread in each.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and you must pass one needle from one side to another, like those who sew leather straps;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the suture is more grievous than those of other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgments about the wound are such as the judgments about other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, rather than let it dry out, you should replace the intestine and sew up the wound.
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then apply the powder of burning flesh, and if it has dried out, then put some ointment that is appropriate until the wound heals.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	Tie the thread, and let the eyelids and eyebrows fuse together.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat the wound as you would others, until it is healed.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	And if you don't have medicine, apply old cotton wool to it as soon as it begins to drain pus, and move it twice daily until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	Because you don't need any other medicine in many instances when the wounds are simple.
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	And if you suspect that the wound might cause the main limbs to become infected, you must dampen a light linen cloth with lukewarm oil or rosehip oil, and place it around the groin and under the armpits.
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	and if he feels pain or inflammation in the bowels, and it happens often, then cleanse them with a clister of red wine, especially if the inflammation has reached the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and pierce it from within, knowing that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to treat than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine which is called 'jeun' cannot be healed when it is wounded, and this is due to the fragility of its veins, and because of the delicacy of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the belly button falls out of the wound, put it back in as with the intestine, while it is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	and if it is old and has turned worms or black, you must tie the spot that has gone black to prevent bleeding as there are veins and arteries there;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	then cut what is between the tie, and hang the two navels from beneath the wound outwards to ease its extraction when the belly button falls, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	On the rupture of the mouth
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestines are round and the wound is small, one can restore it in some men, for I saw a man who was wounded in the belly by a lance;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, from which excretions and gas came out;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I treated it according to my ability, and I did not cease to clean it until he was healed, and the wound closed up.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw it healed, I suspected that the patient might have an ailment in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there was no illness there, but he remained in better health, eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and certain experimenters say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in such a manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	take coarse thread from large gut, then gather the lips of the wound together, and when the thread has opened its mouth, put it on both lips so that it tightens their mouths above.
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then cut the head of the thread and leave it so that it cannot be untied, then put another piece of thread afterwards in this same manner as before, until the wound is completely bound.
et cout la plaie.	and cut the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	These stitches adhere in the intestine, and there is no harm to the patient, and if you want to sew up an intestine with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, do it this way:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Take the end of this gut string, which should be very thin, then tie to its end a fine linen thread, then pass the thread through the needle and sew up the gut, then pull it back over the tear.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	And this way of sewing, it is not false, only according to the path of faith and hope.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestinal bowels, there is no cure or health, only skillfulness.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it heals, is universally called a "fistula", especially when it is healed and bowed inwards.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula is truly a false knotting that is hard and white, where there is no pain felt, and it also has hair like the feather of a bird.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes it leaps clear, and other times dense.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes little, and others enough.
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, this is true only for one of nine causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	that is to say, due to the scantiness of blood or pus;
ou por sa malice;	or because of its nature;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or due to the hard flesh within it, and on its lips, which does not allow new flesh to grow;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or because there is too much corruption [putrefaction];
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	Where there are sores and the substance is of poor quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	where the medication is not effective in treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	where due to this, the corruption is like a plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	where due to the properties of the region, digestion is slow, healing takes time, and it swells naturally;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, signs, and treatments with remedies in the section.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now I must inform you of the treatment for fistula, which is performed by manual operation.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that fistulas occur in any part of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	for there are fistulas that affect the large veins, arteries, nerves, anus, intestine, bladder, sides of the body, spine, or any joint in the hands and feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if there is any return to the property of the main member, and its similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all fistulas that are of this nature are difficult to cure, there is nothing but work [to do] and ignorance.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if there is any fistula that does not reach the level I have mentioned, and you are confident of the treatment, and you know how to identify it, then take a tent of linen or iron, if the fistula is straight, make an incision.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	and if the fistula is twisted, then search for it with a thin tent of lead, because the lead can bend and move along the twisting.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	and if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot locate it well with tents, then cleanse it by clisterizing through one of the openings, as moisture flows from one opening to another, thus cleaning it.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	Then carefully examine it as best you can to determine if there is bone or nerve involved, and whether the injury is complete or not, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and where exactly he feels this pain.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	And when you have truly located where it is, whether it is close to a joint, nerve, artery or vein, or any of the places I mentioned, treat it accordingly as I told you, and remove whatever is damaged and corrupt within.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	Then cure it until it is healthy, and if the fistula is deep in the right spot, you must treat it perfectly, as much as you can, then place moistened bandages soaked in healing ointment, pushing them inside until the tip of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes any excess remaining at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then I apply invigorating ointments to healthy flesh until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And if it is not healed by this, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut it out.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If the wound or inflammation does not burden your principal limbs as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackening, cut away until all corruption is removed, then treat it with invigorating substances until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	And if it is not healed, and bends backward as before, know that you have not gone deep enough:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	If it is uncovered and searched thoroughly until you reach the bottom, remove all the decayed matter, then reset its position.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if it is healed in this way, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the decayed matter has penetrated too deeply, and you cannot reach it.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	If there is another instrument left by nature.
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	And if there is a small decayed bone that you can extract with pincers, remove it with the suitable instrument for this purpose. If there are multiple bones, remove them all together, leaving none behind.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	And if moisture prevents you from continuing without any errors or fear, cut away the moisture and flesh, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, apply something that causes suppuration to the wound and leave it until all the flesh is rotten around the bone. Then they will be able to extract the bones more easily.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	And if it is a large bone, such as from the leg or thigh, treat only the suppuration until all discoloration has disappeared and then redress the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	And if a large part of it has become suppurated, and reaches the bone marrow;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	It must be cauterized and cut until all suppuration is removed, then treat it until it is healed.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in a man's leg so that you may take example from it and apply it to your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	He was a young man of about thirty years old, who had pain in his leg due to an internal cause, such that the matter came up into the leg, and it swelled with a large abscess, and there was no external reason to open [it].
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	But the doctors, in their folly, worked on it so much that the abscess opened up and a lot of matter flowed out, becoming a fistula, and there came forth many discharges which threw out all bowel contents and moisture from the body;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	And many doctors put him through various treatments for about two years, and there was no wise person in the art of medicine, until I was called upon, and I examined his leg and the medicines they were using to treat it, and saw what was flowing out from the openings in great quantity. 
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	And the young man's body became red, and he had a yellow complexion.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I set up a tent in one of these holes, and then examined all the holes, and found that one came against the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	So I hurried and cut into one of the openings until I exposed part of the bone, and I found it corrupted and perforated, with the corruption reaching deep inside to the bone.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I scraped away what appeared to be the corrupted part of the bone and believed there was no other corruption beyond what I removed.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	And I began to treat the wound with soft medicine over a long period of time, but it could not heal.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	Then I started again and exposed the bone as before, finding that the corruption had spread into it. I scraped it away, then removed it, and tried in vain to close the wound.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	but I could not cut around one palm's width of bone, and it remained stuck to all its soft tissue, then I treated it with medicine;
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and it was quickly healed and fused, and there was no need to start the work again except for the patient's weakness, who could not endure more, and because of my fear of his death.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation, he often bled, but he was completely healed, and in place of the bone, a hard tissue grew, and it had good consistency and caused no harm or damage whatsoever, neither going nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if any bone in the body is broken, it should be treated in this way:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	take a bandage, and bind the head of the bone that protrudes, and instruct someone to pull it upwards;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and place another thicker bandage made of wool on the flesh that is above the bone, and extend the head (of the protruding bone), so that you pull away the corrupted flesh beneath, and uncover the flesh over the location where you wish to operate, ensuring that it does not cut into the flesh;
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	And place a hot iron or a table beneath the bone to cut away the corrupted flesh.
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	One must be very careful to see and feel where the corruption is, and check again thoroughly.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupted but does not break open, and the corruption lies either in the middle or on one side, expose all the flesh.
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	Then place the hot iron underneath [the wound] and cauterise from one side to the other over the entire length of the corruption with a probe as we have said.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	And if the corruption is in the joint, cut away the corrupted joint [surface], and cauterise the bone on its other side.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is located between two joints, there is no other option but to cut it out.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	and if the corruption is in the wrist of the hand or the ankle of the foot, it is indeed very severe, yet you must still inquire about this corrosion, how it presents itself to you.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	purify it in every way possible, but make sure that neither the vein nor the nerve oppose you.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	know that there are many types of incisor tools and saws for cutting these bones, depending on the arrangement of the bones, their appearance, thickness, subtlety, size, smallness, and hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for this it is necessary to match each type of operation with its appropriate instrument.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	And know that your work will show you the instrument you need, according to the knowledge of this art and the signs of different illnesses.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If you think about the instrument you need according to its purpose.
dou feu	Of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head can be affected internally or externally;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	And when you have treated that injury with medicine and it doesn't heal, then you must amputate the limb up to where the corrosion begins so that the patient may escape death or the evil consequence of losing a limb.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	And the signs are that the limb turns black as if burnt by fire and then after the blackness it spreads from limb to limb taking over the whole body.
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If you hurry to cut it, and if it is due to the sting of venomous beasts, such as a scorpion or snake, and the corrosion is on the top of your arm, then cut it, but do not give it time to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it has reached the hand, cut it at the joint so that the corrosion does not extend to the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	And if it reaches the arm, then cut it with a knife.
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	If it passes the knife, then it is death, and no strong remedy will save them except for quantities of its virtue.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	And do likewise when the corrosion comes to the foot:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	If it comes to the first joint, then cover it after the other joint.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	And if it happens on the foot, then cover the whole foot.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	And if it ascends to the leg, then cover at the knee joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	And if it goes above the knee, there is no other option but to let the patient die.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	The method of covering or binding the limb is that you tie it above and below, and have some ministers pull on one of the bindings downwards while others pull on the other binding upwards, and you cut away the flesh that lies between the two bindings with a spatula that is wide enough to expose the bone.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	Then cover it with cotton or silk, and place a linen cloth on each side so that the silk does not touch the healthy area, preventing further injury and an abscess from forming in the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if bleeding occurs while you operate, cauterize the area immediately or apply some hemostatic powders.
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then return to your medical treatment until it is completed, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage and treat it until it is healed.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened to the man with a wounded foot:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	He had a blackened wound that looked like a burn from fire, and this corrosion started on his big toe, spreading across the entire foot.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man saw the corrosion, he rushed to cut off his foot, and was healed.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and long after, the corrosion returned to his thumb, and he came to me, and I applied resonant substances to it after purifying his body, but could not stop the corrosion.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he saw that I had to cut off his hand, but I did not want to, as I hoped to reverberate the matter.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and I also doubted that if I amputated his hand, he would die, because the man's health was weak.
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he became desperate, returned home, and hurried to cut off his own hand, and was healed.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And I have not included cases where it is done otherwise, if one needs to do so.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	There is no instance where an abscess forms in the flesh and remains for so long that it creates a large accumulation of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	And then it hardens and ruptures, discharging the pus which remains visible in the wound, just like a vessel;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	The skin above is as thin as delicate cloth, and does not extend to the bone or nerve; such a condition is called a "sinus" and is not known as a "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	But if it extends all the way to the bone in depth, then it is called a "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the skin is such that you cut this skin all around it, especially when it is delicate, just like a piece of cloth.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and it does not matter for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you are worried that the skin will rot, and the decay is not complete, and the skin is thick with flesh, then clean it thus with a clyster:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	check if the breasts are large, and the bowels that are inside emit a foul odour, then clysterise with Egyptian medicine which is made thus:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	take equal parts quicklime, oil, and litharge, and cook them in a vessel over the fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	And then take according to your need, mix it with water and honey, and use it as an enema for the breast, holding the opening tight.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	Leave the medication there for two hours, then remove it by feeling around.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Do this several times until the breast is softened, and remove the pus.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	And sometimes you can use an enema of ash water if this medication is not available. Take ashes from grapewood and pour water over them, then strain it, and use it as an enema until you know the breast is well softened.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	And if the patient cannot tolerate it, neither Egyptian medication nor ash water, then use an enema of water and honey where there is a bit of powdered litharge.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	where you cleanse it with honey and mixed wine, for honey has the property to purify and wash, and wine causes the blood to rise.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and when you have done this, and you are certain that the wound is well cleansed, then cleanse it with what makes flesh grow in it, and take definitive cataplasm, and make it with rose oil and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	where you cleanse it with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken about their properties in the treatise on ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	and if the wound of the breast is small, and the cane of the enema cannot enter, then enlarge it with an iron rod a little, and put in a bit of Egyptian ointment or Basilican ointment until it is enlarged;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if the wound is too wide, cut it and leave only enough space for the clyster to enter, and if the opening that emits excrement is above, then close or cover it at a lower place where it is located.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bowels are perforated, it does not allow food to pass through.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	And if you cannot cut the skin below as you wish, prepare it in such a way that the bowels are directed to the lowest place they can be, for when the bowels are perforated, it does not allow food to pass through and if you cannot cut the skin below as you wish, prepare it in this manner:
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	That the bowels flow slightly downwards, and leave nothing of the bowels behind;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take consolidating medicine to put on the wound, and extend it onto a linen cloth that covers the entire wound.
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	then cover as much of the surrounding area as possible with a hole in the center larger than the original one, then extend ointment on another linen cloth according to the size of the wound and place it over the injury to ease swelling. Do not remove the large outer bandage for several days.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and the one on top of the wound, remove it often to reduce swelling and wipe away any discharge. Examine what comes from this swelling - is it poison or pus or just a lot of fluid, or is it digestible or undigestable?
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	and take note if the patient experiences pain and whether there is an abscess or not. Once your medicine has been applied in this way and you observe what emerges from the wound, know that the tissue is healing and bring the patient closer to health.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Then you must release it in the morning or on the third day, and when you untie the wound, change to another cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast ejects undigested food after many days, know that the breast is not healthy.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle venom emerges after a long time, do not despair of health, for healing is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are men who heal slowly in their wounds, and those who act contrary to this;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if the bowels remain undigested after many days, you should know that this breast has not healed;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if the breast heals slowly and is remote (far away), apply drying medications that are moist in substance but dry in effect, such as a definitive ointment, for it contains a large part of vitriol, which is the final medication.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take definitive ointment, make it with rosehip oil, and moisten it with old wine equal in volume;
puis le confit et en use;	Then boil it and use it.
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	And this same thing is better boiled when there's no definite ointment present, or take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind it up, and sprinkle the powder on honey while it's still on the fire.
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	Then mix it with a linen cloth and spread it over the chest. Sometimes an aristoloche is used, or roots of celestial lily, which are like barley flour and chickling vetch.
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	Use it as either a simple medicine or in combination with other treatments.
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	Grind them up into powder and mix it onto the honey I mentioned before, then apply it.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	And if the cure is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then know that corruption has reached the bone, or to hard tissues, or ligaments.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	If the treatment for curing fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of an abscess under the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	A panaricium is an abscess that forms beneath the nail of the finger or toe, or it may appear in other places.
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	And when it is neglected and left untreated, an abscess can form beneath the nail, leading to a deep pus-filled cavity that erodes and destroys the root of the nail, and sometimes even removes it entirely.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	It causes corrosion down to the bone, resulting in a foul-smelling pain and the affected area is wide and discolored.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the previous section, and the treatment is not effective, then it is necessary to cut away all the remaining unhealthy tissue near the nail with an iron tool, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cauterizations are a great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is sound;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	And if the nail presses against the flesh, beginning to prick and wound it, you should place a needle beneath the nail that pierces the flesh, push it upwards, and cut away this flesh carefully and lightly, then apply burning and corrosive medicines onto the remaining flesh to remove all.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corruption has reached the bone, cut it away, and pull hard, for as long as the corrupted part of the bone remains, healing cannot occur.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you see the finger is corrupted, cut it away from us as described before, then treat it until it is healed.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if he is wounded, and kicked, and feels great pain, then you must first treat his wounds.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	then cut the nail with the sharp spatula by slicing across it, and ensure that the cut does not go all the way through to the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, place something soothing on it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of the shoulder joint from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two adjusting thumbs that are born in some people's hands are sometimes very fleshy, and there is either skin or bones; at times they have nails, and one of them grows on the root of the joint, while the birth occurs in several of us.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	One who is born with a deformity of the finger will not move it, but one who is born at the knuckle of the finger may move it.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the incision for someone with fleshy fingers should be made in this way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cut it at its root with a wide spatule.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	He who is born in the root of the joint, so it is hard to cure.
si te tien dou coper.	So you must hold on firmly while cutting.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In one who is born or must be delivered by the posterior route, you must first cut the round flesh down to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable depth for it, and cure it until it heals.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joining together of bones occurs either by birth, or by the healing of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	It is necessary that you cut the sutures, so that they may heal according to their natural form;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two tents or moist cloths with rose oil, so that they do not adhere.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Or you place between two soft cloth pieces, until the flesh is sutured, as it should be done.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If a fusion occurs on someone's hand with the palm facing upwards, cut this fusion as it is required.
des vils	des villages
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Veins are open wounds filled with melancholy humours that come to many body parts.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And more dislocations happen in legs of those who walk on foot and work hard, compared to others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	So it is necessary for you to administer purging of the bile sometimes, then treat with the basil plant.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The treatment with iron is according to two methods:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	One method involves scraping [the wound] and drawing out the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The other way is to raise the vein and draw all of its blood out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The incision should be done in this manner:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	First immerse the patient's leg in hot water that is very strong [in temperature], until the large vein becomes subtle, then pull the sick person's leg up from above the thigh to just below the knee.
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then cut the vein at I place or II or III with a wide incision and lift it up then pull out black blood by your hand from one end to another until there is enough bleeding as the patient can tolerate.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then tie it up, and instruct them to abstain from food that generates black bile.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and repeat the evacuation process and cauterization when veins refill with blood and harm the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The remedies will be as follows in this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	place the patient's leg in warm water and shave any hair on it until veins become dilated and prominent.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you have no bath, heat it over the fire, then place it on the wound from the top of the knee down to the foot or below the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then work the skin with an unciner, and peel away the wound from each side until it appears when touched.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and you see it red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white cord.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	then push the thread underneath so that it is raised from the skin and then smooth it with an unciner gently, then place another piece of cloth on top three fingers wide.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then peel away the skin above the wound until it appears and then lift it with the thread as you have done before and smooth it with another unciner as you did initially.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	Then cut another slice, or several if you need to, then lift it up and cut it at the toe of the foot, then draw it out and lift until you reach the second slice.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then extract it slice by slice until it comes out completely, then cut it.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And if you cannot draw it and lift it out, then put a needle in from one side with strong double thread, tie and pull, push the needle underneath, turn your hand to either side until it comes out.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And make sure it does not cut, because if it cuts, you cannot draw it or lift it out, and this will harm the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	And when you have drawn it all out, place moist wool soaked in wine and rose oil onto the wound. 
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat [the wound] until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the face is distorted, twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it open in a crooked manner, but do not amputate.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and draw [the incision] as we mentioned before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron with which one cuts the face is curved, and does not slice, so that it incises the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	And it is of a thick curvature, because if it were delicate, it would slice the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is entangled in the legs, in warm parts of the body where no herb or tree grows, and on earth where there is no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	And perhaps it appears elsewhere than in the legs, and this occurs due to the decay that originates beneath the skin, much like how snakes and worms develop within the body, embedded between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the sign of the beginning of this vein is that a great inflammation comes to the leg, then the color changes, and the vein starts to protrude, just like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the wound opens, you must wrap it with a piece of wood that is 3 and a half to 2 inches long, tie it in place, and leave the wood hanging from the leg. Each time fluid exudes from beneath it, rewrap around the wood and retie it;
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	If it is too long, cut off a portion of it, then rewrap the remainder and do not cut into its root so that all of it emerges.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	For if you cut into its root, it will retract back into the flesh, causing abscesses to form as well as decay at that place and a painful illness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	For this reason, it is necessary that it should be treated little by little until reaching the head, and that nothing remains in the body.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	And sometimes this vein, when it is treated and reaches five palms in length or more, a man came to me whose vein extended for ten palms long, and when you cut it, it exudes one stream of pus through an opening, and perforates all the way through so that everything comes out;
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	The matter inside is evacuated, and medicine is applied to the area for some time to prevent putrefaction, then it should be treated like an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And sometimes this vein is very delicate, especially when it appears in the ankle joint or foot, where many openings form and it must be carefully treated.
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Cure it, therefore, as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Worms that are born between the skin and flesh.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called 'ox disease' in our land because it often happens to oxen, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body up and down, and one feels it move from limb to limb until it tears the skin where it was, and escapes;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	It is born of the putrefaction of certain humours, just as worms, serpents, and larvae are born in the belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	And one doubts its evil nature, for when it travels through the body and reaches the head, and goes into the eye, perhaps it enters and destroys the eye;
et ceu avient maintes fois.	And this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it being cured and drawn out, one cannot resist but when it goes away:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	one must therefore bind the place above and below with a strong tight bond, then press upon it and draw it out, and if the poison is perfect in the flesh, and you do not find it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm that it does is to run into the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming towards the eye or near it, firmly pinch below it with the eyebrow, then press upon it and draw it out;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	And it is necessary to use purgatives on the patient, cleansing the body with soluble medications for harmful humours and avoiding putrefying foods.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from windiness.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This illness is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that arises in certain limbs, able to move from limb to limb.
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	And I have seen what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to see an ailing woman, who uncovered her arm, revealing a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	And after that, I saw it rise up towards the shoulder like a worm, more than anything else, just like quicksilver when it runs from one place to another.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	The pain departs from its place, lodges in the shoulder, then spreads throughout the body, eventually reaching the other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then it returned around the body again, as I witnessed.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly amazed at how it moved from limb to limb, because I had never before seen this illness behave in such a manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	However, I had heard that pain could often move from one place to another, but I had not experienced it myself until I saw it in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	And I thought it was because the woman had a slender body and her veins were exposed, which made the wind's effects more noticeable.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	It does not appear according to this reasoning for those who are delicate and have moist bodies with covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you wish to treat this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said, then bind it above and below tightly, and cut above so that the windiness is forced back into place;
et cauterize le leu;	and cauterize the area.
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you do not see it with your own eyes, then treat it as if raising the wind, with foul-smelling pills, and pills of serapin, and similar others.
des saiettes	from arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and the parts of the body where they land.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The variations of it are such that some have large spikes, others small ones, while yet others are furry or smooth.
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	And there are those with two horns, others with tongues, and yet more with parts.
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and this one which falls on any limb, it happens in two ways:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or in the principal member of the body it occurs, such as brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar organs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it happens therefore in any part of these organs, and the sign of death which I will tell you next appears to you:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	you must be concerned with the extraction of this arrow, for death follows in many situations afterwards;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this evil sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not stuck deeply, then pull it out, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and if there is any damage to the substance above the brain, it appears as a black spot in one or both eyes, along with swelling, redness, dizziness, inflammation, reddening of tongue, spasms, loss of consciousness, and vomiting bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	And perhaps it goes without saying from the nostrils or ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps loses speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and leaps from the wound moisture white like pulsation, and there is also as burned flesh;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if these signs appear to you, hold on to the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is inside.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The signs of the arrow when it falls into the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and you also feel as if it were stuck in a hard object, not empty.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and perhaps the arrow moves with the heartbeat, and black blood flows out, and coldness and cold sweat come, and fainting.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Know then without doubt that death descends.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrowhead that has not pierced the lung is that there is no foam coming out of the wound, and the throat swells up, and the patient's complexion changes, and they breathe heavily while rejecting cold drinks.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrow falls into the covering of the intestines, it is near the small ribs;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and he suffers great pain and great difficulty breathing;
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and all the limbs of his shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrowhead falls into the stomach, sometimes something undigested may come out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrowhead falls into the belly, and no excrement comes out through the lower intestine, there is no hope for a cure or the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps out and flows continuously, and the patient feels severe pain;
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, such as the arm and forearm, neck, throat, shoulder, armpit, backbone, waist, thigh, legs, and similar parts are safe according to many arrangements.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery and it is not poisoned, as I will tell you happened to me so that you can do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a man that an arrow fell on his arm at the base of the neck:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and I tore it from underneath the fat of the ear, and she was healed without noticeable injury.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And I extracted an arrow that had lodged in the fat of the eye beneath the white part below, and the arrow was bent, and I could only reach its point towards the shaft, and the arrow was as long as a Turkish bow, all iron without barbs;
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	The eye healed, and no ill consequences befell it.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And I extracted an Arabic arrow from the throat of a Christian; this arrow had barbs.
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I cut away the barbs, and manipulated it until I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I extracted an arrow from a man, which was lodged in his abdomen or stomach area, and I thought he would die.
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change at all;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I incised above the arrow, released it, and pulled it out quickly, and he did not suffer any ill effects.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a man with an arrow lodged in his back, and the wound has healed over it;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and if the arrow remains inside him, and he does not experience any changes in his natural condition or functions, nor finds any harm in his normal activities.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And you see another man with an arrow stuck in his face, and the wound has healed over it;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and remained thus without suffering great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many similar others.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And extract an arrow from the prince's man, which was stuck in his nose and was slightly leaning towards the right side;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the arrow was completely bent.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called to treat him after it had been stuck for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found that the wound was quite narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I tested it with all my skill but did not feel anything.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt pressure and pain behind his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was due to the point of the arrow, so I applied an attractive and digestive poultice there, so that his skin would not swell.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	And the location of the arrowhead appeared to me.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I applied the plaster immediately, and the wound healed promptly. The patient remained ill for a long time until they felt the arrow one day inside their nose.
et il le me dist.	And he told me (about it).
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I applied corrosive medicine to the wound right away until it opened and I tried again, feeling the tip of the arrowhead that was exposed.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	Then I inserted an object into the wound's opening with that corrosive medicine until the arrowhead became visibly exposed.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	And it took almost four months to fully penetrate the limits of the wound, and then I widened the wound so that I could insert the tongs, but when I did, (the arrowhead) couldn't come out.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored.
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I then restored it, and the wound was sealed, and the patient was healed entirely.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	Now I have told you the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you may focus your care on what I do not mention, because a book cannot possibly cover everything.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	But wise masters compare very few great things, and for what is present and lacking, they find new work, and new instruments, to deal with the strange occurrences that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows do not leave the members where they are stuck, but rather according to two manners:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	Wherever by low place where they enter, or from another side;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which shoots forth from where it enters is an arrow embedded in flesh, and sometimes it may be seen now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it cannot be seen, leave it until the flesh around is rotted away, and its exit path has eased.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and also if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, leave it so for a few days, moving it each day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it will appear, and if not, pierce around with an awl so that the surrounding area is widened, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the head, reaching one of the brain's ventricles, and some of the symptoms I mentioned appear in the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If you do not draw it out, but leave it until the wound is equalized after a few days, for if the arrow reaches the surface, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not stuck solely in bone, and does not emerge from the skin, and the patient remains without incident for a few days, prepare to extract it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is deeply embedded such that it cannot be removed, apply cauterization around the wound as I have told you.
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the site until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is buried inside the body where it cannot be seen, search for it everywhere.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	And if you feel it, draw it to any suitable instrument.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	And if you cannot due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrowhead, and there is no bone or nerve involved, cut it open until the wound is large enough.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	Draw out the arrowhead if you can, and if it has barbs that hold it in place, remove the flesh that is impaled on them from two sides as best you can, then break or bend back the barbs so that you may draw out the arrowhead.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	Be careful not to break the arrowhead as you would then have more difficulty drawing it out.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, leave it until the surrounding flesh is rotten; then pull it out, as the extraction would be eased.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the outflow of blood works against you, manage it as we have said regarding treatment in its chapter.
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	And beware of incising the nerve and opening a vein, and find a way to extract the arrow without danger, sooner or later, firmly or gently.
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	Place the patient according to their original position when the arrow struck them, for this is the greatest help there can be; and if you cannot do so, place him as indicated by the signs before you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	If the arrow came from another part of the body or if nothing is apparent to indicate its path, but you see or feel swelling in the skin where it may be;
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	Cut above until forceps can grasp it, then extract the arrow.
si saut fuer maintenant.	If it jumps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is stuck in the bone, turn your hand roundly until it enters the bone and widens it, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if she cannot exit, leave her there again, then repeat the extraction until it is complete.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if it was from the arrow that is in there, push the entire shaft out;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if it was bone, and you wish to administer a push, provide an instrument with a groove so that the tip of the arrow enters the groove of the instrument.
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	then push it through, and if the arrow is grooved, insert the instrument with its point facing inward to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is envenomed, you must cut away all flesh around it, if possible, and then treat the wound as necessary.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow is in bone or flesh or in the belly or bladder or ribs and it is close to the surface, you can cut above it.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	And guard yourself from cutting the vein and nerve, then pull it out, and finally sew up the wound, if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Let the treatment continue until it is completely healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the pliers used to extract arrows resembles the beak of a bird; see below for its form:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are many ways to do this:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	Large, medium, and small, depending on the amount of arrowhead.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the pointed end is also like a bird's feather, to push against the tip of the arrow, as shown here:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of the forceps for pushing and extracting is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	Common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	The veins from which one recovers are thirty-one, of which sixteen are in the head; namely:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	Two veins located behind the ears, known as "herbech".
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	And two arteries that are visible in both temples.
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	et two veins that are in the two eyelids, which are called "aspires";
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is within the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is at the top of the nose;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two glands which are on the neck;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are on the upper lips of the mouth, which are called "augeherich";
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the two veins that are underneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins which we commonly treat are five in each arm;
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic vein, which lies on the left side, and people call it "the vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	The means is called "phlebotomy," composed of the cephalic and basilic veins; laymen call it "vein of the heart.
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	And the basilic vein is found on the right side and laymen call it "vein of the belly"; it's located above the clavicle and is easily seen as a prominent vessel in the arm.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	The cephalic vein is located between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches.
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	In the leg and foot there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	One is located below the curvature of the left calf, while the second is found at the ankle on the right side.
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein which is called "nesse", which is located at the ankle on the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg there are three veins underneath those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The bleeding of the veins which are behind the ears aids in treating chronic catarrh and headaches.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	and the quality of bleeding, as I tell you, is that you raise the patient's head and rub the area where the veins are with a coarse cloth.
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	then hold the patient's neck with a cloth, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two places dependent on the head.
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	place your fingers under your thumb, where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, make an incision there.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	Then take the lancet, and insert it beneath the vein until you reach the bone, then lift your hand along the entire length of the vein upstream, and cut both the skin and the vein completely through twice, and let blood flow out as much as you wish.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then squeeze it and bind it tight until the vein is clean.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And I have already mentioned the incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The bleeding of the two arteries that are in the two temples is useful for ancient headaches, and solid ones, and for chronic eye inflammation, and also for the body to produce tears in the eyes.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	And the quality of the bleeder is as I say.
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	And the patient must strain their neck so that the two veins are clearly visible.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	He will feel pain in the artery below your thumb, and then you must lance it.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	Then raise your heart above the vein near your index finger, push the lancet underneath, and lift the vein upwards, along with its cover, just as you did for the other two veins, and allow the blood to flow according to your need.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then release the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And afterwards bind it firmly, and leave it until it is healed.
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	And we have already spoken of their opening and extraction at the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The bleeding of the vein on the forehead is just as valuable as the bleeding from the cerebral vein for ancient illnesses of the face, and also for migraine and redness.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And its quality is such that the patient strains their neck by twisting until the vein appears.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the instrument which is called "the digger", of which this is the form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point on the vein, pressing it with your hand or another object, and let out as much blood as you wish.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then release the patient's neck, and bind the vein so that it is tight but not too tight, making sure to cover a wide area with your work.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	Nevertheless, the blades must not be too sharp.
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	And if the wound is crooked, because the bone is close by, and sometimes breaks the blade when it is delicate.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The bleeding of the two veins that are in the temples aids the eyes, and treats inflammation, redness, itching in the eye, and diseases of the face.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the quality of their bleeding is such that the patient strains his neck by twisting with a cloth, as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then you bleed him, and let the bleeding be transverse, a little across the breadth of the blade, and a bit long, because there is no flesh there.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flame is delicate, perhaps it breaks;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	Then let the blood flow until you have enough, then bind it with cotton, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The bleeding of the nose is useful for fever, and acute madness, and illnesses of the head, such as migraine and redness that appears on the face, especially when it is an old ailment;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	And the quality of the bleeding is such that the patient tightens their neck, then pulls their nose towards your left hand, and you take the fine long flame, and insert it between the lips in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open easily there, and now the blood will begin to flow;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not go too deep inside, let the blood flow according to your necessity, then leave it overnight, for it is quickly restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The bleeding of the two jugulars aids in reducing swelling of the neck, and at the beginning of inflammation, and for many illnesses, impetigo, scabies, shingles, and abscesses.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the bleeding is that the patient tightens their neck beneath one or other jugular, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	and let the masters be upon the head of the patient and have the patient sit on a chair. Then bleed at the vein in the neck, slightly wide, then draw blood according to need.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	Then remake it on the other vein, then untie the knot, and compress both veins moderately, so that the patient does not suffocate.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	And leave it like this until morning, until the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	The bleeding of the lips
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The draining of veins from above helps with glue in the mouth, and gum corruption, and lip cracks, and from the nose and around it.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the procedure for healing is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold their neck as I have explained;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	Then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left, you will recognize them by their black color, and also by the small dark veins around them.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	Therefore cauterize both of them, and if you do not recognize them or are unsure, then cauterize the larger one on each side; treat all four veins in this way since it is the same procedure for all.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	On bleeding beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The bleeding of veins beneath the tongue aids after the bleeding of the carotid artery, and it is used for narrowing the throat, and diseases of the eye, and ailments of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of the bleeder is such that the patient sits between your hands facing the sun, and they lift their tongue, and look beneath at each side for a black vein;
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	bleed one and then the other, but do not go too deep, for beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the neck that are commonly bled are bled in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	or by piercing with a quick, broad-bladed knife, or a slender olivewood one as sharp as a lancet, and it is called "anesil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and they are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of Martin's flame is very renowned, and it is so widespread as you can see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open up narrow veins that are full of thick blood, and those that contain turbulent blood;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the form of an olive flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	it is more pointed and sharp, and it is used to bleed delicate veins, where there is thin, yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The bleeding of the basilica, which is one of these veins, aids in treating illnesses that affect areas below the throat, and those relating to the neck, chest, and abdomen;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and the bleeder must bleed gently, and take care to avoid the artery which lies underneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if the artery is severed, and blood flows out uncontrollably, it must be stanched as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And must not be pressed on the flame but cut like a lancet.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if basilic does not open clearly, you must extract it, and change to another one.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	or you desire any vein of it, or you heal in its place the wound between the arm [and another body part]:
elle apert manifestement;	it opens clearly.
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and cauterize it with the flame of a lancet, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you wish to know the place of the wound, it is necessary instead that you extend the arm, touching the place until you feel the pulse.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	Then mark the site of incision, then bind the arm, and open the vein with a knife;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	and take care not to wound the artery when you see the site swelling, for it is the artery:
eschui la donques.	avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it rise like a child's urine, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is arterial blood:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	act quickly then, and apply pressure for some time, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, which often happens;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	if the arm is bound, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient's arm;
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it remain still with fear, and do not move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if the bleeding is not stopped, and you faint, and no medic is present, then quickly cut the artery if it is exposed, for this will stem the flow.
et estainche li sans.	Stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	Take a piece of ficus bark, split it, then take one half and bind it on firmly until the next day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	If the bleeding stops, that is good.
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	But if it doesn't stop, treat as mentioned before with blood-clotting powders.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And cauterization is not always effective in several conditions due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm's ligament.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The bloodletting of the vein in the middle helps as it releases blood from the head above and the body below, because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic, as we have said.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	The person bleeding must take care of the nerve that is below, and if they puncture too deeply, finding the nerve, it may swell and damage, making the procedure difficult or impossible.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	This nerve often appears but sometimes it may be absent in some individuals due to its delicate nature and should therefore be punctured with a fine instrument.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	And cut through the nerve with your force.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	Et if there is a vein between the two nerves, cut it lengthwise.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The incision of the cephalic vein is beneficial, as it draws blood from the head and aids the eyes.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is necessary to open a vein by striking at the olive branch or the myrtle branch, for this is the safest of all veins, as there are no nerves or arteries beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, you must seek the lightest place, and do not press too hard if you miss the first time, and start again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And by chance, the place may swell in some people when you miss the first time, but it does no harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of bleeding depends on your assessment.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you should know about bloodletting is that it is not intended to cure but rather to maintain health and prevent future illnesses.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	and let the bleeding be performed on one of the three veins located on the arm
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	that is to say, cephalic, median, and basilic;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should bleed at the beginning of spring when fasting, and in autumn or winter after eating, when the signs of fullness appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	and one should bleed on the first or third day, after two or three hours of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	Bleeding administered for illness has no determined time, but when needed, it should be done at any hour and at all times.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	One should not bleed children until they are fourteen years old, nor a woman who is pregnant within the first four months and up to seven months of pregnancy.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	They ought not to bleed the old who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when someone wishes to be bled, in whatever manner it may be done, they must prepare the bowels with a gentle clyster, if there is much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw harmful excess from the intestines which would damage vital organs.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	One should not be bled if they are overly full of meat or drunk, until the effects wear off, nor those suffering from dropsy.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	Nor should one be bled after having suffered a violent bout of diarrhea, or vomiting, or abdominal pain, and multiple episodes of defecation following intercourse with a woman, and from overwork, lack of sleep, and fasting, nor those whose strength is totally depleted by an injury to the arm or body.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then purify the humours, if the blood is thick, through diet and drinks and with medicine, if you have the power.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	Then enter the bath, if nothing prevents it, to purify the blood and heal the wound around the arm, as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	And guard yourself that day against work, pain, and lust, and similar things.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	And remain calm and joyful, and let the healer be higher than the patient, and let him rub the arm two or three times, then bind the bandage moderately tight, for if it is too loose or too tight, blood will not flow.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	And then rub the place with your hands until the veins swell up, so that you feel them.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	Then moisten the wound with a drop of old oil, then place your left-hand finger on that area to be incised below where you wish to open the incision, so the vein does not burst and collapse when struck.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that flow like cords when incised, and some are filled with windiness, so that when you apply flame, it retracts from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and this is how they are.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	And if the vein is opened, but the wound is too narrow, thus it is necessary for the incisor to be mindful of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein is opened on the first attempt, it is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	If not, restart again slightly below this place or above until the levels are even, if they aren't swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the levels are swollen, and the patient is frightened, let them rest for one or two days, and do not bind their arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	Perhaps there will be hot abscesses coming on.
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Do not enter the bath, then restart the treatment if it pleases them.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	And if the wound is small, or blood trickles out subtly and you doubt it won't be enough to satisfy your need for bloodletting, then draw the flame directly into that same opening.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	And do so slightly above this place, rather than below if the levels aren't swollen.
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	For this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the place swollen, do not reopen the wound, and apply a little lard oil, as it lightens the body of blood, and is beneficial for this location where the lard meets the oil.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	And thus administer the lard oil in any wound you treat to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	And this same property exists in triacle and beef fat when applied to the wound.
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	So finely does it separate blood and hinder its flow if too great is the amount.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if there is an abscess present of considerable size, which often happens, especially when the wound was not cleaned before but only opened that one time or where the opening of the vein is small, then you must hurry and apply a moist sponge in water and salt slightly warm to the site and bind it tightly for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and you must do this after the release of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place for several days with some blackness or greenness, it will not harm him;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, apply something of aloe or myrrh mixed with gallium juice, mastich, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And often there is an abscess and appearance at the incision of the temple:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	put your hand on it, and if you find the place soft to the touch of the hand, then this appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	remove then that you do not apply anything of what we have said, for perhaps it cuts short of the artery;
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but for this wound use a dry plaster to harden the place, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw from each person's blood according to the quantity of its quality, and the colour of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	and if you see it as thick, leave it until it is refined;
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And for those who are full and strong, and need bloodletting, make the wound wider, and let the flames be broad;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and they should be bled often, and it must be done by cutting across, not pricking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	This manner of healing is safe from the loss of blood and cutting of nerves, and it is better than long or wide incisions.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And to him whose body requires healing, it is necessary to give moistened bread in pomegranate juice.
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If he is overheated, then take away blood three or four times; and if he is of a cold constitution, moisten with juice before the healing bread in muscatel syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, nutmeg, and a well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he loses consciousness due to excessive blood loss during the operation, it is necessary for him to drink meat broth and subtle fragrant syrup, and to use other things that we have mentioned in the section on fainting, for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to bleed his arm and perform another operation, it is necessary, when he is weakened by severe bleeding, that he bleed little by little, according to the amount of strength he has, continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if one wishes to bleed his arm after the first bleeding operation, and he has a strong constitution, then he should be bled seven hours after the first bleeding or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if one wishes to bleed in another part of the body, then he should be bled on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For he has much blood within the body which is already overheated, and it brings on fever.
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	If a large quantity needs to be extracted, enlarge the opening as much as possible without causing pain.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	Then you should monitor all the conditions of healing, and keep your hand on their pulse as they heal, ensuring death does not come to them through negligence, which happens many times when healers are careless.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	And it is not necessary, when you wish to release the arm and drain blood a second time, with the opening now closed, that you press strongly upon it.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	If it is crooked, do not extend the arm forcefully, as that would be harmful.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	But leave it alone until it heals for a second time.
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	Where you point with the tip of the flame until the blood that has frozen in the vein escapes, then apply some wool soaked in warm water, and gently press on it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the wound is swollen, leave it alone and do not constrict it until the abscess has subsided.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, do so in the same place or in another vein, or even on the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein between the arms is bled instead of the one on the head because it is more accessible.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of cauterization is that the patient must immerse their hand in hot water until the nails turn red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then bind it loosely so that the vein is clearly visible, then cauterize it now across its width rather than its length;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	If the opening is wide and it is cauterized close to the joint of the hand, but blood cannot escape, return the hand to hot water and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is in this state, do not immerse the hand in hot water, as it is done more often in winter than in summer;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the bleeding from this vein is safer than that of all other veins, as there are neither arteries nor nerves in it.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The bleeding from the vein on the right hand is worth all diseases of the liver, and here is the way to do it:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Immerse the hand in hot water until the vein is swollen so that it may be seen;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And if the bleeding is done in an oblique manner or completely through the vein, it does no harm;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and do not go too deep, for the nerves are underneath, completely devoid of flesh, and then place the hand in warm water if the blood is frozen in the wound, and cannot escape.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drawn as much blood as is needed, apply oil and linen to the vein to seal the wound, and do likewise for each tube.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	Bleeding from the left hand is good for disease of the spleen, and do everything just as I told you about the right one.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The bleeding of the saphenous vein is beneficial for all diseases that affect areas below the waist, such as illnesses affecting the uterus, retention of urine, kidney disease, and similar ailments in the hips, legs, and lower extremities.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the quality of his injury is such that the patient places their foot in warm water and rubs it over the vein until it bursts, and then binds it above the ankle.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and the vein is at the ankle, and from there it goes up along the leg with many branches;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	treat therefore that larger branch, or at the ankle, as seems best.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you treat it on the leg, beware of the nerves that are underneath, and treat it across as in cutting.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	And let the flame cool down.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot exit, place the foot in water, and let it thoroughly drain the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if you fail to cauterize the first time, repeat it a second time slightly above, as the skin is salty.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not be concerned about nerves, as we have said, and treat the other foot similarly in this manner.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The skin of the sciatic vein is found above the ankle bone, and its opening serves to alleviate hip pain when hot blood is present.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	The quality of the cauterization is such that the patient should immerse in a bath and then tightly wrap above the ankle for four days by twisting it, otherwise, the wound will not open.
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	And if it does open, cauterize it in every way possible for you, using various methods of application.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And it is better that you cut it off because the skin is salty, and many people suffer from this condition.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not find it, then feel along any line of the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, taking care to avoid the nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	Make sure the blood flows freely until you see it coming out, then untie the binding, and place cotton over it while applying pressure.
ele est maintenant sanee.	She is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	cupping incisions
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Cupping glasses are made of horns, or brass, or glass;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	And cupping is performed in two ways:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Either by cutting to draw out blood, or without cutting.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this non-cutting cupping is done in two ways:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	Where there's fire all over, or without fire at all;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	and ventilation which is done by piercing and bloodletting in fourteen places of the body, among which some are entirely on top, like the head;
et li autres est emmi le col;	and others are in the middle of the neck;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and two more on either side of the collarbone;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and one below the chin;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and two on each shoulder;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and one over the hips;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and two on each arm;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the cups of both legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the cups of both ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and cupping does not draw out blood, only small veins that are spread across the flesh, and it weakens no one, just as lancing of a vein is done;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it should not be administered, neither hot nor cold, in any illness caused by overindulgence, until the body is completely emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if due to the necessity of illness cupping must be done, or as a habit, then administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or towards its end, and throughout any time in between.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	For there are some who, when they need to cup, have such heavy heads;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and for those who find fullness and redness in their faces, and in their heads, and necks, and darkness around the eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who find a drop of blood in their mouths, and have swollen tongues, and spit out blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and there are some who dream, and see during the night blood and wounds and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially when it is midway through the month, we instruct them to undergo cupping after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The bloodletting from the nose helps with headaches ... that come to the eyes, and it should not be done after the evacuation of all the body.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and this ventousation is in the place of bleeding from the cephalic vein, and it is not suitable for those with a cold constitution to use it, or those who have catarrh, because it does great harm to them;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and for this reason, it is not suitable for the elderly to use it, nor those who have cold diseases in their head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who heal often become forgetful, so it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little further down due to the fear of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	The ventousation on the neck is in place of bleeding from the head and the basilic vein, and for this reason, it is beneficial for narrowing of the chest, and for splitting the channel of the lung, and for colds, and for fullness.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it should be used briefly, for if it holds too firmly, it causes fainting or stomach upset and heartburn.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The ventilation at the two collarbones is beneficial for headaches, eye ailments, migraines, strangulation, tooth root pain, and it serves as an alternative to basilication.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And you should instruct the patient to extend their arm and place it under pressure so as not to injure the artery and cause excessive bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The ventilation below the chin is beneficial for mouth ailments, gum infections, and similar diseases that occur within the oral cavity.
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	And it serves as an alternative treatment for diseases of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Swelling in the shoulders is indicative of an illness caused by heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The ventilation of the armpits is just as effective as that of the three veins in the arm, as it draws blood from these major vessels.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the healer not to make it too perfect, for the skin is bare of flesh and knows beneath nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The cupping glass that is on the buttocks is good for hemorrhoids of the anus and ailments beneath it, and it should be large and made of copper, which requires proper suction.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	and if by chance it was thin, it would break.
et i fai grans plaies.	and it creates large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The cupping glasses for the legs heal evidently, as they draw blood from all over the body, and are good for old pains of the kidneys, spleen, and bladder, and reduce swelling.
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and they are located at the two sophens, and at the two ankles, yet they weaken the body over time, and bring on fainting in many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The way to apply the cupping device is such that you place it first on an empty stomach, and suck gently, then put it quickly, and move it evenly, do not stop until you see the place red and swollen, and the redness of blood appears.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	Then cauterize, and replace the cupping devices, and take care in considering the constitution of bodies, for there are some with thick flesh, and others with delicate skin.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	You should only cauterize once, and the wounds must be wide, and one deep incision is enough;
et suce legierement.	And suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the blood is thick, it should be tapped twice.
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	The first time to thin out the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the blood is very dense, it should be tapped a third time.
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And when we wish to draw out thick and viscous blood, we should only tap once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we want much blood, we must often begin again.
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And if the blood is thick, you should tap it thoroughly, and finish when the heart is suddenly pierced, and for those with a thick and hard skull, and narrow arteries, you must grease the cups of the ventouse with an oil that opens and dissolves.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is applied with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or squash seed oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is to be spread, use watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take almond oil, or oil of balm, or dill oil, and their likes.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one who is healing has tender flesh and large pores, it should not be oiled, but instead it should be washed after the fomentation with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or squash water, or china root water, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And for those with excessive moisture, rise easily with myrtle water, or sumac water, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those with excessive swelling should rise from drinking old wine, or suc juice water, or aniseed decoction, or chamomile, or something similar.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	and one should not bloodlet with cupping before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and one should not sleep after cupping, and they must be upright when cupping is to take place and when it has taken place.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And watch over those who are healing if they are choleric, and if their blood is too sharp and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	he must take cold things, such as pomegranates, endive, lettuce, and similar items;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and eat little porridge, and lean meat, and moist foods.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And for those with a cold constitution, they should take honey syrup, and fragrant medium wine, which is neither old nor new, eat little pork, and eat porridge, small birds, and pigeons.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and on the day they cup themselves, they must drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is fitting to give certain men treacle or nutmeg once before cupping, or after, to comfort the main limbs;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and let the blood be carefully drawn, but it is not fitting for those who are hot to drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The cups that are placed without causing injury are those that are put over the liver, and over the chest, and gout, and over the stomach and hips and kidneys and hip, because these members cannot bear to be injured on their surface, and it is not done for the purpose of drawing blood from member to member, just as we place them on nipples when a child is suckling;
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	to remove the viscosity that is in the member, just as we place cups on the stomach and hips to reduce the size of the member;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and it alleviates the pain when there is gravel or stone, perhaps removing by its attractive virtue the gravel, or dislodging the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	And so it does when one places it on the liver and spleen when there is retained windiness, and these cups are administered empty to draw out only the wind.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	Sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water, as in pleurisy diseases, and the cup is filled with solely warm water or water that has boiled suitable herbs.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The way to apply a fire cupping device is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	It has two finger widths in diameter and half a palm width at the base, and there is a small hole on its side near the middle, just enough to push through a needle, and it is made of brass, soft in front so as not to injure the patient when placed upon the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	And it has in its middle a brass or iron bar running across for placing a candle wick, and there are large and small ones according to the diseases and moisture of those who use them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For children's cupping glasses are different from those of adults, and those of thin people differ from those of fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And so one must place this cupping glass upon the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	Take the candle wax or tallow and put it in the cupping glass through the hole that is in it so that the light does not burn the patient.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	Then put it on the limb, your hands being over the hole we have spoken of so that when you want to, the vapour can be let out and one removes the cupping glass.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And take the tallow again like before, repeating it often if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the cupping glass which is applied to treat inflammation of the pleurisy, being completely hollow, has no rod or hole and can only be used when it is filled with water, then placed solely on the affected limb.
et c’est li forme:	and this is its shape:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Leathers are not to be applied except to limbs where cupping glasses cannot be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, or similar areas.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and on bare flesh like an ear or nostril, and other such places;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	The quality of the leathers is such that when you find them filled with clean pure water without any sediment, then take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and place them overnight in warm water, until they are soft, and have no contents in their bellies;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	then let the patient be bled by opening a vein or using cups, then rub the limb until it is red, and apply leeches;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are full and drop off, if it is a place where cups can be applied, then apply them, for this brings much relief afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, lift the affected area gently, then water it well, and let it dry.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the area bleeds too much after the application of leeches, then dampen a linen cloth with cold water, and place it on until the bleeding stops.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if the blood is multiplied [i.e., congestion], apply crushed vitriol to the skin lesions and similar things until it is extinguished.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	where you place half a peeled bean on it, leaving it there until it dries up at the site, and it will now be healed.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you need more of them [i.e., beans], take others without skin.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the beans [without skin] cannot be taken, rub fresh blood over the site or insert a needle until blood flows out, and then place them there. As soon as they sense the blood, they will dry up.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see them falling apart [i.e., the beans], sprinkle over it some aloe and saltpetre powder or ashes; they will now fall off.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with setting fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu'il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n'en lurent; 
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason knowledge is lacking in our land, because I never found any good [of it];
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing except through the knowledge of ancient books, in which I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and through experience, and through the habit of my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained within it, and I have abbreviated at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, just as I did in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is necessary, therefore, that we say in the prologue of this book the main points of the words and chapters where the sage puts his understanding, and remains focused on truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when breakage or dislocation or torsion or fracture comes to anyone, you must hasten to bleed the patient on one side and then the other, if nothing prevents you from doing so, such as weakness of the body, children, or the elderly;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	Unless the weather is very hot, or too cold;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	And avoid cold things, such as cold baths and curd made from goat's milk or sheep's milk, and do not drink wine, eat fatty meats, or fill yourself up too much with flesh foods that fill the veins with blood until you fear a hot abscess or an overflow of matter in the member;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	If the patient returns to his former management as he has used it.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	When the broken bone begins to heal, one must feed the patient with nourishing meats that promote growth and have viscosity, such as wheat cooked in water, rice, eggs, feet, cow stomach, chicken eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For too much nourishment causes swelling and delays healing of the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well mended or welded according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those who are too tender like the bones of small children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	But have no worry, reset it by applying thick tendons that bind and join the limb together, as firmly as it was before.
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And do not take away any part of the broken bone; for this it must be nourished with rich meats as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from that of the arm, or the leg, and I shall tell you in this chapter all the types of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is fracture that requires resetting, and another by sharpening, just like the cut of a quill to write with.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is fracture accompanied by wound, or just a small crack in the bone.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And for each type of injury have its own appliance or tool in the restoration process as the memory returns to that place.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	And the bone fracture is evident due to the twisted position of the limb, and it appears clearly from the outside, sounding hollow when pressed by hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	And when there is no twisting or hollow sound upon touching it, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is likely no fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	But there may well be tortuosity, or a fissure, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You must not move it by hand, but apply the following medicines, then hold it firmly yet gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the fracture which extends across involves two disjoined parts, you must now bring them into equal alignment lest a hot abscess forms there.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if a hot abscess appears there, let it remain for a day until the abscess is appeased;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then set it equal to the bones which you can perceive slightly and keenly, know that its restoration is lighter than those of broken ones.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then restrict it as you must do afterward.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bone it is broken into pieces, then extend it into two parts, be it hand or foot, or your whole arm if it's a small limb, or with two cords, or one cord and your own hand.
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are separated, you realign them in their places as best you can, and be careful not to cause any injury or pain to the patient through your work.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and align the two heads of the bones well according to their best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not aligned correctly:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	if it aligns beautifully, and do not hold it too tightly, or press so hard as those who cause through their work an abscess to form hot and swollen on the limb, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is properly aligned, warn the patient well not to move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, nor in turning, nor in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And make sure the limb is secured so firmly that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when it feels no pain, it is not yet ready, and you must put it in such a position that it feels no pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	And ensure it is properly aligned so that there is no distortion when it is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	And the condition of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small limbs, such as arms and fingers and similar.
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	You must wrap it in soft and fine linen cloths.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	And those which are large, such as thighs and legs:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	You must wrap it with a wide and hard bandage, for the wide bands embrace the entire large limb, and hold it tightly from all sides equally, so that there is no burden.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then bind around it with light lint, three or four turns according to the limb, and tighten your hand slightly on all sides of the bandage, then go above the fracture and tighten less so that the fracture can move a little.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	And loosen the bandage a little at a time until you take up most of the healthy place, then take another bandage and start again around the broken area.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then return to the area below the fracture and tighten it moderately, neither too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first binding above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place between the joints linen swabs or cloth strips, ensuring they are all even, then bind everything above with bandages, and finally place your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or abscess, apply soothing warm poultices for abscesses and reduce the swelling, leaving it as such for a few days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then place your splints above and ensure they are half the width of a cane or rod that is cut in two for bleeding, or made from palm ribs, and let them be according to this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	However, the splint that is placed directly on the fracture should be slightly thicker and wider than the others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	et let it also be as long as befits the limb, whether small or large;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then press upon the bones just as you did at the first hour, then bind it above with a suitable thread, as in the first hour over the fracture.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	the narrower it is above, the less so below.
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and make sure that the thread is medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft flax.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the thread is too thick, just as I have seen in the works of fools who use ropes made of twisted flax for their bindings, this is a great error, because the binding cannot be even if it is too fine, and it should not have more than two fingers' breadth between each bone.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is injured by the head of the rib after compression in their body, place compresses made from linen or woolen bandages underneath so that they do not bruise.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by a fracture and the heart is broken, I will discuss its treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And you should not extract ribs too close to the broken limb on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limb is large, one must not apply escharotics until after 5 or 7 days, or more depending on your assessment of the severity of the abscess that has developed.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	And see here the manner in which ancient plasters were applied to restore fractures, dislocations, and sprains:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	You take flour that is closest to the millstone's wall and mix it with plenty of egg; then apply this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it; this is the common way to treat fractures in various locations, especially for women and small children as it is neither too hot nor cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another way to treat fractures, dislocations, and sprains with plasters is as follows:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	pren С with saffron and frankincense and nettle and asafetida and Arabic gum and myrtle; 10 С.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	myrrh and aloe, 5 C.
alechil VIIII З.;	alechel, 9 C.
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	and make a powder from it, mix with half an egg white;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	if the man's complexion is hot, apply this poultice, for it has good ingredients and heals broken bones quickly, helping many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another kind of poultice that helps with dislocation:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	myrtle and mallow, 10 C.
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	myrrh and aloe, take nine each;
acaice VI З.;	almond, take six each;
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Armenian bole, take ten each, grind well, mix with water or egg white, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another plaster for joints and displaced bones to ease the pain that arises from dislocation or fracture, worn bone surface, and comminuted fractures.
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take new wool, soak it in warm water and oil, then apply it to the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not restore health but they are good for treating hot abscesses and properly alleviating pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another plaster that restores broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dried fig leaves and earth-green leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another type of plaster for the restoration of broken bones and to reduce the remaining abscesses.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take root of mallow, chamomile, flowers of violets, wheat flour, each one part;
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	and grind it, mix with wine, if the limb is hot, mix with moist coriander water or plain water, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another type of stronger plaster for cases of hard abscess during limb restoration.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take roots of mallow, flax seeds, pomegranate flowers, melilot, and sanicle, and flowers of violet and chamomile, each one part of the above.
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	and grind it, mix with salt water or fresh water, or wine, depending on the heat of the limb and its restlessness.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras states in his book that one should not place anything on the broken limb to restore it other than a mixture of wax and oil; he says it must be between two substances, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And Galen suggests that one should apply dry substances a little warm to the broken limb for restoration, such as myrrh, aloe, and incense, and similar things, just as we have mentioned.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another plaster remedy for injury and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take mugwort and chopped men's hair, or bird feathers, viscum, and equal amounts of flaxseed; grind them together into a plaster, and bind it on.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	Then you remove the binding after some time, taking care that the patient feels no pain and the bone has not moved from its place.
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	Do not remove it by hand before two days have passed.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	If pain occurs at the site or there is itching, restlessness, or swelling, be quick to remove it and take off the plaster immediately.
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	Take a light cloth and moist sea sponge, dip it in water, and apply it to the area until the itching stops and pain is soothed.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Leave the limb to rest for an hour, then place dry linen on it moistened with water or rose oil, and bind it onto a night bandage until you are certain that the abscess is warm.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	Reduce the inflammation of the limb and remove any pain, then begin to bind it with a gentle bandage again, applying a small amount of plaster, but do not bind it as tightly as before.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And gently until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess has cooled, turned red, caused pain, and swollen after everything has been removed, and you need an ointment and bandage, then start again, just as you did previously in the same manner.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	If nothing from what we have said above happens to the limb, do not release it for at least three or four, five, seven days.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And never leave it for more than twenty days as we see fit, until the fracture heals and approaches realignment.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	Then restrain him more than before, and thicken his flesh, as I have said previously;
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	And if you see the place drying out more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot reach it;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Bathe it therefore in warm water, each time you release the joint, and let this be done every three days, easing the tension slightly;
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	Through this process, the nourishment is cut off to the limb, and amends the mishandling caused by those foolish doctors who set the limb crookedly;
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	It is evil, and so are the fearful procedures, and I see no other option but to leave it alone and treat it correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various kinds of fractures
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many types of fractures exist, with diverse forms, and their causes are specific.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	For there are fractures caused by the blow of a sword, and the point pierces through all the bone up to the soft tissue beneath it, much like an axe or a stick does.
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	And so this type of fracture is called 'haickishure'.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	Where the sword strikes through the bone without piercing it, this type of fracture is called 'absolute'.
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	And these two types of fractures cause wounds that are either large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded percussion wound, or fissure caused by stone or wooden pole, or from falling on stones, or other similar causes.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating fracture, which reaches the membrane beneath the bone or upon it, and this wound may be either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	If the wound is shallow, barely breaking the skin like a hair's breadth, and the crack in the bone is small, this fracture is called 'capillary'.
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	and if the wound is caused by a strike of stone or by falling, or by similar things, and drives in a bone fragment below, and the skull is cracked like when coppersmiths beat upon cauldrons;
si entre li piere dedens.	if the stone goes inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more often to those who have moist bones in their head, like the heads of children;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and it happens with all these types of fractures that small bone fragments become detached like stars;
et je em parlerai en son leu.	and I will speak of them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all manners of fractures through their displacement, examination at touch, and the corrupted flesh that is upon them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The fracture's likeness is known by this: when the bone is exposed, and one rubs upon it, the dark fracture opens up.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In treating the fracture, take heed of the patient's accidents, and if you see any ill accident such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, swelling, numbness, fever, eyes issuing forth blood and turning red, and other similar conditions in various dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you see no fearful accident, and hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the fracture comes to you first, and it is in winter, then you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day so that you can treat it.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the summer, hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, unless the membrane beneath the bone has become corrupted, and the accidents we mentioned occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the fracture of the bone reaches the membrane that covers the brain, then you must open up the affected part like this:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and it is that you take the head of the sick person carefully, and uncover above the bone in every way possible, and on the face of the wound as gently as you can, and if blood flows out when uncovering the bone, or abscesses arise, use whatever aid is necessary, and fill the place with soft rags moistened in rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	let the wound rest until abscesses subside and be certain that no more blood flows out;
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	then start removing around the bone, and this is done in two ways of practice:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	one way is to cut narrowly from the front, and this is its form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then he makes another incision greater than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second method is to have various sizes of cutting tools, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, made entirely of iron.
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and work gently, so you do not wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is hard and dense, you must pierce it around, rather than using cutting tools with drills that do not go through the skull entirely, and there should be a margin or circle above the point to prevent it from penetrating beyond the skull.
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and you will need several of them so that each one fits in its place according to the type of bone, and thus have drills for the entire skull.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	and this is the form of three types of trepanning:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The quality of piercing around the broken bone is that you place one trepanning tool over the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know the bone is pierced.
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	Then replace the trepanning tool elsewhere shortly after and continue like this around it. Then use incising tools to remove the section of bone between the perforations and do so gently and delicately, just as we have said, until you can extract the bone by hand or with any instruments such as tongs, pincers.
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	And take care not to touch the brain or the meninges.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced and extracted the bone, it is necessary that you retain the cutting tool which remains of the bone with all other similar instruments like an incision knife, but they must be sharper and more subtle than another incisor.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	And if there is nothing left of the small bones or scales, remove them lightly with the appropriate instruments.
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	Then treat the wound with tenting and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And the other method of work is that which Galen describes, which is more safe.
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And strike it very hard; this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	You must first uncover a part of the bone where the fracture is visible, so that when you have uncovered this area, you will place beneath it the head of this lenticular cutter, which has this shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut from one side, as it is a narrow space in two directions, so that the cutting edge faces the bone.
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	Then strike lightly with a small mallet above it, so you gently chip the bone all around and be careful not to hit the membrane beneath.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is firmly attached to the bone, remove it lightly because you can safely remove it without causing harm or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate to the marrow, and the bone is only cut from above, with small pieces remaining, it is necessary to smooth this roughness, and remove the scales using a fine rasp, of which you must have various sizes, to suit each place most suitably, according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Use large rasps first, then smaller ones, and do not stop until it is smooth.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	For each of the other delicate incisions or fractures, you must adjust your approach accordingly.
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	It is something that cannot be fully explained to someone who has not studied this art thoroughly.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the sore is uncovered, you must take a piece of linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, dampen it in rose oil, and place it on the wound.
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	then take another piece of cloth doubled over once or twice, dampen it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth.
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	do this as gently as you can to avoid aggravating the sore, then place another bandage on top, but do not tighten it too much, only enough to hold the wound together.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	leave it like this for one or two days until the abscess has cooled, then remove the bandage and apply medicinal herbs such as lily root, oat flour, incense powder, and other similar remedies.
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and from these things make a powder, and place it on the wound, and administer gentle medicine without biting;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	watch that the wound remains clean, so as not to leave any infection or let pus form, for when pus forms on the brain membrane, it runs and putrefies, causing great harm to the patient;
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	for when you apply biting medicine to it, it corrupts from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take heed therefore, if any ill accident comes to the patient, as we have said, it is indeed doubtful without a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if blackening occurs only due to the medicine you have applied, then it must have such a virtue, so take some honey and mix three parts rose oil with one part linen cloth, and apply this to the sore.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the patient with appropriate methods of treatment until they are healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Know that sometimes both parts of the upper arm bone are broken, or just one of them, for there are two bones.
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	The broken part is cartilaginous, it does not break but only bends or twists, then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, you must put your little finger into the upper arm bone and place this break evenly inside your index finger, then push from the outside so that the bone regains its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	Do this gently, and watch for any pain felt by the patient due to your treatment.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part above the nose, and the two parts cannot come together, you must set it equal to the head of a slightly thicker nail.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the fracture is of two parts, reconstruct it as such, and restore the first part promptly on the same day if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If not, after seven or ten days when the hot abscess is cooled down, then place linen cloth tents on top of the nose if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Where you must place another tent from somewhere else if there is a fracture there too.
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	And let the tents be so large that they fill the openings of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some restorers say that one must moisten the strips with butter, and change them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It doesn't seem right to me but they must be moistened with a mixture of egg white and flour.
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	Then leave the tent until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And sometimes goose feathers are pushed into the place of tents, and if there is soft cloth around it, and the fracture is held, and the patient breathes upon it.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	or do whatever you wish.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess appears at the nose while you are working on it, put some ointment or moist cotton soaked in rose oil, or a piece of diacodium.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if the abscess does not heat up, apply a plaster externally made of bran flour and incense powder, mixed with egg white, then place light lint on top, and do not tie it tightly.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	If the bone fracture is minor and broken into small pieces, extract them with suitable instruments for this purpose, then cut open the wound, and treat any foreign objects within by soldering, such as plasters and appropriate ointments.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no wound inside the nostril, treat it with tents and insert thin planks of wood until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the fracture of the jaw.
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is fractured from below, and there is no external wound, and the break is only outside without breaking into two pieces or being pushed inwards like an arch, it can be diagnosed easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	One must, if the fracture is on the right side, put one's index finger into the patient's mouth;
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	And if the fracture is on the left jawbone, insert your right index finger and gently push in the broken part with it, then align it from outside with the other hand, making sure they are even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jaw fracture is separated into two pieces, you must apply extension to both parts until they are aligned.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	If there is any movement or fracture of the teeth, bind them with a thread made of gold, silver or silk and then apply wax over the broken jawbone, covering it with a piece of doubled cloth.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	and place on the cloth a large well-made star, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the jawbone, and secure it as best you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	and if you see that the shape changes, then release it on the third day, and then reset whatever has changed.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	and apply an ointment on it, made from mill dust with plenty of egg or sesame flour, after you have removed the scabs.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	and put a light woolen plaster on top, and if the ointment hardens, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until they are healed.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	Many times cured within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if a warm abscess arises, treat it as we have said many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is both breakage and wound together, ignore it if no part of the bone has been removed;
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	so carefully remove it with suitable instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with a flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Once you have removed all these fragments and there are no more remaining, cleanse the wound if it is wide, and apply suitable dressings to promote flesh growth until it heals.
de la forcele	To strengthen it.
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The forearm breaks multiple times towards the front, towards the shoulder, and the break occurs in three ways:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	Or it is broken and torn into two parts with pieces, and this is the lightest to restore;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	Or there is breakage along with an open wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the work is thus when there is breakage without an open wound, you must have two assistants so that one holds the shoulder with the broken forearm;
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and extend the neck towards the part;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then place your hands evenly on the fracture so that its shape is correct and has no irregularity or completion.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you need to extend it further, place beneath the patient's shoulder a round sphere of cloth or wool, and make it thick according to your necessity.
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	extend and raise the forearm, and hold the sphere firmly in your hand so that you may realign the fracture evenly as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the arm bone outwards because it is too deep, then the patient must often lie on their back, and place a medium-sized pillow beneath the shoulder, and have your assistants push the shoulder downwards until the bone of the upper arm is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	Then direct the fracture with your hands, and if you find it disjointed, it is necessary that you strike upon it.
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and draw out the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot be joined by any means, then cut it with one of your knives.
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but make sure to apply gentle pressure with the instrument, to protect the soft tissue.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and it should be like a spoon-shaped instrument, with a rounded edge and not too sharp, its width depending on the size of the bone and the strength required for the procedure.
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and it should have two ends, as you see here, one wide and the other narrow, corresponding to the shape of the wound that was made when you extracted the bone.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are certain the abscess is hot, cut into the wound, and if the rupture is small or you suspect a deep abscess, fill the wound with soft pads and bandages according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	Et if hot abscesses form, soak a cloth with rose oil, olive oil, and wine, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The tightening of the bone, when it is without wounds and uncut, is that you place on the bone a poultice made with mill powder and egg white, and put light packing on top, and add a weight underneath if necessary.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	Then take a very wide bandage of one palm's width, then place two layers of cloth over the packing and poultice.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a slender stick three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that one end of the bandage hangs.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	And place the stick over the break, then wrap the bandage around the neck and under the healthy armpit, and underneath the injured armpit.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and reset each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the fracture properly, and you clearly see that the marrow does not move from above the broken bone, then let it heal every day, and when the ligaments loosen, restrain them.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	have the patient lie on their back, and place a small pillow under their head when they sleep to elevate the shoulder upward.
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	this lightens the fracture of the collarbone due to the alignment of the shoulder, or you bind their arm to their neck, and do not unbind it if a bad accident happens for up to twenty days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	then apply the plaster again if you see that it is needed, restrain and leave them in this way until they are restored.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	And it is restored within twenty-eight days at most, and less for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the shoulder's fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	Before it happens that the shoulder breaks or moves out of place, one should not force it back by touch alone;
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	Align it according to the shape of the break, and reset it following its natural form, using all possible techniques at your disposal.
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	Then place over it powdered meal with plenty of egg white, and light swabs, and cover with a double cloth.
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	Then place on top a broad and fine bandage, slightly wider than the shoulder, and if any part of the bandage comes loose from the shoulder, fill this gap with linen swabs so that the bandage remains even.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	and then hold it tight with a large bandage securely, so that the bone does not move from its place, and check the binding every day.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	and every time it loosens, tighten it again, and align the bone if it has moved out of place, and let the patient lie on their side.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	and the shoulder is healed in twenty or twenty-five days.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when these numbers are completed, untie it, and be sure, for this is not an easily repositioned bone.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a part of the bone juts out, and pierces under the heart, then operate above it, remove it, and do as we have said for healing an abscess after breaking a rib.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breastbone fracture.
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The leg is sometimes broken in half, but this rarely happens.
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it often breaks above the knee.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is fractured in the middle, it leans downward and causes the patient great pain, shortness of breath, coughing, and occasionally vomiting blood; the ends of the broken bone are exposed and clearly visible through the skin.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	Et the restoration is such that the patient often lies on their back, and you place a cushion between their shoulders, then press down on the shoulders, and bring together the sides of the two ribs with your hands, and gently mold it evenly in all ways that you can, so that the bone's shape is as it should be;
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	then apply a plaster and cover it with fine cotton wool soaked in salt or another light substance, wrap it all in a cloth, and bind it firmly over the broken bone so that it does not move;
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	and wrap the bandage around the back in a circle, securing it tightly but gently, and loosen it every hour to check for swelling, if there is any, then tighten again;
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	and if it needs to be unbound, due to corrosion or itching that arises in the area, or pain or abscess, hasten and release it, remove the plaster, and address whatever has developed with appropriate treatments.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	then reapply the plaster, and secure it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	Of rib fractures
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Know that the rib-breaker does not come from any thickness in the back or head area, and only bends due to their thinness.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and one feels it well when pressing on both sides of the spine.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And for the restoration, you must set the fracture evenly as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply a plaster, and restrain with a bandage if needed.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	If the rib fracture is angled inward, the patient feels severe pain and a pricking sensation like needle-points, as the bone pierces the tissue.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And it expels phlegm with difficulty, coughing up large clots of blood, which is a serious illness; the old ones have used great devices for this.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And there are some who say that it is necessary to administer meats that swell the belly in order to expel the rupture outwardly.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not cause this, but rather the hot abscess comes if it has been there already.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it is present, then heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And some said to put cups over the place to suck vigorously, and this seems reasonable;
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	However, there is doubt that the cup will not draw out the excess to the place due to weakness of constitution.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some of you said to cover the place with wet wool in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make even the skin around it; then treat it with a phlegmon treatment, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear due to the bone protruding through the flesh, there is doubt about the patient's condition. So it is necessary to cut open over the place of the broken rib and one must put under a tool to guard against suppuration.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then one must cut the bone, and pull it gently, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if hot abscesses appear, put moist dressings soaked in rose oil on the spot.
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat the area appropriate for an abscess, and have them lie down on their side as needed until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	On the fracture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Sometimes there is a fracture in the neck bone, and it happens that it bends.
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	And also in the backbone.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will heal or not, take note if their hands are softened, swollen, and numb, unable to move or extend, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is deadly in many situations, and if they change and feel well when pressed and pricked, know that the bone joint is saved, and the patient will be cured with proper treatment.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if something similar happens to the backbone, and you want to know if it is healed or not, look out for softened feet, and if there are accidents that happen in their hands, and on the back watch for windiness and involuntary discharge.
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And when he is revived on his stomach, there is involuntary expulsion of bodily fluids.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is reminded of it on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Know that it is deadly.
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	If you do not attend to his care diligently.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if these accidents do not occur, then the matter is more trivial.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the treatment is such that you should reward him if there is hot abscess, apply ointment with rose oil or yolk of egg oil until it is soothed.
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	Then apply one of the soothing and drying medicated plasters, bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest.
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And do not let him sleep on that part of his body where he feels pain until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bone becomes separated, you must cut above the heart.
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then treat it with healing ointment until it is healed.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	and if the hip bone is broken, which is called the "thigh bone", put your left thumb on it, and align it with the other hand to exert force, then apply the poultice and bandage over it, if needed.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then hold it still, and if there is any separated bone, take care of it, and remove the bone, then treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the broken hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, 
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Et extend it from its length, and bend downwards towards the wound, and pain comes to the patient at the site, and a prickling sensation, and swell what breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the restoration is that you extend your hand above it, until you reach beyond the fracture.
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	And discern what type of fracture this is and its form.
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And if the fracture is solely of the head, so make that fracture even, until it is of natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long or it angles inwards, make the patient lie on their belly so that you can see to restore this break.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have made it even, so apply upon it a plaster cast, then place upon that a wooden or heartwood splint, and bind the fracture, such that it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And apply pressure under the ribs until the ligament is aligned evenly.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if hot abscesses form there, do not touch them until the hot abscesses have cooled, and put on what we have said before;
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	Then return to the restoration process, and restrain it as needed if there are no other complications;
et c’est li maniere.	And that is how it should be done.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of shoulder dislocation.
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The shoulder aids are what connect the arm to the shoulder blade, and if they are broken one should restore them according to either of the two methods.
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	One is that you take one piece of wood of medium thickness, in the following shape:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	Et bind the two shoulders with two bindings, raise them upwards, and lay the patient on a seat.
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	Then cast the broken arm onto the trunk [tree stump], until it reaches the armpit, and place in its middle a curved piece of wood, then raise upon some heavy object that the assistants stretch downwards.
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Then place the splint to break evenly with his hands together, so that the fracture returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	The other method is to have the patient lie on their back and bind his hand to his neck; command two ministers to hold the broken ends together with one holding above the break while the other supports from below with straps. Then each must pull in opposite directions until both halves of the fracture are realigned correctly.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more intense, then tightly bind the ligament below the fracture and above it, and stretch each of the ministers to their respective sides.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the fracture is close to the head of the shoulder, you must place one binding below the armpit and another towards the side [axilla], below the break.
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	And also if the break is towards the side [axilla], you must place one binding lightly without force so that the fracture aligns both on its spot and on the side.
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then align the fracture evenly, as it ought to be, and hold it steady, unless warm abscesses form there.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if warm abscesses do form there, do not hold it tight for seven days, and apply moist woolen cloth soaked in rose oil until the warm abscesses subside;
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	Then hold it firmly again, and the way to do so is to apply a plaster cast over the fracture, then position the arm on the shoulder or chest, and place your hand on the patient's shoulder or breast;
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And apply the bandage, holding it over the shoulder and arm, so that the arm remains in its proper position, unless something prevents this or if the bone is displaced.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone will move, use splints, and place a larger and stronger splint over the break, with two fingers' width between each splint, and let each splint be large enough to extend three fingers' breadth beyond the fracture on either side.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	Then draw up on the splints as I said at the beginning of this chapter regarding fractures, with greater force and less separation.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the position of the splints and the tightness as we have said when restoring the broken limb, and doubt about an abscess getting hot, leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have instructed.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	Then check every three days the binding to ensure that itching or swelling does not occur at the site, nor any numbness in the limb due to it being too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the address, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such accidents occur, do not release him from his bonds until three days or more have passed, and let the patient sleep on their back with their hands resting on their stomach.
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	place a pillow stuffed with wool underneath the injured area, and check every hour during the day or night to ensure that the broken limb does not move or loosen its bindings.
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	if it heals by the power of medicine, give them the food we mentioned earlier, making sure that the meat is of the highest quality.
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when they start to regain strength, let their meals be hearty.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	It is customary for the splint and leg to be rewrapped every forty days of treatment.
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And then you must loosen it and administer baths and ointment medicines to realign its place.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the dislocation is severe and stuck, it may take one day or two months to heal.
de la brisure du bras	Of the fracture of the arm:
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscile," one of which is small and follows the wrist.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is large, located below towards the little finger.
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	Should only one of these bones break or both together by chance.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the smaller bone is broken, its restoration and healing process is relatively easier.
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	And when the larger bone is broken, its healing is poor, more grievous than if both were broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small knuckle bone that is broken, you should gently stretch it slightly and make sure it is aligned.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it is a large wound, you must compress it more firmly;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	lay him on a pillow, and hold the wrist of his hand higher than the others, and keep the little fingers lower than the other fingers, and have the patient cross their legs over themselves, and place the pillow in front of them, higher than the patient's body, so that he does not suffer any strain;
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	then have your assistants stretch out their arms under the part of his body below his hand or wrist, and have other assistants on the other side above him.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	Then place the mirror flat, according to its best shape.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it is broken into pieces, you should put each piece back in its place and hold the heart-shaped one firmly; if you cannot restore it to its place, cut it out as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if with the breaking of skin I have spoken about it in the singular chapter;
si pren la cure.	then take care [of it].
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if at the beginning of recovery warm abscesses appear, use a compress made of cerate composed of rose oil and white wax, which should be neither too hard nor too soft;
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and cover the compress gently above until the warm abscesses are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	Then remove the cerate, and apply a plaster made of the mill powder with plenty of egg white, then place the splints, with the splint for the fracture being adjacent and slightly wider than the others;
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and note that there must be six splints on an arm in various arrangements:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	whether the fracture is located in one of the bones or in two;
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	And hold it tighter above the fracture than elsewhere, and every day less in removing it, as I said at the beginning of this chapter.
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	Let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard or rough.
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And the thread of which it is held should be linen, neither too thick nor too fine, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And rest the limb and its connection for some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching which occurs in the limb, you must rinse the limb with warm water until this itching is soothed.
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And let the member rest without constriction.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Then begin the compression again, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones are separated or similarly misaligned, then realign them.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you note that blood cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you must soften it a little and leave it like this for some days until circulation returns, then apply compression again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said come to pass with the patient, do not release him until twenty days have passed.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	He should be wrapped in a bandage around the neck, and then you can tie his hands behind it. His collars must remain even, and he is to be guarded against any movements or twists while sleeping on his back.
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Et know that this fracture heals in XXX days or XXXV, and perhaps even in XX days, depending on the combinations and constitutions of virtues.
de la brisure de la main	On la breche de la main, tu la frotteras tant qu'elle soit chaude et moult roide; car souvent est elle si roide que tu ne puisses la froter a nul chastez; adonques la laisseras desiester par le temp, et tu l'oigneras comme nous avons dit. Et tu la frotteras XX jors ou XXX jors ou XL jors selonc qu'elle soit plus roide ou moins roide, jusqu'a ce que le os se joignent a son chastez; et si elle est de telle nature que les osses ne puissent estre a leur chastez par frottement ni par oignement, adonques covient il que tu les remettes en leur place.
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and the knuckles there are few fractures, but more often sprains occur.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the palm of the hand is fractured or bent, the patient should have their arms crossed and sit upright in front of them evenly.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	Then place their hand on the extended cloth, and let the assistants extend the broken bones, aligning them with the mirror until they are properly joined.
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	And apply the plaster and bandages, unless an abscess forms, then insert a small stick according to the size of the place.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And wrap it in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the fracture is around the front of the foot near the sole, make a pad of linen cloths and instruct the patient to bind it tightly to their broken foot.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	Bind it with a long strip of cloth and provide a soft heart-shaped cushion as big as the sole of their hand; hold it tight as is required.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is on the outside, you must place a splint above it and another below, in the palm, so that the hand remains open and straight, then bind it all around with bandages, tightening them between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	If the fracture affects one of our fingers or thumbs, make it even as is required.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	Bind it with the foot and if you wish to place a small straight splint to raise the fracture and prevent movement, do so.
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	If the fracture affects any other fingers such as the index finger or one of the others, make it even and bind it with the healthy finger next to it.
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	or you bind them all together with a bandage, holding it in place so that it may move better, or you put on a splint as for a fracture.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	and take care during the restoration and arrangement of a hot abscess, and help those who come to you with it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of a broken thigh.
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The thigh bone is often broken, and you can see this clearly when the leg turns forward or backward.
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	and its restoration is such that you bind the ligament above the fracture, and another below it.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patient lies on their face, then each attendant stretches their bandage to its limit equally;
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and that is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is close to the root of the thigh, then one bandage should be towards the wrist, and the other bandages below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And also if it is near the knee, then let the binding be beside the knee, and let the extension be downwards.
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	Then place the mirrors so that the bone is aligned with both hands, ensuring it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster and bind it, if no abscesses arise.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is a hot abscess present, let it cool down before returning to your work and treatment.
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The binding is done in the following way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	You must wrap the fracture with one thick or two to three thin bandages, leaving some extra length, then turn the leg so that the heel reaches the base of the thigh, and pass a long thread between the thigh and the leg below the knee, bringing the end of the thread over it.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	Then return to the leg and thigh with the bandage, then place splints on the fracture, and put a splint over the bone of the leg.
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	Then fill the empty space between the leg and thigh with soft cloth to evenly tighten it, then start binding firmly in figure-of-eight turns three or four times over the splint.
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	And as you go upwards beyond the fracture, tighten it less.
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	Then take the two ends of the thread you passed between the leg and thigh, and bind three splints that are above it, then return to the bottom on the underside along the length of the foot.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	And tighten it so that it cannot move from its place, then leave it like this, and ensure no abscess or swelling develops there nor any other similar thing.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if it happens, then release it, and address what is coming, as we have said many times;
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if there are fragments of bone caught in it, then one must remove them if possible;
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	and if that cannot be done, then one must split the site open, and pull with force;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And sometimes the thigh is broken in such a way that pins are inserted, as in the shoulder and arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	however, in this kind of restoration, the patient is not harmed.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And understand that the thigh is restored in L days, or perhaps a little less or more, according to the variations of constitutions [i.e., different patients].
de la ruelle dou genoil	Of the groove of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the alley of the knee there is little breakage, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is only a crack or a hole, and this occurs with all wounds, whether felt as pain or not, and one feels well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is such that one straightens what is bent to its proper place, as much as it can be assembled and moved.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	Then apply the plaster, and insert a round stent if necessary, holding it in place as required, then follow all the arrangements we mentioned for other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar conditions.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Apply to each condition what is appropriate for its healing.
de la brisure de la jambe	On the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is rightly called "muscle", and the other is called "tibia".
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	All other fractures of the leg happen just as they do in the arm, and for this, the restoration is equal to that of the arm, and the work involved is all the same. And if both bones are broken together, the leg becomes twisted on all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the subtle bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is clearly visible.
et torne desoz.	and comes underneath.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Then provide an extension, make it level, and bind the rods equally.
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	However, if the break is severe and there are multiple fragments, the extension should be shorter and lighter.
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	lighten it according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed your work, take two strips of wood that are as long as the leg from knee to ankle and bind them to either side.
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	Then wrap in two places with one bandage above and below, binding it tightly in the middle as well, so that at this time the leg cannot bend to the right or left, and thus it is sound.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	And some administer two splints along the length of the leg, whether of wood or another material, and they put the leg in it to prevent movement, making this properly at the site of fracture or wound.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	And move the leg each day to check for abscess or other mishap.
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of broken bones in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no break, but in the bones of the foot a break can occur and at the toes sometimes only cracking takes place in various situations.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if there is a break in the bones of the foot and you see these bones protruding from one another, then have the patient place their foot on the ground as though they were about to walk, and now put your foot on theirs where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their places.
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	Then apply the plaster and some padding on top, place beneath the patient's foot a small board with two feet in length, then gently restrain their foot, once you have wrapped it in bandages, along with any other necessary materials.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, untie the bandage, for you will find the bones equalized, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if there be any broken bones therein, restore them in the same way we have said for fingers of the hand.
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	Then place a splint on the broken toe according to its length and slightly wider, then put under the foot that small board I mentioned earlier, and restrain it gently.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	And if there be two or three, or more, broken toes, then place a splint on each toe according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and restrain the board beneath the foot.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And so keep them resting on top of the head of the table, removing their belly from the foot, so that they hold it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And make sure you do not forget the other things I have said to the other bone setters, since we spoke of them earlier;
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	and treat each accident as it is required.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Of the broken bone of the wrist
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the woman's bone is broken by nature, make her sit spread out and then lean her towards her back part, to be held from behind;
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	Then fill the woman's broken area with cotton to the level of her natural shape;
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	Then help the woman stand up with her back lifted gently and slowly until the cotton comes out at the entrance of her body, allowing the bones to realign themselves;
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	When she wishes to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she is done, put it back in. Do this for seven days or so.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	If the fracture will be restored, and if you wish to see this, take a sheep's bladder, attach a tube to the opening, and insert the entire bladder into the wound.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	Then blow strongly through the tube so that the bladder is fully inflated inside.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	The wound will be restored as the fracture returns to its natural place.
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	It should then be filled with cotton and left like this for several days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the wrist bone of a man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said for the hip bone.
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And these dislocations are not hidden from him who applies his study and practice to them, and reads my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the fracture indicates in many ways the correct path for restoration:
enten le donques.	Understand it then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's gullet and insert the penis inside it;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	Then wrap it in fine linen, and leave for three days, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	For break with wound:
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	He who has a break with wound, especially if it is large like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, must be treated now as we have described for treatment of wounds.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, treat it with vitriol poultice, if you have nothing else, then repeat the treatment to restore the fracture that same hour or day, unless hot abscesses arise.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	If hot abscesses appear, leave the treatment until the ninth day, until the abscess has calmed down, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause a bad outcome.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	If the broken bone is apparent on an exposed heart, you must set it gently with your hands in a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extension does not seem sufficient to align with your hands, use this instrument of iron, which is seven or eight fingers long and its width depends on the size of the wound;
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and for this it is necessary for the surgeon to use three or four of these, according to what he needs in each treatment for fractures.
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and let them be round and slightly thicker so that they do not bend when compressed against the limb during your treatment, and pointed at one end, thickening towards the middle like this;
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And it is called a "splint", which means the curved piece must be placed over the head of the visible bone;
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and strike it once until it returns to its place, and let them be even with each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, then you must cut off the head of the bone until the instrument has enough power to do so.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then use a suitable instrument for this purpose, either a chisel or a knife according to your ability.
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	Then remove what remains in the bone of roughness and small bark.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not yet in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	Do this until it is in its place, then soak the cloth with black astringent wine, and properly so if it was on bone.
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	And do not put any ointment or other greasy substance on the wound for it may cause inflammation and decay.
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	Then apply stitches once you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, wrapping the covering all around according to the size of the wound, taking great care that the wound is not bound tightly with the fracture.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	And many times these foolish surgeons have done this, causing death or corrosion to the patient at times.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And the ligatures are softer and gentler than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is severe or large, and you fear bad complications may arise, as we have said, and find pain at the site, it should not be treated with stars.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	But wrap around, instead of using stars, use hard rags, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound is inflamed, remove what you have applied to it entirely, and put on a healing ointment such as tetrafarmacon and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	You must loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at night, until it is fused and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be bandaged in such a way that the bowstring runs downward slightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if after many days it does not heal but becomes inflamed again, know that there are small pieces of bone present, which is why you must probe the wound with a needle and remove all these loose pieces that cause such pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula develops at the site or any other form of corruption occurs, you must treat it according to what he says in his chapter beforehand.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken and protruding from the limb, such as in the thigh or shoulder bones, and other similar large limbs, do not extract it, for many die due to this procedure, but leave it until it rots.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	Perhaps after twenty or thirty days it will fall off by itself, then treat the wound if you are able to do so.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if you cannot, then leave it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	Scabs that form over the healing.
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	We often come across the healing of fractures, especially when they are close to the joints, and it is an ugly sight to see the shape of the affected limb.
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	And at times, the limb may not be able to perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Take heed if it is fresh for us:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	If the physician administers styptic medicines such as aloe, incense, and myrrh, or substances like sarcocolla, aloeswood, and others of a similar nature, so that you take any of these things, or all together, then prepare them with a styptic wine, or with egg white, or with isinglass.
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and place them on the night over cotton wool, and hold it tight, and do not untie for two days.
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	then untie it, and start again with another one until the knots are removed;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or you may hold it tight on a well-made wooden block;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	for the property of wood is such that it removes all swelling from the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the knot has already turned hard like stone and must be removed, then cut it out, and split open the excess;
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	or you may take it to a barber so that he removes it, and treat the wound until it is clean.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	Of the member which is weak after treatment
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the bone fracture is healed, and afterward the limb remains weak and delicate, it happens for many reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	because one reason is that it was bound too tightly, and not tied as it should have been;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or because there were too many bindings, and nourishment could not reach the limb;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	or due to excessive drainage;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or from too much movement, not at the right time;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or because there is little blood in their body, thus they are weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the treatment is to have the patient eat, and make the body soft, so that blood multiplies within them;
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and administer well, and give joy and permission;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	then apply pitch on the limb, so that the pitch draws out the great discharge, and moisten it often with warm water until the discharge reaches the limb;
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and restore it to its natural form.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	A joint twisted after the injury.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bone appears broken, and the form of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function:
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	do not believe the fools who say one must break the limb anew, and many foolish doctors have done this in our land;
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and these practices are to be blamed, as they lead to great harm, and even death;
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	However, if the nodules and pain are fresh, they must be soaked in warm water, or softening herbs should be cooked, such as leaves of mallow, roots, honeysuckle, and similar things.
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	And make a softening plaster, such as well-made diachylon, and take the mucilage of mallow, mixing it with goose grease or sesame oil, and apply this ointment.
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	Alternatively, you can take fatty figs, grind them with coltsfoot meal, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the swelling is removed by continually and thoroughly rubbing with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	Make gentle movements to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	If the tendon is old and hardened like stone, and must be removed with an iron tool, then it should be cut right up to the bone using a delicate and light incision instrument.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and apply a compress; focus diligently on treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs to anyone, you must now reset it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if one delays, the joint swells, and it may be reset painfully in place.
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	since one should not move it while swollen;
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	often causing spasms and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	however, when it happens, have the patient bleed, then leave them be until the abscess is quietened.
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	immerse the limb in warm water and oil, then gently reset it; treat each member as it returns to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the head down to foot.
des mandibules	Of the jaws.
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	where they are slightly out of place, and somewhat softened;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	where they are completely dislocated, and hanging towards the worse, and saliva falls from his mouth which he cannot hold in, nor can close his mouth, and it affects his speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns through various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and fully dislocated, you must reset it promptly, without delay;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	and in such a manner that the assistant holds the patient's head, and presses their thumb from one of their hands into the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on two sides;
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and let the other two fingers of their hands be outside to keep it level;
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And instruct the patient to soften their jaws, and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	The mirror is placed evenly until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if it is severely dislocated, especially if both jaws are involved, bathe them in warm water and oil until they can be gently reset.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	Do not delay the resetting process as we have mentioned before.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	Once the jaws are realigned evenly and the patient's mouth feels well-lubricated, apply damp cloth dressings infused with a mixture of rose oil and wax, then lightly bind them with soft bandages.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	Let the patient sleep on their back with their jaws resting between two cushions to prevent any movement to the right or left, and refrain from exerting themselves by chewing. Instead, consume light meals until the pain subsides and the jaws are fully healed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And then let him eat what he wants lightly, and do not exert himself to open his mouth for eating or drinking, until the mandible is well-nurtured and healed.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be reset at once and fail to return to their original position, then fevers and sweating may follow, possibly accompanied by a loosening of the bowels or even vomiting up clear fluid.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see that, know that it is fatal.
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and many times the one it befalls dies within nine days.
de la forcelle	Of the fork.
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The fork cannot be reset from the sides within its limits; sometimes it is dislocated externally and this can be easily felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the restoration is such that the patient often lies on their back and stretches out their arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then press the place firmly with your palm, and it will return.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then apply the plaster and bind it up, and hold it firmly.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the head which faces towards the cut cannot dislocate;
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	if not, and if it dislocates at all, then reset it to its place, as we have said;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	then apply the poultice and bandage it tightly, holding it firmly in place, and instruct the patient to rest until healed;
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and thus also reset the head of the shoulder when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	Know that the shoulder is dislocated only in three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	one is when it dislocates to the lower part behind;
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second one is at the part of the shoulder;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and sometimes dislocates in the upper part, which happens often;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inside towards the nerves;
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	and often dislocates downwards towards the armpit, especially in those with little flesh, as it falls easily without support;
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	in those who have enough flesh, it falls slightly, and returns slightly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And perhaps it happens to some men by blow or fall, and the shoulder swells from a hot abscess, and one thinks that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	You must therefore test it until you are certain;
et adonques encomence la cure.	and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And dislocation is recognized when it falls toward the axilla, creating a noticeable distinction between the affected shoulder and the healthy one; you will observe an evident disparity between them.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	And you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and beneath the axilla up to the acromion process of the scapula, resembling an egg.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	And the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose nor move any of its joints.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	And if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you will find it clearly at the acromion process.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And this type of dislocation is not difficult to reset when it is new or if the patient is an infant.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the method is that the assistants lift the patient's hand upwards, then place your palms underneath the armpit, and raise the joint forcefully to its correct position;
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	and the assistants lift the hand, extend it upwards, then place it underneath;
si venra hastanment.	there will be dislocation.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not work as we have said with hands outside afterwards, then the patient must be bathed in warm water;
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and the assistants apply softening and soothing ointments, such as a decoction of althea, fenugreek, and melilot in water, to be administered;
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then the patient should be reminded on their back, and a pad of equal woollen cloth, neither too soft nor too hard, is placed underneath the armpit. The heel of the patient's other foot is placed onto this pad, then they lift up the affected shoulder with care. They draw their hand;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and another assistant holds the patient's head so it does not move downwards;
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	that shoulder returns immediately now, and if you see that it dislocates again according to this method:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and have a stronger man present than the patient;
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and stand upright facing the patient's side, and push their shoulder beneath the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit upwards so that the patient hangs in the air;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	and another assistant pulls the patient's hand downwards towards their stomach.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, weigh them down with something heavy, and the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And it is also reset in another way:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And one should insert a long peg into the ground, so that the shoulder is as round as an apple seed, and it should not be too thick nor too thin.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	Then one should be placed beneath the patient, but ensure they have soft blankets on top, and the patient should lie along the length of the peg.
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Afterward, extend their arm from the other side in this way, and the joint will return to its place gently.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	And if it does not want to come back due to all the aforementioned things, then do this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	Take a peg of two arms' length and four fingers in width, which has an end rounded for insertion perfectly beneath the shoulder joint, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	Then place over his head a soft cloth cushion, so that the wood does not hurt the patient, then put it under the patient's armpit;
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	and extend his arm over the long side of the wood, and tie the shoulder to the wood, and the arm to the head of the patient, then place the arm on a stool with a wide base, and let the hands be extended downwards, and let the body hang loose on the other side:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	the joint returns now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, no matter how it was done, you must put under the arm a wad of equal wool then apply the plaster prepared with flour powder, incense and egg white over all shoulder and around, then tighten the strap under the arm accordingly, return the binding on top of the plaster, embrace the hand to his neck, and leave hands in that position.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And make sure he moves little, so that the limb is comfortable, for it will heal sooner;
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then move more after five or seven days, and change his position;
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	If it is closed and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has moved out of place due to moisture or for any other reason, you must apply cauterization to three openings, as described before in the chapter on cauterization.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all that and it still dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and they cannot lift their arm above their head, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is either cut or stretched or weakened.
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation towards the armpit, breasts, or behind is caused by a push and stretching of hands, and another place must be treated.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing process, there is cracking in the limb, and delayed movement, let the patient bathe frequently until this cracking eases, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	Of shoulder dislocation:
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	Know that the jaw joint is often dislocated and returns with difficulty;
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	And if it is dislocated on all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation has not been reduced, for it can be seen and felt clearly;
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	and dislocated according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick person's wound with the healthy one, you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	Because the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm or reach their shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And it is necessary that you reset it, even if abscesses appear afterward, because if abscesses were to develop, it would be difficult to reduce.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	and perhaps it cannot be reduced completely in all directions, especially when it is at the back.
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	it is worse than other dislocations, and causes even greater pain; moreover, death may occur as a result.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And the restoration is such that when it is possible to reduce it, you should extend your hand with both hands to them;
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And let his arms be spread out, and the hands of the mirror according to the cut around, above, and below, and push the joint towards their armpits together, or at the root of their palms, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he bends his hand towards his hand, and press against the root of the palm the bone which has come out of joint.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong traction.
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and let two people administer the extension of the arm, and the other two hold it, so that it does not move in the traction.
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	then turn the arm on both sides, after you have wrapped it with a long and wide piece of doubled cloth.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the mirror has joined the joint to the hand, anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint firmly until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, apply dry poultice with raw egg white on top, strap it tightly and tie the arm to the neck of the patient for a few days, then remove the binding.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	and if the joint is firmly in place, untie the bandage, and leave it be.
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	and if you see that the joint is not held firmly, reapply the poultice and bandage, and leave it there for a few days until it is securely in place.
puis le deslie.	then untie the binding.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if he feels soreness after resetting the joint and it moves again, bathe him and massage gently, pressing until the pain is soothed.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	Tu places sur la jointure un emplâtre de graisse de mouton, puis le laisse pendant un jour et une nuit, ensuite tu l'enlèves, et il doit aller dans le bain ;
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	Et quand il sue, s'il frotte la jointure doucement, ensuite remet l'emplâtre dessus, et retourne dans le bain ;
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Et ainsi fais cela deux ou trois fois, jusqu'à ce qu'il soit guéri ;
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	Et s'il y a une plaie, applique du foin de vache humide chauffé au beurre, ensuite recouvre ;
si revenra a sa disposition.	Cela reviendra à sa position d'origine.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	La jointure de la main disloquée, et son retour en place est léger, plus facile que pour les autres articulations.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	Nevertheless, it must be repositioned immediately to its place of origin, in the same hour that it is dislocated, unless the area becomes swollen or an abscess forms there, which causes heat.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the process of repositioning is as follows: place the patient's hand on a table and have your assistants stretch out their arm, aligning it with the patient's; then match the appearance of the dislocated joint to the palm of their hand and push until it returns into place.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	Nevertheless, you must ensure that it is properly aligned.
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Then have the patient place the back of their hand on a table for extension and repositioning.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, make the patient lay the back of their hand on the table and have the assistants place their hand above that joint's position.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns to its position now, that is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If this is not the case, if the extract of healing plasters soothes hot abscesses, and you leave it thus without restarting.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, the joint remains deformed.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and it neither harms nor hurts the patient to keep the hand soft as long as possible, and he is unable to grip anything at all.
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	then know that the nerve or artery has been severed.
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	if there is any other method to treat it except by the application of a caustic near the wound, and perhaps nothing else will be beneficial.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, apply the poultice we mentioned, then restrain it and leave it for five days, then release it and leave it like that.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it properly, and there is any tearing, then bathe it with warm water, and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	At times the finger of the hand is dislocated towards each side, at times on the back of the palm or on the belly.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then stretch out the finger, and push on the dislocation with your thumb until it returns, then support the head of the finger, bending it towards the part where it is disjoined.
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	Leave it for two days, then straighten it that day;
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	And bind it at night as we have said, unbind it during the day, make it move, and re-bind it at night.
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Do this frequently until it becomes narrow. Do the same if dislocated at the palm of the hand, act in the way you have done before, until it is healed.
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And do likewise when dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Of dislocation of the spine from the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine from the back or neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no cure, for death hurries the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	The signs are that involuntary excretion occurs without his will, he cannot control it, and often one or more limbs become weakened, whether the two thighs, both arms, or one of them.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And often the spine bends into four parts.
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	Those who bend backwards are called "hunchbacks.
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	The treatment is to turn back if the hunchback developed in childhood:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	There is no cure or healing for it at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And for those who develop it from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of treatment with big words have little real benefit according to them.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have shortened it according to my intention, and I have crafted instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that with regard to the humpback disease which presents in front, no one knows its cause nor cure;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	And also the one that develops directly in two sides, and it cannot be cured except for that which specifically presents at the back, as I say.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	And it is that the patient must be stretched out on their face in an equal place, and have a restraint underneath them so they do not injure themselves.
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then fix one iron rod firmly into the ground at their head and another at their feet, and tie a cord across the shoulder blades of the patient, and another to their hips, knees, and ankles.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and two assistants will hold the bindings, one at the head and another at the feet, between the two fire irons.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and they should be well secured, the fire iron as we have said, and the patient's palms placed on their spine so that it straightens.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not straighten with this treatment, take a board three feet long and insert its head under the wall, then have the patient lie on their side, push the board's end under the wall, placing the middle of the board onto the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and have the patient place their feet on the other end of the board, pressing hard until it returns to its original position.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if you see this, have him turn his hand around.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And insert two red-hot iron rods into the head of the patient's affected arm, and place two more near their feet, with each rod a palm's length apart vertically.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	And ensure there is one hole in each iron rod for the turner's hand to fit through, and make sure these rods are firmly embedded into the ground so they do not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	And between the two larger iron rods place a turning rod, which causes the ties to turn, and have two smaller turning rods, each one palm length long, to rotate this handle.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	Then tie the tie that is among the holes to the handle towards the head, and another tie of the other end to the other handle, nearest to their feet, and have each minister turn their handle with all his strength, while the master inserts a needle as described before.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, apply a drying poultice with an abundance of egg, then pack it with swabs, and add a splint made from a tablet three fingers long to support the place of curvature and the healthy part of the spine. Then bind it with a bandage as we have said, and let the patient use subtle nourishment until healed;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	and if anything happens at the end of the treatment, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medications along with the splint we mentioned earlier.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	and sometimes we administer a piece of lead, and the appearance presents itself behind the lower vertebra of the back, and one thinks it is a dislocation.
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	and it is the bone that protrudes, for which one must not have presumptuousness
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	may cause death to come upon you.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Know that the joints of the hip and shoulder are prone only to dislocations, not like other joints.
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	within and without, and in front and behind.
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and mostly within it is dislocated, for which it comes out both in the front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its internal dislocation is this: when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the sick knee protrudes more than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee to the floor.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And it is the place near which swells from a hot abscess, because the hip comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes out of order is such that these accidents are contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the sign for one who experiences this beforehand is that he stretches his leg according to its completion.
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	However, he does not bend the knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot first, and he retains his urine, and the throat swells, and when he goes, it passes over his heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him to whom it happens behind are such that he cannot spread his knee, nor bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh bone is in place beneath the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The treatment of this similar dislocation is that you reset it if the dislocation is old and remains according to its position, there is no other option.
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	And one should not be presumptuous about it.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in the case of a fresh dislocation, which has four types, hasten to return the joint, stretch it both inwardly and outwardly, and move it from right to left.
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	Perhaps it will return there, and no other treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return with this method, you must prepare one strong assistant and stretch the leg forcefully with two hands or with a rope tied above the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	Another assistant stretches their hand above in such a way that they push their hands under the patient's armpits, then tighten another rope around the thigh.
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	Another holds the head of the rope.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	They extend upward and downward all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If not, then one must apply treatment in a similar manner.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When dislocation is on the inside, you must lay the patient onto their healthy side, then place the bandage on the root of the thigh and the area below the groin, stretch the bandage upwards towards the groin and towards the genitals.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	Then have another assistant take his arms, embrace the thick part of the diseased thigh, and stretch it outwards in this way.
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	It will return to its place immediately.
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	This manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot secure it in the way we have said, then you must bind the patient's two feet together with a strong soft bandage over both heels and knees, with the injured leg extended twice as much as the other.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	Then hang it from a pole above their head so that the pole is two arms-lengths above the ground;
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Direct one assistant to embrace the patient's thigh, and another assistant to hang with the patient, firmly embracing the thigh, as the joint now returns swiftly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is outward, have the patient lie down as we said for someone with curvature of the spine, and tightly bind their bandage around the injured leg and foot.
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then place two red-hot irons, one on the head and another at the feet, then insert a red-hot iron between the thighs of the patient inside the hollow.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And have wet cloths planted around (them), so they do not burn the patient, then stretch each attendant towards him, and let the mirror be placed equal to his hand at the site of the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place him on the table, and press as we have said for curvature of the spine, and let the patient lie on his healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the afflicted leg patiently, and according to what I have said;
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And let the mirror be placed on the affected limb to be above it, then press with the other hand, and stretch downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is on the outside, it should not be stretched downwards nor lifted up off the ground, but rather it must remain as if the hip were dislocated to the outside, just like we have said about laying on both hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	And it is placed on its face, and the bandage extended as we have said before, and one must press upon the joint with the board.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	And it will be effective when the patient stretches out their legs, and they are even.
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	Then adjust the thighs, apply the plaster, and use a bandage to strain it so that the hip does not move.
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	And let him rest for three or four days, then release the bandage, and put the plaster on top of it.
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	And if you see that they are even, strain it as before, and leave it for three days.
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	Then release the bandage, and make him walk gently until the limb is strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of knee dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The knee is dislocated according to three methods:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	That is to say, from within and without, and behind.
et ne desalue point devant.	It does not dislocate forwards.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the sign of this is that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if it does not touch their thigh, know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And the method of restoration for all three is that you make the patient sit upright, and stretch out their leg if they can, then place your back against their face, and put their foot on top of your feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	Then take their knee in your palms, and grasp it between your two hands, then bend the two sides of the joint firmly.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	and another minister extends his foot, so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he slightly bends his leg at the hip.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	put the plaster on it, and let the leg bend at the hip, keep them together strongly for three or four days, then you can untie.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and the patient must not exert himself to walk, until the limb is strong.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not broken, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	Of heel dislocation:
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes bruised, and sometimes fully dislocated, inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	and the sign of this is that the ankle is swollen, more so on the part where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	the reset should be gentle, and it must be gently extended by hand when the patient is relaxed only.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is completely dislocated, you must make the patient sit upright, and have one assistant hold them by the leg above the ankle.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then twice to the left, extend it upwards, and gently push the foot upwards.
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	Do this twice, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot each time.
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	If it remains in place, that is good.
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	But if not, begin the process again, as it will return.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	If it cannot be done this way, have the patient lay on their back on the ground, and firmly drive a peg into the earth between their thighs, tying cloth around it so as not to injure the patient.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then have the ministers hold the thigh, and another minister extend the foot to their hands or to them with a rope, which is tied above the ankle of the foot.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then each minister should extend equally, and the pole should be placed between the patient's thighs to hold them as they are extended.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then place the mirrors equally on the dislocation with your hands, and another minister should hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return promptly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is in place, put the plaster and lint on top of it, then strap it tightly, and bind the foot to the leg, taking care not to tie the cords too tight over the tendon behind the ankle.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	Then leave it for two or three days, and if the bonds loosen, pull it out.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	Then untie it on the third or fourth day, and instruct the patient not to move for four days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if they move before this time is up, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if hot abscesses arise there, you must treat them as we have said elsewhere until they are healed.
des dois	twice.
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the thumb is dislocated, it should be gently stretched without exertion, which is an easy task.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	If the dislocation is in any of the small joints of the foot or back, you should make the patient sit on a flat surface or an upright table, and place your foot on what appears to be the joint, then press hard with your foot until it returns.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	And when it is equalized and nothing appears to be wrong, place under the sole of the foot a two-legged table, then pull strongly, and leave it for three days before untieing.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And make him rest until it is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound occurs with the dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, often the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	Do not be presumptuous in the treatment if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate, merciful, and patient, do not dare.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	And apply soothing, anti-inflammatory remedies at the beginning for abscesses and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of recovery.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	And when you see hope of recovery, reset the limb now even if it causes warm inflammation.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is replaced, apply soothing things for the inflamed wound with hot cauterization and treat the wound as appropriate with drying ointments;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones are displaced, remove them, and do as we have said for simple diseases;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	and beware of entering a state of fear, as I have said, for it will cause you harm according to your Creator, and it endangers both your arm and your body.
