O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, very dear sons, I have completed this book for you which is the last in the science of medicine together with its fulfillment, and I have made an end through its explanations and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I complete it for you with this treatise which is part of the work of hands, that is to say, "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is neglected in our region and has been lost to all, so its knowledge is depleted and cut off, and nothing remains from it but small descriptions in ancient books that have come down to us.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions have been clouded over and knowledge pushed away.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	Now it seems to me that I will revive it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition, explanation and abbreviation.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	and will come with the forms of the cautery irons and other instruments for the work along with their adjustment, explanation and preparation as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good master of hands is found in our time, the art of medicine has become distant.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for anyone who wishes to undertake this to overcome the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that they know the judgment of members and their forms and conjunctions and separations; and have knowledge of bones, nerves, brains, and the number of them, also movement and moving veins and resting ones, and where they emerge.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And for this Hippocrates said that word with the name is much, and with the deed is little;
et meismement en l’art de main.	especially in the art of medicine.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We tell you in the introduction of this book that one who is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned beforehand should be careful not to fall into error and cause harm to others.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	So I have often seen many who attempt this science and so abandon themselves without knowledge and without experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I saw a mad surgeon who cut into the abscess of scrofula on a woman's neck, and he cut her carotid arteries.
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	which is why so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I saw another surgeon who treated the bladder stone of an old man, and the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	he took away with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if they cut it out, he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And I saw another surgeon who treated a duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break he had an open wound;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the ignorant physician binds the fracture over the wound with tight bandages, leaving no room for drainage, and thus it ends.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and he instructs them not to untie it.
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and as a result, the leg became completely swollen, the foot was affected too, and it led to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I am called upon to treat him, and I hasten to come and untie the leg.
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I unbind it, he is at peace and feels no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But nonetheless, the corruption had already taken hold in the limb, and I could not heal it.
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	And the corruption did not cease to travel through the member until the limb was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And there was another evil physician who would burst an abscess open and then inflame it with the malignancy of his power.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a cancer, when it is caused by melancholic humour, one should not touch it with iron unless it is in such a place that one can remove all the corrupted tissue.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And for this, my dear son, you must know that manual work is divided into two categories:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	That is to say, works where there is danger in many situations;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show you in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	This is why you must be cautious so that the foolish physician cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	Take up your tools with prudence, approach your patients gently yet firmly, and employ the best method so that by God's grace you may succeed in healing them and be praised.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	And leave behind terrifying illnesses of severe unhealthiness;
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	And remove your weapons from whatever makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may travel from this world to the other with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galen says in some of his admonishments:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not treat any illness badly, or you will be called a foolish physician.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise in three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapters are about fire cauterization and medical incisions, and the chapters are organized from head to toe.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	And about the shapes of instruments, the preparation for cauterization, and everything that is necessary for the procedure.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and cupping, wounds, arrow extractions, and similar things.
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	And it describes the order of chapters and the shapes of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions, and similar things.
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	And it is ordered from head to foot, and the shapes of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Before we recall the work, it is necessary for me to speak of the quality of aid and harm of each humour.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of treatment, and their harm, is a long discourse and subtle science, and hidden secrets.
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	And many wise men have spoken of this, and they agree on it.
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	And their words suffice for me, for I fear lengthening it.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that cautery aids universally all constitutions where there is cause, except two constitutions:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	That is to say hot constitution without matter, and dry constitution without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In the combination of hot and dry constitution with matter, some debated and said that cautery is a great help;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	And others said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	That cautery is of no use in illnesses arising from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to treat hot diseases caused by heat or dryness;
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	And he who says the opposite claims that cauterization provides great relief to hot and dry illnesses that afflict men's bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	When you compare the body of man with its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the former cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it by experience once.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And in any case, let no one interfere unless it is he who has experienced it and knows the chapter on cauterization well through long practice, understanding the diversity of human temperaments, their dispositions, the causes of their illnesses, their symptoms, and the passing of time.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	Of other temperaments we have no fear, especially in cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the doctors agreed and consented to the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my child, that fire cautery is one of the secrets of healing and is of greater benefit than burning medical cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and it does not arise except on the member that is cooked, and it harms no other member unless touched.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	Burning medicinal agents spread from one member to another by contact, causing illnesses that heal quickly.
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	And occasionally the patient dies.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fires for their height and for the goodness of their substance do not make coals, unless there is superfluity.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And I have found this through experimentation and the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things;
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	and for this I excuse myself for the length of speech, because it does not please me to take away from you the secret that is hidden in fire, and the quality of work, how it cures illnesses of the body, as the philosopher says when demonstrating;
or le recevez en vos pensees.	receive this in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be performed, and chose carefully.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, for the harm which arises can be removed by the aid of cautery;
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	and especially if the cautery is necessary for pain that requires immediate treatment, lest a greater evil come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And never think of it, dear son, as some foolish doctors do;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	for the disease that is cured by cautery has no relapse;
et il le dient ensi;	and they say it like this;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not as they believe, for cautery is only a medicine that alters the complexion, and dries out the humors which are the cause of pain, and is better than medicines due to its quick action, and because of the virtue of its work and control.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And it is possible that the disease comes sometimes according to the complexion of the patient, and the location of the illness and its strength;
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	and are gathered in him the excesses due to acquisition of meat and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered where there is little excess and moisture, such as dental cauterizations for pain, and similar things, and this kind of pain does not return.
mais ce avient poc.	but it happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many do not understand why cauterizations are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true;
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	but they do not believe that cauterizations are better than medicines, but their understanding is false, and cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we administer various treatments for a disease and they fail, then we apply the cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it is evident that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancient ones said that cauterizations with golden instruments are more beneficial than those with iron, and they attributed this to the quality of gold and the nobility of its substance.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	And they said that the place of cauterization does not cause corruption, but this is not always true as I have tested it, and found that it is indeed so in some people.
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	And gold cauterizations are more valuable than those of iron, just as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	However, when you heat a golden instrument, you do not know when it is hot by the colour of the gold, and it cools down quickly.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if you overheat it.
si font au feu;	They do it with fire.
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	and thus there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we use fire cautery, which we have adapted to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Here you have been ordered this chapter of the head to feet, so that the way is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	Olive oil cautery.
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is beneficial for moisture and cold in the brain, and there are two that are made due to a disease called 'soda', and because of many humours that descend from the head to the eyes, ears, and due to numerous dreams, toothache, sore throat, and especially all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged with a solvent medicine altering the brain for three or four nights, according to what their condition and constitution can bear;
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	and then let the patient rest his head.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then have him sit cross-legged between your hands, placing his hands on top of yours.
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	After that, place the root of your palm onto the root of his nose between his two eyes.
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And let your two fingers be the ones that bleed; then heat up the cautery called 'olivare', and this is its form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And place it on the inked spot, then gently pull and squeeze your hand back and forth while twisting.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	Then lift your hand slightly, and feel the area if you see any bone at all, even a small one;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	And if you don't see it, repeat the cauterization until you do see the bone as I've instructed;
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	After, take a little bit of silk, put soft cotton inside it, and place it on the spot, leaving it there for three days.
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	Then put moistened cotton mixed with butter on top of it.
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	Leave it there until the scalding sensation has passed.
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating the wound, heal it with 'tetrafarmacon' until it is fully healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And the ancients said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purges itself.
et por ce si aide mues.	and for this reason, healing is aided.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some said that one should let the cautery burn until a part of the bone is charred, then remove what has been burned from the bone and it shall be healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And others say that the cauterization should be left on top, and pressed so hard that it dents the bone as wide as a needle that women use in their sewing, for this reason, the humours flow out more easily.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	And one should leave the wound open for a longer period of time.
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	Afterwards, one must treat it and seal it closed.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two types of cauterization do not seem to me to be good at all, except in certain people where there is a way of fear.
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and I think I should leave it alone.
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	because the head is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other body parts.
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And even when the head of the sick person is naturally weak, and the first method of cauterization seems more effective to me, I use it with great success.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	Of the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When the entire head is affected by chronic pain that persists for a long time, the patient must use herbs and pills called 'cockroach', as well as purgatives, oils, and plasters.
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	And if you perform the cautery as we described before, it is ineffective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take note if the patient's shoulder is of strong constitution and not too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Then cauterize underneath that cautery, slightly different from what we said before.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	Afterwards, perform a cautery on each corner of the head down to the bone, as we described earlier, and then cauterize the place called "vasselz".
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	And it is red where cups are applied;
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	Lighten your hand so that you do not break down to the bone:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	The sick person feels even greater pain during this cauterization than with others, and I will speak of it later.
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	and it is fitting that the cauterizations of the horns be more subtle than those for the middle part of the head, and this is the method:
dou cautere dou chief	For the head cautery.
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When pain suddenly arises in one part of the head and extends to the eye, with the skull being purged by cleansing medications, and other treatments I mentioned for various diseases have been performed but are ineffective:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	then you must cauterize it in two ways, namely with cold medicine and by using fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The cold medicine cauterization is done by taking a piece of aloes wood, removing the bark and cutting it into two pieces for the temples where the pain lies in such a way that you can place the aloes wood under the skin.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	and when it is answered, bind it well and hold it like this for twelve hours.
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	then untie it and treat vigorously with garlic juice, leaving the wound like this for two or three days;
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	then apply cotton soaked in butter until healing takes place.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment, let it heal completely.
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	And if you want to use any of the caustic medications, refer back to my previous treatise on caustic medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is done in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery, which has this shape:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	It is called a "close" wound because the head has the shape of a clover or a three-leafed plant with one pocket of curvature and in the middle there is a small appearance.
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and place it on the painful spot, hold your hand and slightly turn it over, so that half of the heart's sword is burned.
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and a large amount of blood flows out.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	Afterwards, place cotton in front of the wound, and leave it on for three days.
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then put moist cotton in butter, and then clean the wound until it is healed.
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	and if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "knife-like", on all sides of the tip, be careful not to cut the artery in this fresh migraine.
de emigraine	of a migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat a migraine as we have previously stated in the division of illnesses, and it does not improve, and you see that the previous cauterizations with medicine and iron do not suffice for him, then it is necessary that you heat up the cautery called "cultellare" until it turns white;
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	and incise there instead, over the painful spot, a line half an inch long, and remove your hand once, but be careful not to cut the artery or reach the bone;
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	and take care of the jaw movement when chewing, making sure it does not become stuck and that no spasm comes to the patient, and beware of the arterial blood loss when cutting into the artery, for this cut has great danger and especially so in those who are inexperienced and untested;
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and leave the work halfway through;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to staunch blood when the artery is severed, and I will show you where it appears in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that these cauterizations are not sufficient for the illness, and the patient is still suffering, cauterize it in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	and if you see this, apply the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on arterial extraction, using the double-bladed cautery.
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	and this cauterization is better and more helpful than that one.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	From ear pain due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is ear pain due to coldness, and one has applied solutive medicines and other treatments as we have mentioned before in the division of this book, but the pain does not subside, then heat up this cautery tool called a "point". This is how it looks like:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After piercing around the diseased ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and remove a little above the root of the ear once you have marked the site for incision.
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and make X incisions around each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	after treat the site until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	Upon the torture of the mouth:
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	Wounds that should be treated with cauterization are only those that discharge fluid, as we have said in the classification of diseases;
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not apply cauterization to similar conditions that come from drying out and of nerve spasms.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you treat this type of wound that discharges fluid from ulcers and purgings of the head and gargling, and it is not successful, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauterizations:
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	One at the root of the ear, another slightly outside the temple, and the third where the two lips meet.
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	Place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make a cauterization spot above the ear, slightly below the crown of the head, and another in the temple as long as a thumb.
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	Leave the cautery until half of the heart is burned.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And this is the shape of the cauterization mark:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	It is similar to the shape of the knife we mentioned earlier, but it is slightly more delicate and requires a slightly thicker blade.
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, leave it to heal as I said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said before, but there is no improvement, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauterizations.
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	Two above the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one at the spot called "vessel" as we said before, and the last cauterization on the mouth of the stomach.
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	And treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	Of lethargy.
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this illness, give the patient large herbs and pills that calm the brain.
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	After treating his head entirely, place the patient's occiput on a mustard poultice as described in the treatise on plasters.
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	And this is how to apply a cautery:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	If you do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If the incision is done this way, it is good.
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	And if it is not, perform three cauterizations on the head descending to the neck with a two-finger space between each cautery.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	Treat it as the others, and if you see that it needs adjustment, and the patient is suffering, perform one cautery in the middle.
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if necessary, two more above the two horns, and treat until it is healed.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	and let the cauterization be that which is called 'olivare', as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	From the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	The head must be cleansed of hairs and any other matter, as we have said before;
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	after clean the head of the patient, then cauterize it in the middle of the head and on each horn, and behind it, three times along the spine of the neck;
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	and if you need to do more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, then perform four cauterizations along the spine of the back;
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	And leave it until the deepest part of the heart is burnt, then lift your hand.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	After the wound is treated, let it heal completely, and use the cautery called 'olive oil', as we mentioned earlier.
de l’epilempsie	from epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptic should not undergo fire cauterization unless they are phlegmatic; it is necessary to first modify the brain with herbs and other treatments we have mentioned in the section for adults who are suffering greatly.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is a child who cannot endure it, have them do gargles and chew softened meat to nourish the brain frequently.
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	After the king's face is in the middle, make a cautery there as we said before, and another on the vessel, and one on each corner.
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if the patient is strong and suffering, apply cauterization as I said for those with paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine from neck to back, and use olive oil cautery as described earlier.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, perform this delicate cautery as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholia the superfluities or corrupt humours and thick phlegm prevail, then cauterize with three cauteries as we have said for one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholia the superfluities decline towards it, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink by which their brain may be cleansed, as was said before in the classification.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After rising, let the patient rest their head.
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	After that, make a well-crafted flaxen pad, like a circle, and place it in the middle of their head.
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	Let the patient lie down with crossed legs, ensuring they are well-supported on all sides.
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	Next, present the flaxen pad and apply some old goat butter to it.
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	Heat the pad with gentle fire so that the patient's skin can bear it comfortably.
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	Empty the circle from within their head and let it cool down.
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this for the patient once a week along with other good treatments until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you see scabs form during the cautery, make multiple punctures across the entire cautery site.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This manner of cauterization moistens the brain equally.
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	And then place on it cotton moistened with butter and chicken fat.
de l’awe des eulz	from eye ache
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When eye ache first arises from the signs I mentioned earlier in this section, you should begin by giving the patient things that clean out their head and guard against moisture while they sweat it out in the bath multiple times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	After, instruct him to lower his head, and cauterize him between the temples, performing two cauterizations if the descent of the weakness is towards both eyes together, or one if it is in one.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	And cut all the veins and arteries that are below the heart during any cauterization, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temple.
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	Be mindful of the loss of blood, and if you see too much blood emerging, stop it with such power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and the incision, how to cauterize it and stop the bleeding.
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	and sometimes you make a cautery or hot iron underneath the two hind bones.
dou cors des larmes	body of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed, and they sit on the veins or near the arteries that appear outside the head;
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and you see that they are cold and phlegmatic excesses, then make the cautery that I mentioned at the beginning, descending to the eyes.
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	A cautery in the middle of the head, two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or hot irons underneath the two hind bones.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	And if more is needed, carefully cauterize above the eyebrow with small cauteries.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Through the body of tears from within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you treat him according to what we have said in the classification, and he does not benefit, then give the patient three nights of cuckoos to drink.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	After the king's head, apply cauterization to his forehead in the middle of the olive-shaped area.
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	And apply two 'clavilis' cauterizations above the two temples, slightly below the hairline.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	Be mindful of the artery to avoid cutting it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the 'clavilis' cautery instrument:
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the eye is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery instrument called 'olivare'.
de coi ci est li forme:	Of which this is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you wish, make two additional cauterizations above the temples as long as the eyebrows are.
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And do not let go of it [the cautery] until a third part of the paper has burned, according to the manner I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	on the hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	Sometimes it happens that the eyelashes turn inwards and prick the eye, and for this, cauterization is done in two ways:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	That is to say, with fire or burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they [the eyelashes] have grown evenly, then put the patient into your care.
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	After, sir, on the paper of the eyes, draw a shape that is similar to the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be beside the hairs.
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then put moist cotton with egg white and parsley poultice on the eye, then heat the cautery which has this shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	Afterwards, cauterize on the shape you have drawn many times until the heart of the area is burned.
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	And the sign of success for this operation is that you see the paper shrivel up and the hairs stand on end at the tip of the eye.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	Then lift your hand away and leave it like this for three days, then apply moist cotton in butter until the scald is removed.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of dressing until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if after these hairs grow, and the paper is softened then restart the cauterization on that same spot as you did initially.
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	If the hair has fallen out, cauterize it until the paper lifts to its natural position, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The burning medical cauterization is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow large and even, then make a parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	Then take French soap and quicklime, of each one 3 ounces, and grind them together well.
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	And make a poultice with it to prevent cooling, then spread it on the form you have made like the leaf of the myrtle, and place eyes of paper over it.
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	If the illness is only in one eye, you must operate on that one, and if it affects both eyes as well;
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	And place under the eye damp cotton soaked in egg white.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	And let the patient's head be in your hands and put an index finger on the medicine, and press it gently and move it every time the patient feels a stinging sensation from the medicine, because they will feel a burning sensation as well.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for some time, remove the medication with your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the stinging passes, remove the egg white and observe if you see the paper lifting as well as it would be lifted by a hot iron or an incision.
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	and if it is so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If not, apply more medicine to the place where the treatment was done, until your work is even and your eyes are sharp.
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place moist cotton soaked in butter until the burning heart is cooled, afterwards treat the area with ointment called "diaphenes" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary, ensure you are careful with your work through great vigilance so that none of the medication reaches the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	If the paper becomes soft afterward and hairs prick in the eye, restart the treatment on that softened area from the paper, just as you did before.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Afterward, treat it until it is healed.
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and this is the form of the myrtle leaf:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	and know that the eyes of men differ in size and smallness, and according to this are your limitations;
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and let not the true way be denied to him who has studied this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	on the treatment of fistula with cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have described in the division of diseases, and your treatments are not effective, then it is necessary to perform cauterization in this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	instruct the patient to place their head on a healthy tone.
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	hold the minister's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or turn.
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	afterwards, place moist cotton soaked in egg white or parsley juice on the eye.
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	after that, heat the cautery which is as follows:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and it is fixed at the top of the head like the shape of a vaulted ceiling, together with where the cautery is.
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	if you see it [the head], it should be pointed from one side to the other, and if you see it, it should also look like a tent.
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	however, this one who is beheaded will not move for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	Then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus, and dry it [the wound].
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and if it is closed, open it, and draw out the bowels [the pus].
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	afterwards apply the hot cautery firmly, and hold your hand over the cautery at the part of the nail above the eye, so that your hand does not wander.
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	and put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you cauterize down to the bone, it would be beneficial.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If not, start the cautery again one more time, or another if you need it, and leave it for three days.
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	After that, put moist cotton in butter on top, and treat it with a drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass without healing, then apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed.
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and treat it according to what comes up in this chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	There is also a method for cauterizing fistulas, which none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Understand the fistula, and split the site open.
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	After that, put into the incision one subtle probe of what this is made from:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	et they make it to the quantity of one 3 of plumb;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	et hold your hand or hammer firmly, and do not let the patient move at all, so that the molten lead does not run into his eye;
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and it is necessary to place on the patient's eye moist cotton dipped in egg white or honey;
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	the lead enters the place of the fistula, and it heals with wonderful health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization we mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, you must administer an opening in the nail, and lead the fistula to the body of the nail according to what is necessary in its proper place.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Very often cracks occur on lips which are called "hair", especially those of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have described in the section above, and the treatment does not work, then heat a small knife-shaped cautery according to this method:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And he places them in the crevices until they reach the bottom.
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	afterward treat the place of cauterization until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess forms at the root of the throat or in the tonsil, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it causes decay and swelling and becomes inflamed and turns into a fistula;
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you treat it as we have said in the section on treatment, but it does not heal:
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	then you must apply cauterization according to the size of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	after the hole or opening of the fistula, hold your hand so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and behind it;
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this once or twice, after treating it as we have said in the section on treatment, until it is healed;
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if he is cured thus, it is good.
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if not, it is necessary to expose the place and remove the corrupt bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	Of tooth movement
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it is not effective, then place the patient's head on your lap.
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	after, heat the cautery which will come after in this way: you place a rod over the tooth.
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and put the hot cautery inside until your hand feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth;
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	After lifting your hand, begin the cauterization according to your will.
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	After filling the patient's mouth with salty water, hold it there for an hour and rinse thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	In this way, the moving tooth is confirmed to be stable, the softened gum restrained, and the corrupted moisture dried up.
de la dolor des dens	Of the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When tooth pain arises due to coldness, whether from within or without, and medical treatments are ineffective, it requires cauterization in two ways:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	Cauterization with butter and fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Cauterization with butter is performed by taking cow's butter and melting it in a small iron or brass spoon.
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	Afterward, take cotton, wrap it around the tip of a needle, dip it in the melted butter, and place it on the aching tooth until it cools.
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	And thus it often happens that its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you wish to moisten wool and cotton in cold butter, and place it on the aching tooth, and apply a hot iron until the heat reaches the end of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The cautery of fire is such that you take a rod made of iron or copper, and it should be thick so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth;
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After heating the cautery, from which its shape will come afterwards, place it on the tooth and hold your hand there until the cautery has cooled down.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often because the pain will be relieved on that very day or the following day.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary for the patient to fill their mouth with good butter during the urgency of this cautery, and then let the fire cool.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make the cautery for whatever part of the head you wish, and according to your ability;
et c’est li forme de la caine:	And this is the form of the cane:
des scrophules	Of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When scrofula is caused by cold and damp humours, and it does not respond to digestion-based medicines, then heat the cautery with what follows here in this form, and make two openings for the smoke to escape from the other side of the cautery;
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	And place a hot cautery on the abscess once, or as often as needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	And if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to its size, and leave it in place for three days.
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	Place damp cotton soaked in butter on top until the burn is healed.
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards, treat the area with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When moisture prevails in the body's channels, especially when it arises from a cold constitution, it is necessary that the patient first be drained through solvent medications.
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	After performing the cautery at the base of the throat, be careful not to go near the throat and burn no more than a little of the heart.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After performing another cautery at the junction of the neck and skull on top of the spine, let the 'clavile' cauteries be as shown before.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat the site just as we mentioned earlier until it heals.
de la toust	Of the cough.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all lung diseases are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and it is an old disease, perform two cauteries on their ribs.
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	And another cautery in the middle of the chest between two breasts.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	And let the cauterization, which is called 'clavicle', follow the form as described before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see it, apply cauterization by pricking the entire area that is called 'pin' as described before in the treatment of ear diseases;
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and let the pricking be up to XXX or thereabouts.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treatment of the place according to what has been said before, let there be three rows of cauterization following this pattern:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because these cauterizations are lighter, you do three at a time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	On the shoulder's dislocation:
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	Afterward, remind the patient of their back and sides.
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	Then lift the heart which is within the thistle with two fingers of your left hand.
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	And if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cauterization iron which has two handles, as shown here.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	And cauterize the heart until it pierces through to the ribs, which would create a figure like that of four cauteries.
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	And for this reason the cautery is made with a cauterizer that has three blades, thus creating a pattern of six cauteries.
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	And the nerves follow the subtlety of a tent, which is the shape of the cauterizer with three blades.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	and sometimes it is adjusted to this one nerve, thus there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After this place on the cautery some ground ivy leaves.
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Then let the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until it is well supported.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated again soon after, then quickly perform a cautery on the thick part of the clavicle, or many cauteries in succession.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joints are closed, and moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When cold and excess moisture arise in the stomach to such an extent that they disrupt its natural balance, and catarrh is multiplied within it, and with customary treatments it does not improve, then it is necessary that the patient be recalled onto their back, extending their legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	After this perform three more cauterizations - one below the heel of the foot equal in quantity to two thumbs, on each side of the cautery as long as the pattern of the cauteries forms a triangle, and ensure there is enough space between them so they are not joined together when laying down.
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	and let the cauterization be so thorough that it purifies the two parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauterizations be according to this form without adjustment.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and for those who fear this cautery, cauterize by pricking and making an incision on the stomach instead. Puncture according to the quantity you wish to introduce.
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	then cauterize with all the "point" cautery.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound that we had before, until it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When the liver experiences pain from cold, moisture, and excessive gas, indicating it has moved away from its natural state due to excesses;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the patients are cured of what we have said before in sections, and it does not benefit them, so the patient must be reminded about their belongings;
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and the sign of the third cautery is applied according to this form and this shape with this amount on the liver, outside the hypochondrium, where the ribs of a man are located;
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and leave a space between each cautery equal to the thickness of one finger;
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	and let the length of the cautery be proportional to that of the body, and do not apply too much pressure with your hand throughout the entire cautery process;
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	and let only half of the heart be burned, and keep the patient upright on their feet;
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if he cannot, let him lie down, extend his legs, and lift his arms.
et c’est li forme:	and this is the procedure:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if you wish to do so, cauterize these cautery wounds with the knife, provided that you are skilled and wise in this art, and be careful not to burn all of it, for you would make his whole body dry.
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and that it does not come close to the mouth, because the heart is very delicate there, and you would make him dry for no reason.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When there is an abscess on the liver, and you wish to determine whether it is within the flesh of the liver or in its membrane:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	If it is within the flesh, the patient feels pain but not excessively strong.
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	And if it is in the skin, they feel unbearable pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And thus when these treatments require it, the patient must be reminded of their head;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	Then drain blood from the area where the abscess is located, then heat up the cautery which resembles a ray, of which this is the shape:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	Cauterize with the cautery until the heart is burnt, and go on to such an extent that the pores are all closed.
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment according to the type of dressing until it is healed.
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And it is not suitable for anyone other than those who have studied the art of medicine at length to use this cauterization technique, through whose hands these diseases have sometimes been cured.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he may operate boldly, and yet it seems to me that one is better off leaving them alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	sinew cautery.
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancients said that one should make cauterizations with the roots of aristolochia, and in this manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take a long root of aristolochia, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and also as thick and as long as your thumb;
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	Oil the root and place it in the fire. Cauterize with one cautery between the nape of the neck and the collarbone, and two small cauteries slightly lower on the part below the beard.
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	et two cauterizations between the fifth rib and sixth rib, inclining slightly towards the back.
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	and the first cauterization on the chest, and another one above the stomach, and one between two shoulders, and two at the sides of the chest outside the cauterization which is between the two shoulders;
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	and do not squeeze your hand, rather apply pressure gently as in smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And some ancient ones said that no man should use a fire-cautery similar to a razor, and they heat it up and place it between the ribs until it reaches this abscess.
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	and if it relieves pain, as we have said for the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear that the patient may die now or develop a fistula which cannot be cured.
de la mice	From the nose.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease from the nose as we have said in the treatment sections, and it does not improve, then there are three types of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	Of which one method is that you make three cauterizations, or four, in a line according to the length of the muscle, according to the shape of the liver cautery as we have said before.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	And do not press your hand over the entire cautery site, let the patient lean back on their shoulders.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	And another method of cautery is that you heat the cauterization site which has two nerves, as we have shown in the shoulder dislocation.
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And lift the heart which is at the center of the muscle, where the patient's pain comes from towards the left, and let the elevation by which you lift the heart be according to its height, according to the length of the body, and let the cauterization site be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After placing two inflamed needles so that the heart is pierced on the other side, then apply a strong cauterization, and thus there will be four of them.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see it, cauterize with all the cautery using three needles.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has gotten rid of pus over a long time, and this is better than the other treatments mentioned earlier.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not useful for dropsy, except for the method called 'ascites'.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you treat it according to the methods we have mentioned in our discussion and your treatment does not benefit them, then it is necessary for you to apply four cauterizations around the navel, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back on the spine, and one near the hip;
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and let the cauterizations be close to the heart's base.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	After leave the open cautery for a long time to expel the pus, and do not neglect the patient's care after the cautery.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	And healing would hasten, and the two intentions will be together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The shape of the cautery for the belly should be like the template we showed before;
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	And that one for the back is an olive-shape, as shown previously.
de l’enfleure des piez	The swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and they are filled with yellow water, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger;
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	And lift your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, so as not to pierce the yellow water, and let the cautery be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	After make on two legs, two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the calf muscle.
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	And let the length of the cautery be such that one is below the knee in front and the other outside, in the middle of the leg.
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	And leave the cauteries open for some time without cleaning them, let pus form within them.
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After that, clean other wounds as we have said before.
de la menoison	From the house
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When belly ache comes from cold and moisture, so that the retaining and digesting virtues which are in the stomach and intestine become weakened, and cannot be cured by means of cauteries.
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	And if you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong constitution, then make one large cautery on the stomach according to what has been discussed before about the stomach cautery, at the circular cautery.
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	et four cauterizations around the neck delicate for all one cauterization clavicle delicate, and two cauterizations above the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, apply a cautery to the wrist, one cautery on each elbow, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large [one], for the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	For the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When hemorrhoids are at the foundation, one or more, and they are ancient, made of large cold and moist corrupt humors, and they are treated as we have said in sections, but it does not help, then make cauterizations:
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	Three above the spine of the back, which is entirely outside below the shoulder, and two in a triangle under the chin.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	and if you think their stomach is chilled, and the flesh is not cooking, and one sees swelling in the face, then make a large cauterization on the stomach as it was said before, and another on the liver, and yet another on the chin with all the clavicle cauterizations;
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	And leave the open cautery for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, let the site heal until it is completely healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	Of fleshiness which is named "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you treat an abscess, heat up the cautery that looks like a razor, and then place it fully heated onto the opened abscess;
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	And leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the opening of the wound, from which the blood flows out;
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	Do this once or twice, and if there is much abscess, cauterize each part as we have said;
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	After the curative treatments with ointments, continue until they are healed;
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on alum, it will provide greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	Of badly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When a patient cannot bear the scalpel or incision, as we will describe in its place, such illness arises that can only be healed through cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a fistula develops and emits purulent matter along with foul-smelling moisture, you must first examine it carefully using an appropriate probe, taking care to know the entire length of the abscess.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, 
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	And beware of burning the nerves which are sensitive, and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	If the fistula goes into the body of the bladder and to the intestine, avoid these places, and do not cauterize over flesh, for it is not deep.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	After treatment, wait until the place is healed, and if the area is salty, and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the wound is entirely healed.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	And if the matter has not been removed, know that the wound is still open, and the bone at its base is corrupted.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	And so with one of these that we will say in their place.
de la maladie des reins	En l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When pain from cold comes to the loins, and there is excessive flatulence, and it does not affect a woman's condition, then you must perform a cauterization on one side of the loins and on the other with the clavicle cautery as we previously mentioned;
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	and if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in a row, and they will provide greater relief.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is soft and weak due to cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then cauterize above the bladder in the area where the arm hairs begin, on both the right and left sides, and each cautery should be as long as the width of a thumb.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	and make one or two cauterizations on the back, depending on your need;
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	And let the clavi cautery be performed according to the form previously mentioned.
de la marris	From a marsh
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the womb is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends delayed;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they come, she experiences great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	then it is necessary that we apply three cauteries around the navel, as we have mentioned for the bladder cautery, and two cauteries outside the back;
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and let the clavi cautery be performed as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the hip.
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When the viscous moisture descends into the hip socket and causes it to displace from its position, with the sign being that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	And you will find the location of the hip joint, so it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the side of the hip with a cautery similar to a circle, and bleed in front of the joint around the bone as it turns, so that the bone remains within the circle;
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	and if the cautery is such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if this cautery is not present, make three large olive-sized cauteries, and let the cauteries be as perfect as all hearts;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat [the patient] until they are healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the hip's pain.
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes to the hip bone, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient has been treated as we have said in the previous section but the treatment is not effective, and the illness is chronic:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	So it is necessary for you to purge the patient of gross humours with foul-smelling pills or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	After doing the cautery procedure;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	And the manner of performing the cautery is according to two methods:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	That is to say, altogether burning medicines, and cauterisation by fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Caeterisation by fire is according to many methods, of which one is as follows:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	You should cauterise above the hip with three triangular-shaped cauteries according to this form, making a good deep mark and large in size, leaving space between each cautery equal to the width of your thumb, and let the cauteries be olive-oil coloured.
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Sometimes a cauterization is performed in the middle above the hip joint, for which there are four methods according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see it, cauterize with the circular cautery we mentioned before for the hip dislocation;
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	But make sure that the circles cover the entire hip joint, and all parts of the heart are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	This is the method employed for sciatica when pain is localized in the hip and does not extend to the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it reaches the thigh and leg, do two cauterizations where the patient feels the pain is located, and four above the ankle on the left side.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	The cauterizations should be made with a knife-like instrument, and the thickness of the heart tissue should be burned.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the patient feels that the pain extends down to their toes or close to them, cauterize where they feel the pain with three or four points using a tool called 'points'.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if it is necessary, do more of this to them;
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if they know that the pain is beneath the knee towards the thigh, use a chisel or circular cautery on them, and be very careful with all your cauterizations so as not to leave the tool for too long, lest you burn their nerves and large arteries, and cause even more harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who underwent cauterization on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so that their leg became completely swollen, as well as their feet, and their feet were pierced and corrupted throughout.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After the abdominal operation which resulted in death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, cauterize both one and the other, according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the wise ones say regarding hip cauterization, this is how it's done: make a tool that has one end like an inch-wide knuckle bone or slightly smaller, and perforate it with holes at regular intervals, each hole spaced about as wide as your thumb.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	and let there be two interlocking parts [of the instrument], also like nuts, and have one iron screw well-made;
et c’est li forme:	and this is its form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	Heat it until it is red hot and throw away the coals, then place it onto the diseased hip bone, turning it towards the healthy side of the body.
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	Cauterise once with one cautery, then leave for three days.
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	Then make an ointment of butter and leave the wound open for a long time.
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasim says that we rarely use this cautery due to the fear of its appearance, and we see few who do.
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	And nonetheless, it is one of the good cauterizations, which can be tolerated if applied correctly and slowly.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The burning cauterizations of medicine are such that you make an instrument with crossed bars into which descends the edge of the port, and it is made of brass or iron on one side, and at a height of two fingers, with each section as thick as a thumb.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	And it should be open on top and bottom, and the parts join together in this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	Afterwards, place the box of the hip on the patient lying on their healthy side, and press your hand firmly onto the box.
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing between the two circles of hot water that has been heated over one fire pot, leave it for an hour's time and let the patient bear its heat and burning.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For there is also a biting sensation as of fire found therein;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	And once the biting sensation has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip of tepid water, leaving it thus for three days, and apply butter until that which is blackened by scalding is removed.
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	And you let it rest there for three days so as to draw out the corruption of humours.
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this would be the last aid after the treatment of ointments until it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or down to the leg, make him a poultice that holds back according to what you have done for the hip similarly.
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	and this is the method of the hot poultice, which I have described in the treatise on medical correction.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, equal parts of each, grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	where there is a small opening for it, so that the tip of a lancet can enter.
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and place over it another well-sealed pot, and put on alkali and heat, and gentle steam above, until there is two fingers of steam above the powders when you have properly gripped with your hand.
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	leave it this way until steam condenses and drips water into the sealed pot, then take all that steam, pour it over heat and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And then there will be great pain, administered through many medical procedures and cauterizations of other body parts.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it causes the same effect as fire, and there are other treatments such as those in which one cauterizes the hip well with iron, and mixtures of honey, nuts, and hot soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a cure where a man was cured of hip pain and sciatica, and he praises it greatly, saying that no other treatment was used, and he was healed immediately after this cure was performed, and he took a bath as he instructs below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And he describes it in this way: take fresh and dry green litharge, grind it very well with a pound of grease, apply it to the hip, thigh, and leg where the pain is felt, and bind it.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	and leave it for three hours, or until the patient no longer feels the burn caused by this treatment.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then let him enter the bath until his body is a little warmed up, and place him in bed, and the pain will disappear completely and he shall be cured.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such medicines of cauterization without first evacuating the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat dung, it provides much relief;
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	et must be done with the cauterization in such a manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen and cover it with old oil-based grease, and place it on the depression which is between the big toe and the one next to it, called the fossa.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After take dry goat fat, and heat it to embers, place on the wool, and leave until it is extinguished.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	then repeat again in this way, and do not stop doing so until you feel it has reached the hip, and that the pain has ceased.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	And this method of cauterization is called "goat cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	From the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or due to impact or excessive loss, or because of similar spread matter that is cold, in none of these cases are caustic remedies good except for those caused by an influx of cold material.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	The patient must be made to void themselves of foul pills or other such things that are on their back, where the pain is located, three lines signed with ink, and in each line there should be V cauterizations or more depending on their condition and how much they can withstand.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	and perform the caustics according to a caustic called "point
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	and if you see [something], make three or four caustics on the clavicle in this manner:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	This illness often affects young children, and the signs of its onset are narrow shoulders when they rise up, and fear.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you find on the last vertebra of the spine, in us, an appearance that arises on other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this, and treat it, cauterize it with the cold cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery touches each part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see fit, cauterize around the spine with the sharp cautery using two or three lines, and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treat the place until it is healed according to what we have said, and be wary of applying cautery to a swollen area with nerve damage.
de la dolor des jointes	Of the pain of joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When joint pain arises from moisture that spreads to every limb of the body, and when foot pain comes about, which doctors call "gout" properly, and when it is caused by coldness and medicines cannot cure it, then treat it with caustics in this manner:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Do a series of fire cauterizations around the ankle joint, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped according to this form.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary to act upon the front of the foot, make a single cauterization that we call a "dot.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pain extends to the knees and other joints, which happens frequently, apply three or four cauterizations on each knee in every part, with each cauterization being olive-shaped.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you need to do more, proceed with additional cauterizations, but don't hold your hand close for longer than it takes the heart-shaped tip of the cautery iron to become red hot.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knees and back, apply the cautery as we described in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pain is in the hands, make two lines of punctures around the wrist.
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	And if there remains no pain in the fingers, make punctures on each joint and also above the hair of the hand.
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains reach up to the neck or shoulders, cauterize each affected area and ensure good care for the patient with proper medication.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you provide good care and remove the phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	For rupture of the spleen
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When a rupture occurs in the groin area and the testicles descend into the scrotum, which is a recent development, one must ensure that on the day of treatment, the patient does not eat.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	And have him consume things that relax the belly, so that the stool may descend from his abdomen.
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	Afterward, make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his breath until the testicles are retracted, then pull them with your fingers, and cauterize below the rupture onto the bone of the hip joint, marking it entirely in a semi-circle shape above the body.
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then heat the cautery with this is its shape:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	Until it becomes white and emits no smell.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then replace the balls back to their place;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	And the attendant should hold his hand so that it does not go backwards;
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	Spread the patient's legs well, and place a cushion beneath them with a bandage on their thighs, and another on their feet to hold their hands;
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	Then place the cautery on the sign with your whole hand, and hold it straight and firmly until you reach the bone. If you do not reach the bone in one go, repeat this process again until you hit the bone;
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	Be careful that the eye does not pop out when you apply the cautery;
que tu ne le brulasses;	That you do not burn him/it;
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and that the patient does not die or suffer other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cauterization, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is appropriate that the cauterization for children be subtle according to their size, and for adults also large according to their measure;
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	after three days treat the site of the butter cautery until the burning sensation is gone;
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	after the treatment with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the wound is well-fused;
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	and it is necessary that his nourishment be sufficient for a long time, so that the wound does not protrude when he tries to go into a room.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, provide him with a well-made bandage, and wear it for another forty days.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	Let him have good rest, avoid excessive exertion, and guard against too much overindulgence in drinking or eating, as well as shouting at high volume.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And when he follows this instruction, he will be entirely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I shall now speak of the treatment for amputation, in its own chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Of abdominal rupture.
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When tumors spread to other organs and are known to be malignant, and you see that they no longer grow, apply a cauterization treatment according to its size, burning off one third of the heart.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	After the treatment, follow up as we have instructed.
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	And some of the ancients have said that one must cauterize with a three-angled cautery according to this form.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But first mark the spot with an X and draw one line across the width above the rupture, then another perpendicular to it, and hold your hand over the entire cautery instrument.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the initial cauterization is lighter and more gentle.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain arises in any limb, whether from falling or injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and medical treatment is ineffective, then it is necessary that the patient be cauterized with a tool called a "point," and the cautery should be applied according to the length of the limb, its thickness, weakness, strength, and location of twists and pains.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	If it is blistered by the first cautery, that is good.
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If this is not the case, perform another cautery on top of it, for such a practice should change in the member closest to it; therefore, you must carry out cauteries until the patient blisters.
de meselerie	of surgery
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The months are aided sometimes by cauterization for great relief, especially illnesses that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	Once you have seen the patient cauterized, observe if the illness is at its beginning and has been treated according to what we've said in the division; it does not descend nor remain, and you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the entire patient, then apply five cauteries on top of each other.
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	On my head at nine o'clock, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair.
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and two above the horns, and one behind on the nape.
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and I leave your hand there until the cauterization reaches the bone, and also so that scabs form and the vapors of thick humors can escape.
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and cauterize it on the wound according to what is necessary.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the injury is spread everywhere,
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and it is clearly discharging pus, then you must cauterize it with these types of cauterization we have mentioned for the head, and one cauterization on top of the nape, two cauterizations on the spine of the neck, six cauterizations on the spine of the back, one large one on the buttocks and another nearby, and two on each shoulder.
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	II on the ribs, II on the knuckles of the toes, I on each joint of hands and feet, and in the pits of the hands.
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and beware of the nerves that are above the back of the heel, lest you burn them.
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and never make a cauterization on the bone of the wrist, and another one on the bone of the abdomen, and yet another one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And know that the more cauterizations you make, the more help you provide, and it benefits him.
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the patient feels no pain from the cauterization as a healthy person would, because his body is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	The cautery should be large and small depending on the limbs and joints, according to what you find appropriate for the tools at hand.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment, apply flour paste with honey to the wound and use other treatments until it is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medicine, oils, and plasters but it does not heal, then perform cauterization on the limb according to its size and proportion.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	and let the cautery be slightly beyond the depth of the heart's point;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	One may also apply cauterization to the hand, foot, or back at the exit point of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus remove the swelling.
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	however, one should not intervene without knowledge of the limbs and the paths of the nerves that move the body.
de albaras	Of erysipelas.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the illness known as "albaras" has persisted and medical treatments prove ineffective, then apply a perfect cautery to it slightly, according to the depth of the heart's species until the whiteness is removed, and its colour is changed.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	Then treat it with a remedy made of flour of vetch and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and one part each of pigeon blood and sparrow blood.
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Mix everything together well, wrap it in a cloth, and apply it to the affected area until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of cancer with cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When cancer appears at the beginning, and you wish to stop its growth, cauterize it with a circular cautery, all around the circumference of the cancerous area.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And yet the wise ones say that one should also apply a cautery to the middle of the cancerous growth.
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	and nevertheless it does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen this happen before.
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	and moreover the most appropriate thing is to cauterize around it with the circular cautery, as we have said before about various cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	On swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When someone has an illness called 'adubelati', and they are slow to die either due to the excess of matter it produces or because of the patient's condition when they are decrepit (that is, very old) with little blood left in them, or perhaps due to the season;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you want to see it hasten their death:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	then cauterize around it with many small cauteries, touching only slightly;
aprés le laisse ensi.	After leaving it like this.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing through the entire cauterization, then heat the cautery with what it is formed from:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of that illness which is called 'adubelati' until the cautery has pierced the heart, and let it be such a cautery that the patient feels it from outside in such a way that the course of decay is lessened.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Afterwards, treat until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the treatment with fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	There is another kind of illness which is called 'corrodens', and it is nothing but a wasting away of the limbs, for it withers the limbs just as fire withers dry branches.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this illness in a place that can withstand cauterization with fire, then heat the small and large claw-shaped cauteries, according to what is suitable for the location or where the illness is;
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	After that, cauterize it from all sides until you eradicate all the corruption, leaving nothing of it behind, so that everything that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then leave it for three days, and apply on the cauterized areas an ointment ground up with oil so that the scaldings from the fire are removed, along with all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	Afterward treat it with ointments producing flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if you see no new scab form after three days, that is good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	If not, begin the cauterization again on what remains in the corrupted areas.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this disease is sometimes cured with medication rather than fire cauterization;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	but nevertheless fire cauterization is of greater aid, and I have already mentioned the treatment for quartan fever in the section on remedies:
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	inflamed blisters that come on the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often the feet become afflicted with a disease we call "claws," which are faulty growths that wound the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And there are two ways of cauterizing this disease.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cautery, and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Fire cauterization is when you heat an iron cautery as well as a lanceolate-shaped spatula, and it should be made of good iron to the measure that it can grasp the nail from all sides, and that it has fine edges.
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	After that, put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand around the nail so that it reaches the bottom of the nail.
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	Leave it like this for three days until it begins to discharge pus.
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Then make an ointment of wild mallows crushed with salt, and leave the ointment on overnight; the nail will come out and be uprooted from its root.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the place of injury by applying ointment until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are converted by force within the body, and occur frequently in hands and feet, then you must apply a hot water cautery to them.
et est en teil maniere:	and it is done in this way:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	Take a rod of brass or iron, or the quill of an inkwell, and place it on top of the nail and its counterpart, which are the warts;
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	And place the rod so that it covers all around, then put a drop of hot water on it, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the rod reaches the root of the nail, allowing the hot water to penetrate deeply into the root.
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	and let the patient endure a little the bite of hot water for an hour.
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	then leave it like this, and it will pull out all at its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another until you eradicate all those that are in the body, then treat them with ointments that generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	The doctor for shaking/trembling.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When some tremble from coldness of nerves, or quartan fever, or any other, you must make four cauterizations on the back's spine, one between each vertebra.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and one cauterization on the foot, and one olive-oil cauterization on the stomach.
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	let him shiver, and hasten his recovery from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	Stinking blisters/pustules.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes the body breaks out in baths/sores or stinking blisters which come from gross corrupt matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	for the first, when they appear, it is fitting to make a cauterization on each head of the pimple.
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	A subtle cautery with myrtle wood, for which the tip is taken by fire, or long aristoloche root, or lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And sometimes they cauterize in the beginning when they appear, according to this method, and it prevents them from growing forward, but breaks the excess that comes forth, and they are healed.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	but it should be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut off
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	There are often great outflows of blood from the artery that is cut in the wound or incision of an abscess, or when cauterizing a limb and similar things.
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	And it is very difficult to staunch (stop the flow).
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And yet when this happens to someone, hasten to place your index finger on the wound's injury, pressing firmly until blood ceases to flow beneath your finger and not a drop more escapes.
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	then apply multiple small and large olive-oil cauterizers to the fire until they all turn red;
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	take one, either large or small depending on the wound and the location of the artery, place the cauterizer on that vessel where you are holding your finger, and keep it there until the blood flow stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if there is a spark when you lift your finger above the wound, and the cauterization has ended, then take another of the hot cauteries immediately.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	Do not cease doing this one after another until the blood is completely extinguished.
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	Be careful not to burn the nerve nearby and avoid any other mischief that may befall the patient.
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it cannot be properly staunched especially when the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned.
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	By cauterization or by extraction if it is not treated, or by strongly binding with thread, or by applying medications that have the power to staunch blood.
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And be bound tightly as necessary.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	What will bring about staunching is binding tightly with linen cloths or putting hot things on it, or other similar methods, and nothing else profits therefrom.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if it happens to someone and they have neither thread nor medicine available, they must place their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press down firmly until it is staunched over the wound and over the vein.
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	And do not move the finger, but moisten it with cold water often so that it is very cold until the blood is frozen and thickened and staunched.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	and make incisions beforehand on those parts where it is necessary for cauterization and medication.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases which require fire cauterization or burning medications, and their symptoms, causes, instruments, and methods of cauterization.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	and placed this chapter on the head to feet, and I will go in this same manner in this chapter so that what is desired can be found more easily.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, as I begin this work, dear child, you must learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first about cauterization, and thus it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	Where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many types of people come seeking treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	If they die from such [illnesses] that afflict them so much alongside their illness that they faint easily due to the shock they experience from their condition and the severity of their ailment.
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And these we ought to fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	From such there are those who will give you their insight, and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am healed".
et li maladie est despitouse.	But the illness is obstinate.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	You must not consent to those who approach you with such mannerisms, but place greater emphasis on your honour than on your greed, and do not act hastily but wisely in matters of which you are certain and can claim credit for.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	And use prognostics and indicators in treating your patients for their healing.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And this will help you gain a good reputation, glory, and a memorable legacy.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	My dear son, may our Lord give you good understanding and righteousness, and if he wills to inspire you with his holy breath, so be it.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have ordered this chapter for you by dividing it into chapters, according to what is presented in the previous chapter on cauterization, which I explained from head to toe so that you may find more easily what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	A head full of water.
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Know that this illness often comes to children during birth, when the midwife grips the child's head too tightly.
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	And sometimes it happens for reasons unknown.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	I have never seen this illness occur outside of children, and in all cases I've witnessed, the child died.
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And for this reason, it seems best to leave the treatment of such cases to others.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw a child whose shoulder was filled with fluid, and the head swelled each day to the point that he could not bear it.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	The moisture grew so much that he died, and this fluid had gathered beneath the bone on the shoulder blade, between the heart and the bone.
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	And the work is such if the fluid is between the heart and bone, and the abscess is small, that you should make a wide incision in the middle of the shoulder.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	And it should be as long as two fingers, so that the fluid runs out.
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And you will see here the shape of the spatula.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscesses are larger, make two incisions in the form of a cross, according to this shape:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is below the bone, and you see signs of the comminution of the skull with the sutures open on all sides, and there is fluid that spurts forth when you press it with your hand inside, and this has not responded to treatment.
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	you must cut into the head with three incisions in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all moisture quickly.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After treating the incisions with cloths and powders, apply wine and oil, and leave it like this for five days.
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Then release the head and treat the wound with tented bandages and ointments, leaving it compressed equally, and feed the patient dry meat to absorb moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another method of incision is to look at where the swelling of the abscess appears, and its collection of pus.
car aucune fois est elle devant;	because sometimes it comes before.
aucune fois derrier;	sometimes behind.
aucune fois en destre;	sometimes on the right.
et aucune fois en senestre.	and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Cut therefore at the place where the abscess appears, and its filling with pus, and make an incision according to your ability.
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and be careful not to cut the artery.
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and if veins of blood flow, so that the patient dies from loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of rheumatism.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When someone has a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or throat, and it is an old illness that does not benefit from medical treatment, then the last resort is cauterization along with cutting of the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	It is necessary, therefore, when you cut his eyes, that the patient turn their head back;
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	After rubbing the place with a coarse cloth until the arteries appear, then have the patient stretch their neck away from the cloth;
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	Then look where the vein beats, and its courses are after the ears, and they are ready to be pierced;
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then mark the courses of blood with ink, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula that is two fingers wide, so that the blade reaches down to the bone, but not into the brain.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see it, push the spatula beneath the artery and the cup above, cutting also as II must across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, blood will continually spurt upwards forcefully.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not appear by feeling it, you must measure a space of three fingers, then mark with ink and cut down to the bone;
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	and for this, it is necessary to let out six ounces of blood, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the fullness of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	then examine the wound.
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	if there is no bone sticking out of the wound, ensure that a hot abscess does not develop, then clean the wound and bind it, treating it with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migraine comes, with a thick discharge due to the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and an old, persistent headache with similar symptoms, and no medical treatment helps, we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have explained.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the method of extracting them is for the patient to pull back the hairs on their temples, and pay attention to the artery that appears in the temple, as it can be easily seen by its pulsation, although it may not appear prominently in some people who are too cold.
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	and if it is dislocated, the patient should have their neck held by some cloth, then rub the area with a rough fabric, and pour warm water over the location until the artery appears clearly.
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	then take the spatula of which this is the shape: [insert shape]
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	then lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then pull it upwards with pincers, and carefully remove the membranes that are underneath on each side;
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	and if the artery is thin, turn it with the point of the hook, then cut it from that side according to the quantity of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, the blood cannot flow out completely everywhere.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	and draw out blood from six cents, until you reach three.
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	and if the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread so that gangrene does not come before the wound heals, and blood flows out continuously.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	then remove the excess flesh between the two lines at that very moment, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a knife-cautery down to the bone until the head of the shoulder is cut off.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	and this is a delicate operation if the patient does not have fever and has a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For cauterization helps to dry up moisture.
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	for it is of greater help for moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	For the extraction of arteries, one must fill the space with old cotton and place well-made bandages over it.
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and when you remove them, ensure to apply dry medicinal herbs that promote flesh growth and bandages until it is healed.
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	and if blood escapes from the artery while you work on it, quickly cut and cauterize with a hot iron, or use vitriol and squeeze by hand to stop the bleeding.
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	and if you don't have the aforementioned items available, place your hand directly on it to freeze the blood, pour cold water over until bleeding stops, and apply pressure as necessary.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	what is more efficient and lightweight in the extraction of an artery is to cauterize the vein with this cutting-edge hot iron divided into two parts, but ensure the divisions are thick enough to maintain heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too thin, it retains less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And there must be a thickness of space between the two knives, and then when you have secured both places, place the burning iron on it until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein into two parts.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	and be separated between the two shoulders as they are not fully fused from this cautery on all sides.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and here is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears from the eyes flow down along the veins that are on top of the skull and it is not beneficial to apply any medical treatment here, you will see the patient's face turn red and feel a pulsation or tremor in their forehead.
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and if their eyes are swollen and moist so that the hair around them falls out, and the eyelids become hot and scalded by the heat of the tears, then it is necessary to apply this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And the ancients called it "healing of contusions," and for the patient suffering from this ailment, make sure they have hair on their forehead, then give them three incisions equally spaced along the length of the forehead.
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	Let one incision be made in the middle of the forehead towards the nose, and the others at both sides above the eyebrows, taking care to avoid cutting into the arteries located at these sides above the eyebrows.
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	Keep your hand away from the line connecting both jaws, and let each wound be three fingers in length across its width.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	Have ready a piece of sponge and plenty of cloth to wipe away the blood, then take a spatula with two sharp edges, which is shaped like this:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	From the incision which is above the temple to the second incision
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	And scrape all the heart which is between the two fissures to all the soft part that is above the bone, then do likewise from the middle incision to the other second one, and then extract this spatule.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Insert into the first incision the instrument that is called a "cultellaire," which is very sharp on one side and soft but not sharp on the other, and it has this form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	Place the sharp side of the instrument towards the flesh above the scalp and the soft side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle incision.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes so that the incision is continuous up until those which appear of the heart, and then do likewise in the middle fissure up until the other exterior one.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	And then extract an equal amount of blood, and press the place for the captured blood.
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	Then place in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and put on moistened bandages with wine and oil and eggs, and make sure no hot abscesses come.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	On the third day, undo the binding, and apply a large poultice of warm water, then treat it with an ointment of basilicon mixed with rose oil, and other treatments used for wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	For the kingdom of eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When someone presents with acute cataracts as a habit, and you see their eyes turned and small, and weakened vision, and the corneas burned;
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and their hair falls out, and there is pain at the top of the head, and the patient sneezes;
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	then you will know that these symptoms and this catarrh come from many sources, and the only true cure is as follows:
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And so you instruct the patient to raise their forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another from the wide eye socket.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	Begin with an incision from the left temple to the right temple, going down as deep as the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples which cause eating.
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then separate between the two lips of the wound and place old cotton, and line with linen bandages.
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	Then bind moistened cloths soaked in wine and oil on top, and beware of hot abscesses.
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	when it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with drying agents that promote healing.
En teil maniere:	In this manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	Take two parts wheat flour, and four parts colophony, and make a plaster.
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	And administer to these wounds to generate flesh throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stuffing of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	All that falls in the ears is one of four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	Or grain, or beast, or stone from the mine or similar thing such as iron;
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	Or seed, like oats, beans, peas;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Or flowing substance such as water, oil, and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When stone or other matter that does not fit nor grow in the ear falls into it, expose the ear to sunlight.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the stone, apply a drop of purple oil or oil of cypress, then administer its removal.
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	And make him sneeze with a condy, and plug the nose when sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool.
et estent l’oreille au desus.	And lift the ear upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Often, pus comes out through this treatment.
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	And if it does not come out with pus, apply subtle pincers for its extraction, which are shaped like this:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it comes out with the pincers, that is good.
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	If not, apply an equally subtle small double-edged hook for its extraction.
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	And if it does not come out with the hook, make a flaxen wick and insert its head into the hole of the ear very firmly, and stuff what is around the wick with soft wax so that no air can enter along with the wick.
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	Then treat the wound thoroughly, for often fire is necessary as we have said.
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	And if fire does not come in this way, take glue of which birds are caught, and place some on an instrument that is sharp for the purpose, and put a piece of cotton around it.
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	Then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and treat with fire.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if it cannot be treated by any of these methods we have said, then quickly cut the ear rather than an abscess, before heat and spasm occur.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	The method of incision is as follows: first, bind the patient's head with a headband, and extract blood according to his condition, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear upwards, and make a small cut in the root of the ear at the fat depending on it.
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and let the fissure be like a crescent moon until you reach the stone. Then remove it according to your ability and suck rapidly toward your mouth
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	until the treatment is complete and it has healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	and if there is grain inside and it swells, administer removal.
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if it cannot be expelled, use the spatula very gently in this shape:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	And prepare an incision for that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not do this when you think the grain is soft due to the moisture in the ear until you have made several incisions.
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	Then extract it with fine forceps and by sucking it out, as we have said before so that the extraction is eased.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the water that falls into the ear, the patient should first use sneezing remedies and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And lie on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it should jump out because of this, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	If not, take many stones according to the length of your thumb, slender and light, and warm them a little in the fire;
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	And place the patient's ear over a hole, and let them lean out with their feet from the other side, and strike an additional stone upon the stone that is in the ear;
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	And do not stop striking stone with stone until all the water comes out, and thus it will all come out;
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	And if you see this, take a reed and insert one end into the ear, and apply fire to the other end until the better part of the reed is burnt.
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Then repeat this process with other reeds until all the water comes out, as we have said about stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In extracting the beast, if it has a small body like that of a flea or similar, treat it as we have said in the section on divisions.
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it has a large body that one can feel, then arrange for the extraction of pin-holes.
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and this is the lightest thing to remove that there is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the extraction of worms entangled in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the section on divisions and treating secretions, and the treatment does not work, then you must examine the ear in the sunlight.
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	if no worms appear, take some fine pincers and treat them; if none appear, then use the instrument that has their shape.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And [the ear] is narrow underneath but wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And thrust the most subtle tip into the ear according to the extent of the patient's suffering, then thoroughly suck out all the contents.
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey and come out, stuff the canal with cotton around it as I have said for stones.
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	and if they do not emerge as we have said, apply the distillations that ancient doctors have proven effective in expelling worms, and you will find them in the treatise on distillations.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	and distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, of which this is the form as you see it:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And whether it is made of silver or brass, narrow below at small openings, and broad above to pour out (the distillation);
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	to compress within the distillation with an instrument of brass made well for this purpose, and if you wish to use a razor, wrap it around the point, lined with cotton.
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	then pour in your oil or juice, whatever medicine you wish from among those inside the cane, and let the cane be placed within the ear;
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	then push in the razor along with all of the cotton, and press your hand gradually until the oil is distilled or reaches the end of the ear.
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	and the patient should feel it inside, and let the distillation be a little warm from the fire, unless one is distilling into the ear.
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And ensure it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stuffing of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born without an opening in their ears;
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	and this same thing happens to men due to blockage of a wound or wax inside the ear, and these blockages sometimes pierce through the ear, so it cannot be seen.
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	and at times the hole appears outside the opening, and you can see it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	Therefore, the one that pierces through and cannot be seen is quickly healed in many cases, and for this, when it can be seen, you must place the patient's ear in the sun.
et regarde dedens:	and look inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	if you see the inflammation evident, operate on this entire area of which it consists:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And be sharp and cutting in front and behind, completely smooth so it does not harm the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	if the inflammation is of newborn flesh or within the ear itself, hold it with fine pincers and cut away lightly, until all this flesh is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the obstruction is complete in the ear, take a subtle light razor and warm it slightly over fire, then place it in the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel inflammation causing the patient itching when heard, pierce lightly, and be careful not to damage the ear nerves;
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	then insert in the ear an ointment tent according to the size of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do this on any day when the wound is healed, take a linen cloth and dampen it with pink water, then powder it with ground vitriol.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And if you see the ear swollen, it is necessary that you remove the cloth and apply another damp cloth made of wax mixed with rose oil until the swelling is gone.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and employ other treatments that stop the bleeding as described in the section on distillations.
de la char des papieres	Of the paper's flesh.
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	These eyelids that become moist on paper and are dry, it is necessary to separate them with tongs and pincers, and cut off a piece of the root with a small spade.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Then place on it ground vitriol.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if it cannot be peeled away, then perform a subtle lenticular cautery, and the cauterizer moves after the incision.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	and they often return when something remains in their roots;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned away and do not return.
de la gresle	Of the hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Often come into the eyes things that appear like hail in their form and hardness, and for this reason, this illness is called "grandine," an assembly of thick moisture within the cornea above and below.
li ovraiges est telz:	The treatments are as follows:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	Take note if the "grandine" moves from one side to another, as this is something that should be known easily.
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Making a wide incision, then flay each part lightly, taking it with forceps, and cutting it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	If you cannot cut without piercing the membrane slightly, it causes no harm to the patient;
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	And if the tear is large, you should sew it together with a stitch, healing it until it is sound;
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	And if it is small, do not apply force, for the ointments will restore it quickly, promoting flesh growth.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	If the clot descends into the ear towards the upper part, then turn over the membrane and stretch out the clot with forceps, cutting it and pressing from both sides;
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	And if the membrane is separated by incision, it causes no harm.
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And when the cataract is removed, irrigate the eye with salt water, and treat the place where pus arises until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	From the fat of eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinach is a grease that forms on the membranes of children's eyes more than adults', and it greatly harms their eyes, causing them to have cataracts in the morning, and they cannot bear the sunlight due to tears rushing to their eyes;
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	And because of this they sleep on their faces, and rest above, with their membranes below their eyebrows moist, which swells and covers the exinach that appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the place with your fingers, feel the dislocation between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the manner of treatment is such that the patient places their head on your lap.
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	then take a linen cloth and prepare a tent-like covering in the shape of a circle according to the size that exceeds each part, then place it on top.
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and press with your two hands from either side so that the excess is gathered within the circle.
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	then make in the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatula a slit which is not wider than the wound made when opening the vein.
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and make an incision in the skin precisely until you reach the excess tissue.
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And in many cases, discharge emerges from the opening, resembling a fragment of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Then extract it entirely with a piece of cloth held between your two fingers at the exit, and turn your hand right and left until it is dispersed.
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Be careful not to reach into the opening with your spatula until you strike the eyeball and injure it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the discharge does not appear at the beginning of the opening, gently widen the fissure slightly until it becomes visible.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	Then extract it as we have described, moistening the cloths with oil and water, place them on the spot, and strain them out of bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And for those people who grind willow and apply it to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it reaches the warm abscess place, then treat it with soothing plasters until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	The hairs of paper.
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When hairs grow on the eyelids contrary to nature and are left unchecked, they harm the eyes, causing various ailments such as habitual tears, softening of the eyelids, and discharge, ultimately leading to eye damage.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	and treatment is done in four ways:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	by fire cauterization together with other medical procedures according to what was discussed in the chapter on cauterization or by medication depending on the case; it is done either through incision and stitching or through canes as I will explain further.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	You should place the patient's head on your lap, then turn their affected eyelid towards your left hand;
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	If it is turned inward, that is good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	If not, insert a needle through it with a thread attached;
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	And be it near the edge of the paper where the hairs grow beside them, and draw the thread over all the paper, and turn it to the razor;
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	Then make an incision below the paper beneath the hairs aligned there, cutting all the length with the wide blade from the large hinge to the small one;
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	Then extract the thread and place beneath the paper a small tent of cotton and cloth, then sign on the paper an image of an anchor, like the myrtle leaf, and still it is necessary that the figure be according to the amount you wish to raise the paper which is divided everywhere.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	Et if has such who need it cut large quantity of the paper according to how much the paper is softened;
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	then make all the spatula on these two lines that you have marked, and start from the large gash until small;
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	and let one of the fissure be near natural hairs in thickness of a root, then insert unicorn's horn into one of two angle of heart, and then scrape away everything;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	then join the two lips with one seam of needle and all the fine thread of wool, wipe away blood, and remove excess hair on both eyebrows with any adhesive substance, if you wish to do this.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	And if not, then take no care of it, just leave the stitches and threads for three or four days.
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	Then treat the wound without stitches using drying and binding agents, for paper adheres to the healing of the wound and its reunion, but stitches are harmful (as the ancients said), and it is work without fear.
et si a une autre maniere:	And there is another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And cut the paper into a shape that resembles the myrtle leaf, as we have described, to three ounces apart according to the form shown here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cut this top part with small equal forces according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you cannot hold the forceps, and the object is not even, then take a needle with one thread, and place it in the middle of the shape.
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and pull another thread towards the large armpit, and the second thread towards the small [armpit], and gather between your two fingers the threads evenly.
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin onto which you have sewn, as we have told you, then join the two lips of the wound by suturing, and treat it until it is healed.
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	and if an abscess appears at your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar soothing ointments.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	and sometimes the hairs of the papule turn white:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	then you must use what we have said about incision;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	But the suturing on both sides is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment of fractures follows this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	And make paper and cut it into this according to what I said, then make two fractures per page, and also two fine threads as long as the width of the paper, which is the size of a spatula.
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	And cut two heads at either end where you hold the threads.
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	Then carefully attach one to the other on top of the paper's eyelet, and pull the two threads from each part.
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	Leave it like this for a few days, and the skin that was constricted will die, blacken, and rot until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If he delays, strike it with force, then treat it until it is healed.
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	And when the wound is closed, if the scab has risen, they will no longer prick the hair;
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	And this is the form of the two chains that you will make according to this figure, and with this measure of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	The works are such that you take a fine needle, and insert into it a thread of soft and delicate silk;
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	Then join the heads and tie each one finely, and let the length of the threads be a palm's width.
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	Then pass through the shaft another fine silk thread quickly, and tie the ends of the thread together.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	Then place the patient's head on your lap;
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	and be near the sun so that the work is illuminated, for it is delicate and precise work, then insert the needle into the base of the hair follicle, pierce through the skin until you draw it out above the natural hair;
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	then extract the hair up to its base, and insert that hair back into the follicle, whether there is one or two or three or more;
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	then withdraw your hand so that the hairs come out along with the natural hair follicle.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the follicle is damaged and the hairs do not come out with it, you will pull on the hair below to extract the entire follicle through the opening above so that you can see it with your eye;
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	Thus, you will draw out the dart and the thread, close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days until the hair withers in its place and flesh grows back over it.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair with those of natural growth, and let it be raised along with them until they grow longer and then remove it.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the corruption of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or scrofula comes to the eye, there are two ways it may arise.
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	One is natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it occurs suddenly due to wounds or incisions, from cauterization, and similar procedures.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	The way of working on it is that you split the abscess and separate its lips, putting in linen pads, binding them until it is healed.
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And you must not use anything that dries or tightens in their treatment.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do so, the illness will return worse than before.
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but work with softening agents such as fenugreek.
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and rose water or another [liquid] and flax seeds are boiled, and diaqilun ointments melted in any oil, and a poultice is prepared, and treat it with this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the secret of your treatment is that you must be careful not to restore it exactly as it was before.
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	and these treatments we have mentioned are only temporary solutions to this illness so that it does not return as it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh which comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is inflammation, truly called "axacrati", and it is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	The accidents come from wounds, tears, cauterization, and similar things.
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	And the method of work is as follows: take a needle with double thread and insert it into the flesh, piercing from left armpit to right, so that the thread emerges at two points in the flesh.
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Then stretch the flesh above completely over the needle, and cut it with a broad spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the shape on the paper returns as it should be, that is good.
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	If not, take a razor and place it in the gap, turn the paper over, and make two incisions on either side inside the paper.
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	And let the two sides of the two incisions in the corners that you have cut be joined together, forming an angle so that when they are assembled, it resembles the shape of the Greek letter I.
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	Then remove that flesh, according to the amount its edges extend below, from what follows under the paper, then join together the two separated parts and sew them up with a woolen thread.
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it with the softening medications we mentioned before, and apply dressings until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the wound resulted from a tear or suture or cauterization, you should make an incision directly below the hairline of the skin, according to what was mentioned earlier.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	Then sever between the two lips of a wound, as I have said;
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	and one must perform the procedure according to the form of the illness, as it is very diverse in form, and wise surgeons use all their power and skill to restore the body's shape to its natural state;
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	and the patients themselves, according to what is required for treatment and tools in various arrangements.
dou soudement de la papiere	suddenly from the papery skin
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this fusion occurs in the hands of men such that the film over the eye is stuck with the white part, and it cannot move or perform its natural functions, you must therefore insert the tip of a razor underneath the film and lift it upwards.
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	And stretch them with pincers until you cut off that which is open to the subtle spatule, but make sure it's not too sharp nor too cutting so that the patient does not suffer from a spatula that's too sharp causing harm to the eye.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	And make your incision such that you peel off the gathered assembly lightly so that the paper returns to its natural form;
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	And it is purified all that assembly, sometimes with salt water in the eye, and others with clean water, and collarbone.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	Then place between the paper and eye a tent of linen, and put on the eye moist wool mixed with egg white.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	And after three days, make use of the collarbone and hot compresses until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the eyelash's nail
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: 
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	She is nervous and resembles hard skin, and another that is not nervous, but appears like white frozen moisture, which when touched with iron and thought to be hardened by pincers, cannot be done so.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	And both appearances begin towards the large corner of the eye, and grow bit by bit until it covers all vision, all light, and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And for the manner of incision, the patient should put their head in a sound position, then open their eyes wide;
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	And take the paper with your hand, then curl your nail around the small pincers, and extend it above [the eye].
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	Then take a needle, and insert a horse hair, or cow hair, or ox hair, and strong thread.
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	Double the point of the needle slightly and insert it between the nail and flesh, then pierce through with the entire needle, tie the nail to a thread and pull it upward, remove all hair from the side of the nail that covers the affected area and strip its root along with the skin up to the cuticle; finally use a sharp knife and small forceps to cut away any remaining tissue at the base of the wound and leave the natural flesh around the armpit so as not to disturb the usual flow of lymphatic fluid.
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	And sometimes stretch the nail with only onion juice and thread, as we have said.
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	Then scrape off all of the soft skin, which is how it appears:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And ensure that the soft skin does not touch or tear the fleshy membrane, and that the plumule is not pierced.
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	After the incision, put a pinch of ground silt into the eye, and apply some lead oxide ointment, leaving it on until the next day.
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it with whatever is necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, and the probe cannot enter it, this similar appearance of a nail has often been treated by doctors.
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and they grow as I have described in the section above, and if you see them cut, then work on the eye of the patient, and take a light spatule with a sharp point according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And lift the eyelid carefully, and if you see that it does not lessen and the reason presses, then distil from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litharge and red copper, both crushed, and plug the eye until the next day;
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	then begin the other work according to this same procedure until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to the eye, such as a hot abscess, then milk it and treat first the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of flesh in the eyelid damages the eye severely, then suspend it with an ointment, and cut off a part but not all, so that no liquid comes from tears.
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	Then distill red eye drops made of litharge into the eye.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of flesh that grows over the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	Some men's eyes are sometimes born red, covering the pupil and spreading over the corneas, turning outwards, and looking like a rose of balsam.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	And the work is that the patient puts their head into your lap, then you open their eyes and roll all that red flesh onto hooks suitable for it, holding it firmly in place.
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	Then cut off the first flesh with a scalpel, and continue cutting all of it with a razor until you reach the end, taking care not to harm the eye during your work.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	And the incision should be like that of a spatoulum, as we have said in the chapter about nail incisions and small forceps which remove it, as its form after this chapter shows.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	and when the incision is complete and all flesh is removed, fill it with melted beeswax or drip red copper sulphate on it and similar corrosive medicines, then cover the eye with cotton wool dipped in egg white so that abscess heat may be sure to leave.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	if anything remains there, and hot blood overflows you, and abscess heat is doubted, then leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with soothing medicines for hot abscess.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do likewise whenever flesh has been adjusted in the eye by this similarity.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	Nevertheless, it is necessary that you lighten the treatment of each weak eye in its natural way;
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	And regarding accidental wounds, in metalworking;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	Do not insert your hand into any of these procedures until you see that the limb is suitable for this treatment.
des voines des eulz	the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	These red veins that are visible under the eye hinder vision and weaken the eye every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	It is necessary that you first examine the eye to see if it is sound or diseased and whether there are other ailments aside from this.
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	Therefore, proceed in the following manner:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Instruct the patient to place their head in your lap and then apply pressure to the veins accordingly based on your understanding; ensure that those applying the pressure are also skilled, with this treatment being done twice as frequently.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And they are two inches apart by degrees inside the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	Then bind those veins firmly but carefully, wiping away any blood that emerges after a short time until you see the veins receding from the eye.
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	And be sure to protect the eye from being wounded by the points of spatulas, and perform this work at midday in front of the sun, and be very diligent in your task such that you cut only those veins.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	And when you have done this, distill into the eye green and red gallnuts to corrupt that which remains of the cataract.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	If you are unable to collect all of these at that hour, make a plaster over the eye with things soothing for the pain, and leave it there for some days until the pain is soothed and the hot abscess assured, then recommence according to this manner which is before until it is healed.
et c’est li forme des forces:	And that is the form of cauterization:
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the eye's fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The surgeon calls "arissati" a fistula:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	When you treat it with cautery and medicine for a burning abscess as I have previously mentioned, and it is not healed, if there is pus inside that you must cut open over the abscess, there where it should die, and drain all the moisture that is present until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, remove all the instrument that formed it.
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	It is called an "aspre chief", and it should be made of iron to the form of a head, and be pointed like a file as it appears in its present form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And place it on top of the location of the rotten bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that the rot is gone.
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	Do this several times, then restore the location with drying medications.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the location is welded together and nothing grows from it, if there is no damage to the body or the bowels, and they remain as such for forty days without renewal or further abscesses, and no bad accident occurs, know that it has healed.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If not, then there is another procedure to reconnect the fistula with the nail hole according to this method:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	And it is that you uncover the bone for the second time with an iron tool and sharp medicines. When it has been uncovered, take a drill of this form which should be three-sided at the top with a tapering handle like so: [insert image here]
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	Then place it on the bone near the armpit, and withdraw your hand from the eye by one inch. Then turn the drill around until it pierces through the bone. The patient will feel this as air passes into their fist if they hold their hand over their knuckles.
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	And then restore the place with dry medicine, as I have taught you. And when the flesh grows and hardens around the location, it goes down to the knuckles.
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	This is a lighter procedure for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the eye socket.
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the wound is open all around and there is no interference with the nerve or any narrowing, then you must bind the patient.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	Then clean it, then place cups or a ventouse without hurting to suck out the air. Then apply to the eye an ointment made of aconite and aloe and incense and gum tragacanth, then strap on the eye, then plaster over with linen bandages.
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	and the method of the bandages is such that you take soft enough bandages and fold each into fourths, and then place one on top of the other according to the amount the eyes need.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	then strain it from above with a hard bandage, and resume the cups to suck without hurting;
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	then remove the cups and keep the eye strained day and night, and if the binding loosens, you must strain it strongly.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	then remove the binding after day and night, and if you see the eye improving, it is good.
se ce non;	if not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it begins to peel, replace the poultice and cloths and the binding, as well as the cups until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	From rupture of dry skin
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When disruption occurs in the dark membrane, it then appears and escapes from the sheets like grains of resin, and it is terrible to behold.
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	Then if you see it severed, the treatment is such that you insert a needle into the root of one part below until you reach the other above, then thread another needle with a doubled length of string from the other side.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	And pierce it, leaving the first needle in place as per its arrangement.
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	Then cut the doubled string and bind one part of the membrane around it tightly, then remove the needle and place a moist linen cloth soaked in egg white over the eye.
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	And leave it until the hair grows back with the eyelid, then treat the eye with comforting substances until the wound is healed.
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and sometimes the wound is bound with cloth in a circle on each side until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	If the eye shows great inflammation, pierce it with a fine spatula that reaches right through the eye, and drain the white moisture and lower the eyelid, then enter immediately.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	then remove it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the bow of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease, called "alcunnati", is only a tumor that forms in the eye, resembling descending water, but it is not water.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	and the way of appearance for the procedure is that you should have the patient sit on an equipped and straight chair, then take their head between both hands and move it until you see the bow coming above your eyes;
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	then let it be fixed, do not go down and uncover the light, and let the patient see things as they should.
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if it does not descend below, know that it is acute, and if the descent of the bow is not equipped as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	have the patient sit between your hands, then take the fine spatula and make a hole in the corneal tissue through the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tissue and the cornea, until the bow appears.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when it is out, drip into the eye warm water mixed with honey, or water boiled with fennel and honey, then treat it with another remedy until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	Water from the eyes.
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have examined the similarities of waters in the process of division, and what is required to puncture [them].
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	so operate according to healthiness.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	You must make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and tie their healthy eye shut very firmly.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	Then place the paper of your eye to their left hand if the eyes are on the left side, or to their right hand if the eyes are on the right side.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	Then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left, the instrument called "almagda", or with your left hand, if the eyes are right.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Then place the tip of the instrument near the crown by a mark as thin as a hair in that white part of the eye towards the lower eyelid, then push the instrument called "almagda" skillfully, and turn your hand until it pierces into the white of the eye, and feel that "almagda" reaches the empty space.
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	And it is necessary that the measure of "almagda's" path is exactly the measure of the space from the pupil to the end of the dark part.
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	and this is the crown of the eye;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	you will see the bone in this paper due to the clarity of the corneal tissue, and you can place the instrument up until where water is present, then express it below a voice after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the water drains now, the patient sees before them and an instrument in their eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	after replace it small and if the water rises again through another passageway place force with the instrument when it is fully inserted and does not rise then remove the balm slowly while turning your hand back and forth.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	and then replace some water with a little bit of celandine and leave this in the eye inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then apply oil-soaked gauze or wet linen to the eye from outside, and bind it with a healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, apply ground cumin with plenty of egg on it.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the ointment cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, as there are such men who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument known as 'alberit', of which this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	and therefore perforate the conjunctiva only, do not go too deep but make it a subtle place, then insert the balm as we have said.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	And when finishing the work, prepare for the patient a comfortable bed where they can lie on their back in a dark place.
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	Remain still, avoiding all movement, eat light foods, and do not move their head to the right or left. They should be bound according to their condition until three days have passed.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	Then untie them in the same dark room and test their vision. Show them some objects, then retie them again until the seventh day.
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And you must not do this during the treatment or after an incision just now, but rather take care of it, as fluid may rapidly rise.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	If an abscess becomes hot, you must remove the eye before the seventh day, and treat it as you would for an abscess.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	And when it is calmed, uncover the eye and place a small piece of gold on its face to cover for one day, and remain in that dark room thereafter.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	Then take them out of the house little by little, and if they relapse into their condition...
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And know that no disciple should interfere in such cases.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And one came to us from Iran, who told us that in his country they make pierced amulets, from which water is extracted, but I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients.
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the appearances of the forms of almagda, for those who do not know them see them.
et soient d’arain proprement:	and let it be made of pure brass;
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the head of the ears be made from this same subtle material, while the back end is in three sharp corners.
de la char sor le neis	From the flesh above the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	Sometimes there arise from eggs different chariots joined together, some of which look like many-footed scorpions;
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	And if there be such that the chariot is ornamented with variegated hues, while its body is soft of good colour.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	Therefore in those chariots which are soft but not ornamented, it is necessary that you seat the patient between your hands towards the sun.
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and work his nostrils, and apply the ointment to those parts, and treat them forcefully.
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	then grasp what you may sustain with a thin, sharp spatula from one side, until you know that the tissue is completely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if anything remains that cannot be cut, open it entirely with the thin instruments gently, so that nothing is left behind.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and if it overpowers you, cauterize the abscess as required;
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	and if it is a malignant abscess, hurry and cauterize it until the blood flow ceases and all tissues are removed, then apply cold vinegar or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If it doesn't work, and moisture reaches up to the palate, know that it is healed.
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	And if the moisture doesn't pierce as it should, know that there is cartilage in the bone above, which prevents the instruments from cutting.
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	Then you must insert a piece of linen thread slightly thicker, knotted at both ends by our hands, and with one or two fingers' width space between them.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	Have the patient take hold of the thread's head in his fist with all his strength and pull it while sniffing until it comes out through the nostril into the mouth.
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	Children often do this at school, and it is an easy thing for anyone who wants to try it.
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	Then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and squeeze one after the other carefully, being mindful of the cord they are attached to.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this so that you know the night has corrupted that flesh, then draw out the cord, wipe away the blood, and wet the cord with Egyptian ointment, and reinsert it into the nose as before.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Do this for three days or more, until the ointment has eroded all that remains of the flesh;
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	Then place in the nose a plug of lime for several days until it is healed, and if they need any drying medicines, use them.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	and this is the shape of the instrument to purge the head, for which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	and it is made of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, just like a tube, and it leads there too.
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	and if you wish to see it, make an enclosed tube for yourself, and let the instrument be full so as to purge the head.
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and hold it to the head with your hand when you heat the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	From the flesh above the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Often there arises in the head of the nose an illness which is called 'telul', and it grows to become large over time, such that it becomes a visible thing.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	and for this you must cut it at the beginning, and remove all flesh, then place a hot iron or burning medicine on it.
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	and if you delay cutting it until it becomes large, take note if it is hard, with a dark hue, and poor scent.
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	do not touch it with iron, for this is an abscess advanced, as when one cuts into it a great illness arises in the patient.
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	and if the abscess is soft to the touch, not dark in hue, and you see that it can be entirely cut away, then evacuate the patient and proceed with cutting without fear, treating the wound with drying and astringent substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and sewn [back] up.
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when the cartilage-related work of this chapter continues for a long time, it provides little benefit, except in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	It is necessary then when this happens to someone, one must consider if the wound is fresh and contains all its blood.
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then sew the two lips together with a stitch, then treat it until it is healed.
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	And if the lips are already torn apart on both sides, you must scrape away all the flesh of their hearts until they bleed, then bring together the two lips with a stitch, and hold them in place, and apply powder of dragon's blood and ground incense.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Put the powders on top with a strong poultice or another sealing plaster, and leave it until it dries by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The way of stitching is such that you bring together the ends:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or with needles, as we have said in regards to sewing up the belly;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or by thread, as I have informed you.
des apostemes des levres	From the lips of apostems.
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	Men's hands within the lips develop hard abscesses, similar to corns, small and large;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	Then it is necessary to turn back the lips, split open each abscess, take pincers and break them apart in every part;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	Then wash the area after the incision with powdered glass until the blood is stemmed;
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then leave it exposed, treating the area with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	On the flesh of the gums.
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Many times there arises on the gums flesh grown close [to them], which the ancients call 'albulus'
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	Thus you must hold it with tongs, cut it at its root, and let out the pus or blood;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	Then place on it ground vitriol, or other restraining and drying powders;
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	And if that flesh returns after the incision, which often happens, cut it a second time, and cauterize it.
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	It will not return after the cautery.
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	These are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	Of wounds
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Sometimes shells gather at the root of teeth inside the mouth between gums: hard, ugly things.
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	and sometimes they are black and yellow and green, as decay reaches the gum, and their teeth stink;
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	you must make the patient sit between your hands, and their shoulder should be in yours, and pull out teeth or tartar that appears until nothing remains there;
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	and do the same with blackness, greenness, yellowness, and other discolorations, until they are cleansed.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	and if one removes what is at the first cause, it is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	if not, repeat on the second day and the third until you have removed all of it.
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	And know that the teeth require different shapes of instruments for cleaning, depending on what the work requires, because the rasp used to clean outside the teeth has a different shape than those used between the teeth.
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	and these shapes and others should be prepared for you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	When treating tooth pain, it is necessary to delay the extraction as long as you can, for this should not be done lightly.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	because it is a very tall structure, until such time as there is no excuse to remove it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is compelled to extract, you must be certain of the tooth causing pain.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	The pain often troubles the patient, who believes it is in a healthy tooth, leading to the extraction of good teeth.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	and yet the pain does not subside because of this, as long as the evil is present, for we have already witnessed it in these soldiers.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	and when you are certain of the offending tooth, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth thoroughly. Use a sharp spatula to protect the gum from all sides;
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then loosen it with your fingers or with delicate pliers at the first notch and extract it until it is well dislodged, then firmly close the pliers;
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and have the patient's shoulder in your lap between your knees, holding it firmly so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth properly without breaking it, and if there is no fracture, take one of these instruments and gently insert it into each side, moving it like you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if the tooth is pierced and worn down, it is necessary to fill it with linen where the holes are.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and if you hold it delicately with forceps, so it does not break when extracted;
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	and much bleeding work is required around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	Take care not to break it during extraction, leaving any part behind, as this can cause the patient greater pain due to the root's cunning nature.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And beware that you do not act like the ignorant surgeon, who through their haste and boldness sometimes break the cartilage and fail to manage what we have described.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but sometimes cause great harm through their ignorance due to the roots that remain or the cartilage they break, as we have often seen.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	and when the tooth is extracted, clean the place with wine or oil and silk thread.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and if there is bleeding, which often happens, then fill the place with crushed green vitriol.
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	if that doesn't work, then cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The shapes of the instruments, with which one moves teeth first, should have long points and large handles, so that they do not bend when you are extracting the tooth.
et ce sont les formes:	and these are their shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should have thick handles so that they do not bend when pulling (the tooth), and they should be well-made iron, and toothed in order to hold it firmly.
de la racine des dens	From the root of the teeth.
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains after extraction, it is necessary to place wet cotton soaked in butter on top for one or two days until the area softens, then you can insert the forceps known as "algefri", which resemble a stork's beak.
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	and are made inside like a file, which is its shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to emerge from all these tongs, you must uncover the flesh all around the root and insert the instrument known as "althali", which is a plainch, of which this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	and it should be thick and large so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out through this, it is good;
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	if not, use all the instruments, which come after forming these shapes:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one requires assistance from this tool with two prongs, of which this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron tools which are placed in front of the teeth, and from this tool resembling large tongs, of which this is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	and let this instrument be strong so that it does not break, and know that there are many dental instruments;
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also other instruments, which are not listed here;
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and wise masters find their own instruments themselves, according to the work they do and the illness presented, for there are such varied ailments that ancient teachers did not instruct on an instrument for each one; if a bone of the carriage or other bones is broken, seek out the appropriate instruments I have told you about, and use gestures, which are formed like this:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And they [the hairs] are thick and well-adhering to hold the bone, so that it does not escape but can be held and removed.
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	then restore the place with appropriate medicine, and if there is bone rot, and it is small, so remove all these instruments:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the teeth appear not according to their natural form, and they are ugly, especially in virgin women, you must know if the tooth is newly born and not in its rightful place, and it cannot be treated or filed:
adonques lou raie;	then extract it.
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	And if there is air with the tooth, take this instrument which has this form, and it resembles a small beak, being sharp iron at its tip:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And hit it repeatedly with a hammer many times to harden the tooth, and to avoid moving others, and if it is visible enough that you can file it, then use this kind of lime as shown here.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and it is like a file from which needles are made;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and with the file one sharpens the teeth little by little, gently, so that they do not move as it cuts;
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	then the whole flat surface at each edge is ground to a fine point by any sharpener, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, it must be filed until smooth so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth wanes
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the front teeth loosen, either due to impact or falling, and the patient cannot bite down on what they eat without their teeth coming loose, and you have treated them with constricting medicine, but it is not effective;
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	If they must be restrained, use a golden wire, for silver wire turns green and corrodes, but gold never changes.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	And let the wire be neither too small nor too thick, according to the space between the teeth.
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	And if you wish to guide the teeth back into place, take the wire and loop it double between two healthy teeth, then pass the ends through the gaps left by the missing teeth, until you come out near a sound tooth on the other side.
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	Then repeat the procedure until you reach the starting point, then carefully and gently withdraw your hand until it is free.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	And ensure the wire is secured at its base, so that it cannot slip off the root of the tooth.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then cut the shoulder bone with a saw using pincers, and put it back together, placing it between two healthy teeth, so that it does not injure the tongue.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	And then leave it like this as tight as possible so that it remains in place; and if it loosens or the threads become twisted, tighten it with another thread.
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	If it remains like this for a long time and serves its purpose, this is the shape of teeth and how to align two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, as you can see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when the tooth falls out, it should be replaced in its place, fresh for fresh, as we have said before.
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And make sure only the wise and experienced are involved, sometimes a tooth made of cow bone is used to replace the missing one; it is placed where needed, secured as described earlier, and serves for many years.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cut loose the tongue's bond
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Sometimes this ligament comes from underneath the tongue or is natural, depending on one's birth.
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or due to an injury of a healed wound;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the work is such that you open the patient's mouth, placing their head in your hand and lifting their tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	then cut the nerve of the tongue, until it is separated from its sheath, and if there is hardness or a knot, and this is due to an immediate injury, then he must pull out the thorn and cut widely on that ligament;
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and ensure that the incision is not too deep, for the artery which lies underneath;
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	and when you have done this, lift up the place with rosewater and oil, or cold water, then put a linen swab beneath the tongue.
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and let the patient be bathed each night to prevent the place from becoming putrid.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if there is discharge of blood, then apply powdered vitriol to the place;
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	and if the blood returns, then cauterize with the small circular cautery, which is good for this purpose;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	then treat it with another treatment until it is healed,
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	and if you see it become discoloured or black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is cancer.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	and if it is declining towards inflammation, and there is moisture present, then apply the unguent, and make an incision with a fine spatula, and release it from both sides.
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	and if the blood threatens to overwhelm your work, then apply crushed vitriol until it is extinguished, and return to your work until everything is treated.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply a plaster of flax and silk, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	Abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	At times, there are growths that form in the throat called "godaths," properly known as the two tonsils; when you treat them, as we have said before, and they do not heal, then take heed:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	If this is a hard abscess of little sense and false colour, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red and the root is swollen, do not touch it with iron, also because of the loss of blood.
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	But leave it until it is ripe, and then you shall open it, or else it would burst by itself.
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is of white colour around and the root is subtle, prepare your instruments to cut, but first make sure that the abscess calms down and is relieved.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then let the patient sit before the sun, and their head be in your hand, and open their mouth and grasp the tongue between your hands, and press it down under all the instrument, from which this is formed.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	and whether of silver or fine brass like a knife
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	Can you press the tongue with all these instruments, and see the abscess, take the lancet and insert it into the almond, then draw it out as much as you can;
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and draw out any material with it from the wound, then cover the instrument with cotton, of which this is the shape, resembling forceps;
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	and however the head is curved, and one side to another, and are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you don't have this instrument available, shape it using the pliers, which also has a similar form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And be sharp on one side, and blunt on the other.
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And when you have treated one of the almonds, treat the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and water and vinegar, and if there is still bleeding, then gargle the patient with water or boiled pomegranate peels, or myrtle leaves, and similar things until the bleeding stops.
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat it until it is healed;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two tonsils, so treat them just like the two tonsils.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman with an abscess that had formed inside her throat, specifically a small abscess;
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And it had almost completely closed off her entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passage, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained like this for even one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	The abscess had risen to such an extent that two tubes were inserted through the nostrils.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I therefore made haste to insert a thin rod, and passed it through one nostril, then drew out a large portion of bowel.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	Then refit it elsewhere through the other nostril, and the surgeon opened his mouth and pressed on his tongue.
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	After inserting the lancet into their abscesses, and cutting a part of it, only a little bit of blood came out.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	Thus were the pipes of her throat unblocked, and she began to drink water and then wine, and she did not stop having this abscess cut over a long period.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	And the abscess regrew again, filling up the space I had emptied so it became very large once more.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	Then I tricked her, and cauterized the inside of her throat.
ensi demora sens croistre;	Thus it remains without growth;
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And separate from these parts, and be only as God made them after me.
de l’uve	Of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When the kingdom descends to the egg, and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular";
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	and if it is excessively thick and round, it is called an "egg".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, and you see that the wound has healed but remains delicate, then you must cut it.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and one which is rounded, gathered together, and not elongated;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and if it is bloody or false colored or black, you must avoid incising it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner I have described, of its whiteness and length, you should make the patient sit facing the sun, and press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned before.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Then insert the lancet into the eye, draw it downwards, and cut at an angle of 45 degrees with one of the two instruments I mentioned for incising both testicles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And you must not cut beyond the natural limit, only removing the excess.
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	For if you cut more, it will harm their voice and speech.
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And after the incision, use what we have mentioned for the incision of two almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient is afraid of cutting, you should employ an engine for cauterization to alleviate their fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The manner of cautery is quick, sharp pain.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And let the patient place their head in your lap, and then press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, moisten it with hot water that is neither too thick nor too clear;
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and use the tip of this instrument, which has the following shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And have a lock of hair on the head where one applies the medicine, like the bristles of a spoon, and place the instrument over all the medicine onto the eye;
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	and let the patient lie on their side, so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth with the medicine inside, without it reaching the throat or hurting them;
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	Then hold your hand to all the medicine and press it onto the eye, for the quantity of half an hour, until you see it blacken and the stinging from the medicine subsides;
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	And if you see this, take cotton and wrap it around an instrument, then dampen the cotton with the medicine, and place the instrument with all the cotton into the eye until the cotton rests on the eye;
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	And do this often until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and fall out after four or five days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you need to restart the medicine cautery, do so, and after the cautery wipe around the eye with cotton dipped in butter, and clean what is around the medicine.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And immerse them in cold water, and treat with gargles until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This treatment is safer than incision or cauterization;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	If it is treated with fumigation in this way, take galangal and hyssop and oregano and chamomile and mugwort and similar herbs, combine all or any of them in a pot, add vinegar, and boil.
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	And the pot should be well-sealed with thick clay, and inside the pot place an instrument that has been hollowed out in this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	It should be made of silver or copper, and one end of it is inserted into the patient's mouth so that the vapour rises to the eye through the tear duct until the eye is cured.
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	After you start again often, until the wound dries up, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the abscess's appearance when it is hot, because many things happen there.
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And do not treat this like an abscess which is declining in heat.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not available, take a cane and put a piece of egg inside the patient's mouth so that their mouth does not get too hot.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	Because the egg piece will prevent the steam from burning the mouth, and this is a good treatment with an overall benefit.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Often it happens that there is bone or fish spine stuck in the throat, or any other foreign object.
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	Thus, you must treat what you can see, and press the tongue against the palate with all your might so that you can observe movement.
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	And for that which does not reveal itself and remains in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the meat is cooked in the stomach.
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	Perhaps thus the thing will be expelled by vomiting.
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	Or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navew, or a lettuce root, or a crumb of dry bread.
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	And tie to the sponge a thread, then swallow it.
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	When it arrives at its place, it will be expelled, and then you must pull on the thread.
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come from what we have said, take a lead instrument of this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	and let the instrument be curved at the head so that it may more easily enter into the throat, and have its head raised upwards;
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and take care not to touch the epiglottis, lest choking occur, nor push against the bone within;
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	and it is better that the patient pushes in the instrument, for he knows where the obstruction lies;
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	if it goes down, or he pulls out the entire instrument evenly, until it is fully withdrawn.
de la sansue de la gorge	From within the throat.
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	Sometimes surgery is necessary, as I have said in the classification, through medicinal treatment;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	and when it does not help, then look into the patient's throat in the sunlight, and press their tongue with the instrument I mentioned to you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the leech, draw it out with a small hook, or use delicate forceps that are fit for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if it is not effective, take a hairy caterpillar and thrust it into the patient's throat; then insert at the end of the caterpillar a hot iron, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And let the patient drink cold water all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	then take a full glass of cold water, open their mouth, pour it in as if they were swallowing, and move their hand often;
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	and as soon as the blood meets the water, it will fall out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it does not fall as we said, then smoke the patient with asafetida using the instrument I mentioned in the eye fumigation.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	Do this many times, for it will fall without fail.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the manner of fumigation is such that you take a pot with live coals, and cover it with a perforated lid in the middle, through which hole the head of the instrument should be placed.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	Then I pour my fumigation into it, and the patient places the head of the cane in their mouth, closing their mouth so that no smoke escapes but instead goes up to the sinuses.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	And now the sinuses will run, if they do not discharge then repeat the fumigation several times;
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	And let the patient suffer from thirst, eating salty or sour things but drinking no water;
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	Then they will need to be expelled by this regimen.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the form of the instrument used to remove leeches, when it can be seen, resembles bent pliers for inserting them into the throat.
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	and it resembles the beak of a bird, and has the roughness of a file, such that whatever it grasps, it cannot release.
et vez ci la forme:	and here is its form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapter of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	There are many types of abscesses, as described by different sources in this book, and they vary in their puncturing and cutting.
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and it is in two ways that differ in appearance and what they hold.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second kind is for those on parts of the body where they are moist.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and abscesses on soft parts differ from those which occur in joints, each having its own treatment.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And for abscesses, one should not puncture them when the bowels are dead according to their fullness.
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And for those of such that need piercing when they are ripe, and do not die according to their fulfillment, just like abscesses which appear near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses appear near joints, and it is left until it has rotted all around, perhaps the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which causes a contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	Where an abscess is near the main member, and if you delay piercing until it is dead, it will harm the main member.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	Where it is near the foundation, pierce it before it dies.
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	And one must not pierce a ripe abscess without completing the digestion process, except for the one near the foundation, which will rot completely and become elongated from within, resulting in a fistula.
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And it cannot heal in a short time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And you must know the work of perforating an abscess which is ready according to its development, and this happens when the pain subsides, and there is a reduction in feverish symptoms, and the lessening of pain and redness, and from swelling and sharpening at the head of the abscess, and other signs;
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	and you must make the perforation sit above where the abscess is more dependent, and where it appears to move;
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and let the perforation be made along the length of the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or at joints, nerves, and arteries, and all places equally where there is no bend.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those which bend, according to this member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in soft tissue, it's best that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed to be digested completely, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce it before that, the poison from it would spread throughout the body, and it is full of much filth.
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	And perhaps they harden the lips and its depths.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if to someone an abscess is pierced according to the width of its body, according to this which the limb needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	Then you must treat small abscesses, small openings.
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	And in large abscesses, large openings, and many cracks according to the size of the abscess.
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	And if you encounter such abscesses where it is necessary to cut out the heart, to remove it.
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	When it has become like rags, and is dead, then you must proceed as with boils.
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	And if you encounter such cases that are split into three angles, and there are some from which one must also remove like the leaves of myrtle, just as with abscesses in the groin.
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and if there are such people where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar cuttings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those who have no head [referring to those with abscesses that do not yet have a visible 'head' or core], just like soft superficial abscesses, you must pierce them fully.
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	and when the abscess is large, and it has formed a great swelling, and you pierce it, do not extract all of the pus at once, but only part of it.
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	then stop up the abscess until the next day, then extract any remaining pus promptly.
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	Do this multiple times gradually until all of the swelling has subsided.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a woman with child, or small children, or elderly and infirm men.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For sometimes the spirits twitch with the exit of the bile, which may cause the patient's death, and you would not perceive it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Be very careful with this chapter, and once you have pierced your abscess, wipe the wound dry, and look to see if the abscess wound is small.
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	And if it's an open gash, then apply lint bandages or old cotton rags.
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	And if it's a large abscess with many perforations, you must insert a bandage into each one so that they lie next to each other.
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	And if you have cut away a piece of the skin over the abscess and stretched it back, then you must fill it with old cotton or shredded linen cloth without moisture, binding it tight until the third day.
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then remove it, and treat until healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if hemorrhages occur in your work, bring cold and light water, and wet some cloths, and place them on the bleeding site multiple times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the flow of blood persists, provide management and treatment, along with the powders I've mentioned in this book, especially during winter when the skin or abscess is very sensitive. In such cases, it's necessary to apply moistened tents and linen cloths soaked in warm wine and oil.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if it's during summer when the skin is fleshy, use moistened linen cloths soaked in water and oil or cold wine and oil, leaving them on for up to three days as we've mentioned.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then open the abscess, dry it, and treat it as necessary until it's healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And this must be universally known regarding abscess treatment:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	For I have told you how to proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	scurvy
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where the brain of the head comes out small abscesses, and are made like nets, just like the breast of a hen, and there are many similar things.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some that are fatty and such where there is also moisture like blisters;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	And if there are such cases that are hard and stony to the touch, and there is no doubt as the artery does not behave contrary.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of incision is such that you must try every instrument which is called an "introducer", from where its shape comes afterwards, and what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if there is moisture, they will push it from above with forceps.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is drained, it leaves the skin that contained said moisture bare and raw, for it returns when nothing is left there.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	Then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment if present;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	If not, use water and salt, apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day.
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And these will heal what has remained from the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And you may reapply the cotton, as before, on the second day, and on the third, until you know for certain that nothing remains from the night.
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with an ointment that is suitable, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscess holds in fat tissue, cut into it along this length.
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	And throw out your thumbs, and peel it from all sides, and apply all of your treatment to draw out the pus where it lies.
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	and if the artery goes against you, do as I have told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also of the abscess if it is hard, and of cutting and treating as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the incision on the hard abscess and the moist one is lighter, for they have little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	and if in any of these abscesses on the head where there is no moisture, like in this case of an abscess I cut open on an elderly woman's head;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and I found the abscess just like a hard stone, rough and white, and it could not be broken;
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if one had cut it with an iron, they would have made as much of a wound as with a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses that come on the head, especially those that appear on children's heads and at the roots of their ears, the opening should always be made as close to their base as possible, so as to remove the pus;
et les cure si com il covient.	And treat them as required.
des scrophules	Of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Often these abscesses occur on the neck, and under the arms, and in the groin, and sometimes elsewhere on the body, and they are very common, and grow intertwined with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	Each scrofula is properly within its area, just like the boil and abscess of the head, as we have said.
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And there are many similar cases to these scrofulas.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones that do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	In the one that you see with good positioning to touch, and it resembles the body's color, and moves in every direction without being attached to the neck veins or artery nor the channel, and is not deep;
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	You must cut it from above and peel off the skin on every side, then spread apart the two lips of the wound with tweezers if you need to, just as we have said for abscesses of the head.
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	and strike it here and there, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and let the spatula not be sharp or cutting, lest your hand slip, and don't go too far ahead so as to avoid cutting what you shouldn't.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cut the vein or artery and it won't let you work on it, then apply ground glass to the wound, or some powders that staunch blood, and bind up the wound.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	leave it be until the abscess is healed, and the wound softens, and begins to putrefy.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the blood is staunched, return to your work until you complete it.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	Then look for any small scrofula on your index finger; if there are any, cut them out and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is a large wound at the root of the scrofula, you must not cut into that root, but rather bind it tightly with a strong doubled thread and let it fall off on its own without harm.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	Then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut out the entire scrofula, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound, and stitch them now, since there is no excess left due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	you must proceed to cut the root of it, and drain [it], and stitch [it] as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Scrofula that has suppuration should be pierced where it appears to die.
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	And pierce it as mentioned before, depending on the case, then apply cautery with ointment and similar things to that which remains of the suppuration.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the wound is well cleansed, apply healing ointment to promote flesh regeneration until it is healed.
de squinance	of dislocation
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancients spoke of the incision of the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	But I have never seen it done in our land, only written about in their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those with difficulty breathing, it is necessary to remove the obstruction in the throat known as the epiglottis;
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	And if no aid is provided through this method, it is because all the veins and passages of the patient are affected by abscesses that are hot in the mouth, throat or both tonsils.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the passage of breathing, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to avoid suffocation and death.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is necessary, when we wish to split the epiglottis, that we divide it beneath three circles or four in a small transverse slit between two of them, rather than by the quantity of the cut on the surface, not into the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And these places are suitable for the section of the epiglottis that has no flesh and where vessels run lengthwise.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the masters are afraid, they must stretch out the skin of the throat to all sides and cut down into the heart until it reaches the windpipe.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And remove the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cut into the surface as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	And it is demonstrated by the interruption of the flow through the cane which must pass through the broken area and through the defect of the way.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open for one period.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour has passed by which strangulation is doubted, gather together the two lips of the wound from its center, and cut through it completely without the cartilage.
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then administer medicine that promotes tissue growth until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dying, and breath defect.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	therefore cover the epiglottis for one who cannot breathe, and they will instead inhale through the wound, thus saving them from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	and for this reason, the ancients ordered that one leave the wound open until the harmful effect of the illness has passed, and it passes in three or four days. Then they order to suture the wound and treat it until it is healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a damsel took a knife, and thrust it into her throat, cutting part of the windpipe;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	And I was called upon to cure her, but found her just as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found blood issuing from it, knowing that she had not opened a vein nor ruptured her windpipe such that air escaped through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried and sewed up the wound, and treated her until she was healed;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	And all the damsel had was that she lost her voice, but later returned to herself;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	Because of this, I say that one should not fear an incision to the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	Of the swollen throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called "throat hernia", and it is a large abscess in the colour of jaundice, and it occurs mostly in women.
et est selonc II manieres:	et it is according to two manners:
naturez, et accidens;	natural, and accidental;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	or natural has no engine.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental is according to two manners, of which one resembles us in flesh, and the other manner resembles an abscess that comes from our arteries.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is fear, and it is not appropriate to operate with fire unless it is small, and this has been proven by all the sources.
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it as our flesh and it does not reach any vein, then cut it like we cut the nails, and treat all its hair if there is any.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And stitch it up quickly, and treat it as necessary until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	Des nous
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways for us, of which I will describe all the similarities.
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and it is necessary that I explain all the differences between us and them.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that them is sick with heat and fever until the boiling passes, and the rotting is complete;
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	then the fever and heat abate.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With us there is no heat, fever or pain, and it contains a cyst, which is its own sac and is according to the colour of the body, and begins like a yolk, and becomes large.
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they are according to two similarities, either coarse or moist, and very much of colour as I have said in the classification.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to treat the bone disease 'nout', that you first examine and inquire about all the instruments known as "entromissoires," according to how their form will be used in this chapter.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	and the method of examining abscesses is that you take hold of the moistest part you find in the abscess and turn your fingers back and forth until you feel that the instrument has pierced the core, then it should be according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	then extract the instrument, and take care what comes out.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	if running moisture is evident, whatever its colour may be, treat it as I have said for other abscesses.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if no moisture issues from the instrument, know that it is greasy and treat it thus by making a cross-shaped incision into it, then seize it with pincers and gently scrape away its skin on either side while you draw out its core along with any threads attached to it.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot draw it out whole, then extract it piece by piece so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything is left behind, the wound will reopen multiple times.
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if even a little is left, and blood grieves you, then fill the wound with some sharp corrosive powder, restrain the wound, and apply warm poultices to draw out the abscess, healing it with other treatments until it is fully healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if the wound is large, then cut the two lips of the wound, and treat it with something that encourages flesh to grow.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	and if the beating vein opposes you or something else, then hurry and apply crushed vitriol to the place, leaving it there for two or three days until the wound rots, suppressing the boiling of blood.
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	Then return to cut what has remained from the night.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	Look here at the shapes of the introducing instruments, and they are of three kinds:
grans et moien et petit;	Large and medium and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	And there are three kinds of squares, which are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and they come in three types:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistula;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	And they are like the needles with which we sew sores, and they are made of yellow brass, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are more valuable, and they have been proven to be effective against dark blue fistula abscesses;
et sont de III manieres:	And they are of three kinds:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Large, medium, and small, according to the size of the openings.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The shapes of hernia are very similar, as you see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	Large, medium, and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	And if there be hernias with two curves of three kinds also;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	And if there be hernias with three curves, and they too are of three kinds;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	And if there be hernias with two curves, and also some with one curve only, and they too are of three kinds.
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	et all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these to which one applies are sharp, and there are some that only cut in one direction, from which we remove the nerves so as not to damage the vein or nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and these intrumentals are the handles answered in many, so that the patient does not perceive it at the opening of abscesses.
et sont de III manieres:	and there are three kinds:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	large, small, and medium, as you see.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and they should not be used other than in fleshy places like legs, arms, breasts, and similar areas.
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and sometimes one makes another small instrument, similar to bark peels, according to this form, with which one stops the bleeding:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it is sometimes placed in a position that heals by closing veins and arteries, and other times according to this grand design:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so that they appear like female breasts;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to treat them must be careful according to this form from line b. until g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrape the fat, and fill the wound with healing meat, then bring together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	and if the breast hangs low, and is softened due to its size like in women, then cut it into two parts above, through two similar incisions;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	So that one is attached to the other at the end of each one, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line b. up to the line g.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scrape the skin between the two lips and remove the fat. Apply what we have discussed regarding stitches and powders and any other necessary treatments until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if it is not healed or the incision is not fully complete due to either the patient's unwillingness to rest or blood loss, then you must fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Leave it until the remaining matter and fat is discharged, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	Of abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from beneath the armpits are like hard scrofula with sides, and there is moisture within them.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b. to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton and treat it with an ointment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is similar to a scrofula, treat it as we have said for incising scrofulas, and if the wound becomes hollow, apply cauterization as we have described before.
de la routure de l’artere	From the rupture of an artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is ruptured, and the skin above it is closed together, abscesses often result, just as there can be swelling in the vein with an abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if you recognize it as such for the artery, the abscesses are long in depth.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and when you feel it with your hands, you sense tightness.
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and if it is in the vein, there will be raised lumps on top.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	It is foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it lies beneath the shoulders and the jaws or in a lot of other places and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	One must therefore avoid the treatment of iron, and one at head should also avoid it, especially in those who are swollen due to an artery rupture above their skin.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then make an incision at the waist with a circular motion, and carefully separate the artery from its surroundings until it is exposed.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	Then insert a needle beneath it, piercing through to the other side, and secure the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have taught you when extracting the two arteries at the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then puncture the area between the two ligatures with a probe until the blood which is there has drained out, and the abscess will be opened.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then bring forward the treatment that causes swelling, until the ligature falls off.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat it with ointment, continuing to do so until it is healed.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	and if the abscess is due to the size of the vein, you must hold with your hand what you can of the abscess along the skin, then insert the needle underneath where you are holding it with your hand, and make it pierce through, having a double thread so that you draw it out from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	then bind the abscess as I have told you, with one of two threads from one side to another across both shoulders;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	and if you doubt that the thread will not hold, then insert another needle with all of the thread underneath the abscess to the incision of the first needle, and secure the threads in four places;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then cut the abscess so that its excess comes out, then cut the heart's excess and leave what is tied;
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put on top a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil, then provide treatments with tents and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	Of abscesses of nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also abscesses come in the artery and in the vein, abscesses come to nerves when they are injured or by too much hard work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this happens more often in the shoulders and hands, and in all their joints, whether it is a serious abscess or a minor one, and its colour resembles that of the body, and there is pain in many positions;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	When it is held very tightly, the patient feels pain, and it is not in a perfect part of the body but below the heart;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	And it moves well from all sides, neither forward nor backward, nor below nor above, and one which is in the joints should not be cut with a knife;
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	Perhaps there would be contraction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and if it is on the head or forehead, make an incision with the spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, hold it with forceps and cut it at its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is large, suspend it with the hook and peel it, then remove it and sew up the wound, treating it until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	large boils hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	It sometimes appears on bellies and nowhere else, and is a disease called "fungus" due to its resemblance to mushrooms, with delicate roots and a large head;
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	And there are small and very large ones among them;
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	et I saw man with II or belly which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had small roots, and were slightly split, and moisture came out of them immediately.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I cut them open and found in one XVIII ounces of weight, and in the other VI З., and the procedure for incision is such that you observe if the patient is moist, and the color of the material is white, moist, and has a fine root.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	then cut it open with a wide spatula, and let the cautery be present.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For when you cut it open there is often a great gush of blood, and if the blood defeats you, then hasten to cauterize.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	and if you see the patient terrified and fearful of the iron incision, then take some well-made hemp thread, and bind it around the wrist as we have said, leaving it there for two days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	then hold it tight, and do not stop tightening the hemp thread until you feel the wrist, and each part of it with no movement.
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	and if the roots are thick, there is fear in cutting them especially for the belly, but you may well cut half of it, then cauterize so that it does not return.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then treat the wound, and make sure you do not cut the tendon which is of a pale color and poor substance with a milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess exacerbated, and I will come to the treatment of cancer thereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the boil bursts open.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the swelling appears due to cauterization of a wound or a fissure caused by erysipelas, and it is located on the belly, affecting some of the bowels as happens with other ruptures, or from blood leaking from veins or arteries according to what has been described before, or from flatulence;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is due to the rupture of erysipelas and the discharge from bowels, then the color of the abscess resembles that of flesh, and it feels as a light thing without pain, appearing with several discharges.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it's due to the discharge of the intestines, then it is more varied, and when pressed with two fingers it retracts, then reappears, and perhaps it becomes clogged, greatly enlarging at the entrance of the bath and because of hard work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	If it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and it appears clearly when you press it with your hand, it does not constrict.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	and if it is due to blood, it appears with these signs: large and hard abscesses, arranged according to a certain quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the treatment is that you must observe whether its appearance is caused by arterial blood, venous blood, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	You should leave the treatment to others.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear in it, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, for both artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestine or hernia, you must instruct the patient to hold their breath and lie flat and still, then draw blood all around the affected area.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then have them rest often between your hands, go around the marked place with all of your fingers, then extend half an inch above the entire big thumb.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then bind it around with a strong thread or firm rope of stout silk, ensuring the knot is secure.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Work on half of the abscess as it extends onto the ligament, insert your index finger there, and feel for the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it caught by the ligament, free it, and push the intestine out of the abdomen;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find an orifice, grasp it with the hook, and cut away any excess;
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery or vein is in your way, go carefully around it, then return to your task and take two needles with fine thread, insert them twice, and put these two needles into what you have pierced in a cross pattern.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then extract the abscess four fingers above these needles, and if you can see it, remove the needles, and let this area rot by itself as the dead flesh flakes off.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	Where you cut it when it is subtle and rotten, then treat according to what is needed, and remove the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And remove the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the area accordingly, and seal/heal the wound.
dou chancre	The cancerous sore.
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have spoken about the similarities of cancer in the previous section, and how it should be treated with medicine, and when one must avoid iron-based treatments.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	And now we speak of cancer that has spread to the bone marrow and requires great caution in its treatment. The ancients say that when cancers are located where they can be scraped away like those found on mammary glands, thighs or similar areas, one must remove it entirely at its earliest stage.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	and when it is large and old, you must not approach it, for I have never been able to heal anyone with such a condition;
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	no one has ever healed it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And for the operation, when it is in place or can be removed, as we have said, you should purge the patient once with black bile;
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	then make him bleed if he has obvious congestion, then prepare the patient in a good place to perform the operation;
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	then cut your oncology or cancerous growth, and shave his head from all sides, and remove it entirely without leaving anything behind;
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	allow the blood to flow freely and drain it well with your hand or something solid, and if the bleeding flows contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize until the bleeding stops;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat with another treatment until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have already spoken about the different types of dropsy and how the accumulation of water is formed, as well as the signs for each type, and the treatment that can be done with medicine or with iron.
si est eclites soulement;	If it is only written down;
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one should not use iron in these two types of cases:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	that is to say, tympanites and hyposarcus, for these are mortal conditions;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	Therefore, when you treat this type of dropsy called "eclites" with medicine, and the cure is not effective, consider if the patient is weak or has other ailments besides dropsy, such as constipation and digestive issues.
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	If you use iron, do not touch there as there is doubt.
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	And if you see the patient is of strong constitution, and has no other illness but only dropsy, and they are neither too young nor too old, then you should proceed like this:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	Make the patient lie straight on your hands, and support them while pressing their belly by pushing water to the lowest part of the abdomen, then take the sharp-edged spathe like this:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be two parts cut.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	It should be pointed but not so sharp that it can reach the intestine when inserted and cause injury.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	Then check if the dropsy is directed towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	So you must cut above the bump on the third right bone under the arm.
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	And if the dropsy is due to liver disease, let your incision be on the left side of the third right bump.
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	And if it is due to the spleen, let your incision be on the right side, and do not allow the patient to lie over the incision so that excess fluids do not flow to that weak spot.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	Then pierce through the skin with your tool, push it in, and lift your hand to scoop out all the fatty tissue between the skin and fascia as if you were skinning something down to the size of a fingernail or so.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Then pierce the fascia until you reach the water spot, then pull it out, and insert this tool which is shaped like so.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it is similar to a fine silver chain, and is made of light brass or copper, and has in its lower part a small aperture;
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and on one side it is fitted with three holes;
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and two on the other side, and one more;
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	and the tip is cut like a feather, and it is in the shape of the incision which scribes use to cut feathers:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	at the top is an axle, so that when the instruments come to the water, it immediately rises above the instrument;
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	empty it then by half or one-third part, for if you empty more than is appropriate at that time, perhaps the patient will die due to the release of their spirit from the body, or they may fall unconscious, or they will be close to death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but empty according to its quantity of virtue, and according to what the conditions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulses;
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	then draw the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now for the heart which blocks the orifice that I spoke of, so you pierce according to this method;
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	then begin the instrument again the next day if you see that he is suffering so, and draw a small quantity of water;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	do this each day, and be careful not to draw out too much water but only a little.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you are doubtful of the patient, and leave too much water, it will cool the heart or sand, and by excessive sweating or bathing in sun, and he will become dehydrated.
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And treat with drying medicines until it is healed, and cauterize over the stomach, liver, and spleen after draining the water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	From stopping of the penis.
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born without an opening in the penis, or with a small one, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If necessary, pierce it with a very thin and sharp instrument in the following way:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	Then insert a thin tube through the penis, and tie it, keeping it in place for three or four days. When he wishes to urinate, remove the tube, let him urinate, and then replace it.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	And perhaps it is not necessary because the urine that flows out will keep the tube open.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	For those whose hole is small, the copper plug will be medicated as we have said, and it will enlarge.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the tube in its proper place are injured. Some men are born with their urinary opening at the top of the penis and thus cannot urinate without lifting it upwards.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	And they cannot recover because the material or substance cannot reach the marrow, and this is a severe illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	The manner of treatment is such that the patient often lies on their back, then extend the head of the penis and also stretch the perineum like the size of a feather, so that the orifice opens in the middle, as it should be.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be cautious of the discharge of blood which happens many times, and if it occurs, stop it with what stops bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	penis sores
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	This inflammation of the penis occurs many times, and it appears as an ugly redness.
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	And there are both malignant and benign ones.
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	You must take them with a thin instrument, cut and clean them all, then apply moistened cotton with Egyptian ointment.
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it with refined ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the abscess is malignant, of foul colour and offensive, you must apply a cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have cut it open and if the abscess is situated on top of the shaft, with part inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the pus that is inside first.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	And when it is sealed, treat it from the outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you treat them together, the head of the shaft is not secured so that it is not perforated, and this leads to blackening and corruption both in the shaft and the glans.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	You must cut away all that is black and corrupted, then bind it with a plaster made of honey and flour which is composed of pomegranate peels and figs, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, apply the lunar caustic as follows:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The cauteries help the two conditions together:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	That is to say, in the removal of blood and in corruption.
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	And if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, you must insert a hollow reed into the penis and have the patient urinate through it.
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And when the skin is sticking to the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or where there is a wound or abscess, you must therefore peel it off with a sharp instrument until the foreskin is loosened and the head of the penis is free from all sides.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	and if this is a serious matter to discuss, then you must peel it with spatule at some pouch of the head of the penis and the skin;
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	then carefully separate it into two parts, and place a thin piece of moistened linen cloth in cold water, so that it does not dry out again.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	circumcision is not like the separation of continuity as with other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	nevertheless, when we do this work of our own will, and especially to children, it is necessary that we perform the best work, and the most gentle for their well-being.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say the ancient ones did not circumcise their children because it was not in their law, and we have only acquired this practice through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	for I have seen the majority of masters and surgeons performing circumcisions around one day old, with forceps, and all at once.
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	If the heart were pierced by two arrows, it could happen that one of them would pass through while the other remains stuck inside.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	Now if it were pierced again, the pain would be doubled, and during its removal, which is not done properly due to the depth of the member's point;
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	And during the removal of the nail, it might happen that the iron escapes, and the wound will spread, and often they heal in such a way that they do not need treatment; I have seen this myself.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the cleaning which is done by force on all that is tied in thread I have found the goodness of experiment; because the force cuts as well from above to below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand down, cut evenly along the line of all that you hold tight;
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	But make sure the thread is tightly wound around the skin;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and let the method of the first operation be such that you make the child believe, if he understands, that you will not tie him up by binding the thread around his penis only, and then you can make him urinate in all the ways you know how.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	then make him stand between your hands upright, and cover his genitals with yours or beneath your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	then push your hand onto his penis and blow into the heart, and pull it upward so that the head of his penis is within you.
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	then thoroughly clean it of the dirt that has gathered there, then bind the root with a doubled thread, and tie it underneath from one place to another.
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	et hold it with your two fingers using the index and thumb, and grasp between the two tendons, then lift the heart upwards gently and draw out the head of the penis.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	then let the blood run little by little, for this is the wound.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and apply powder on top and over the powder a linen cloth glued with a raw egg yolk tempered with rose water, mixed with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, and treat it again with another dressing until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The form of the forceps for cleaning is as follows:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	the two edges should be turned up and sharp, and the blades should also be as wide as the handles equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	The error of purification is when the heart escapes to the incision.
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	Therefore, you must extend it with your nail, otherwise the flesh will form an abscess.
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	And cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, then use pincers to grasp it, and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if they exceed three days, and that which is below the rod becomes swollen, let it be until the hot abscess cools, and then lightly pare it.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	Then cut it as you are able to move it, and be careful not to harm the base of the rod, for this will do it no harm.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Cure therefore the place of scalding wounds with powder, as we have said in the treatise on powders, and if it exceeds beyond measure from the heart, and goes upwards, then it will not harm.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat it accordingly, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	where there is retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	Retention of urine is caused by obstruction of stones, or frozen blood, or a tumor, or similar things as we have said in the classification.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	And if the urine is not released and you see that retention occurs due to a stone at the bottom or neck of the bladder, then the patient must be bent over their knees.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	And their feet should be placed on the patient's back, stretching out their abdomen from above the back, and restrain the patient's elbow as much as you can.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And thus, the neck of the bladder is constrained to express the stone above it, which loosens the urine.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	If it does not come out as we have mentioned and the patient feels severe pain, then you must perform an extraction with all the instruments called "syringe", which is formed like this:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it should be made of fine silver, light as feathers, like the quill of a bird;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The tube should be half a palm long and finely crafted at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	The method of urine extraction is such that you take a thread doubled over and tie it to the tip with either wool or cotton, then insert the tip of the thread into the syringe.
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and cut the superfluous part of the woolen thread and insert it up to the tip of the syringe, then lubricate the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and seat the patient on a chair, and anoint their scrotum and penis with moist oil, olive oil, and lukewarm water;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the base of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the abdomen;
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and have the patient feel its presence until everything is emptied, which will not be done properly if the guide leading there is twisted;
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	then stretch the thread along all the wool in several places, and the urine will follow through the wool, then remove it carefully, and allow the urine to flow;
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and start the syringing again until the bladder is emptied, and ease the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scalds or blood enter the bladder, and putrefaction is gathered there, and you see it needs to be drained of water and medicine, do so with all the instrument which is called a "catheter", and its shape is thus:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed, and it has three openings:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	and the inner hairs by which the medicated plug is such that it blocks the urethra without addition, so that moisture can be drained, and pushed out when needed;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	and when you want to empty your medications into the bladder, put the head of the catheter into the moisture, and drain by pulling on it.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	you will then be able to draw out the moisture with the catheter, and afterwards push it back firmly again;
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	If moisture enters here, it will go to the bladder immediately, so that the patient will feel it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	And this is the subtle form of the enema used to cleanse the bladder;
si est ci:	If it is here:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And it is made of silver or tin, with the head being higher up;
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	And it descends to the left side where the ribs end;
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	Then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture you wish to use for the enema inside it, then tie it between the two breasts with a good thick thread, and heat the pouch over a fire;
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	then insert the head of the clyster into the urethra, then press your hand onto the bladder gently, until the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment paper, make a circle out of it, and punch a round hole in the center.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	then insert a strong thread through the hole, gather the circle together like you would with a funnel, and place within it whatever oil, moisture or water you desire, then tie this to the instrument.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and do like you did with the bladder, pressing gently by hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	of stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have spoken of the types of stones, their extraction, and accompanying remedies.
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	And we have explained the distinction between kidney stones and all other types of urinary calculi, along with their specific surgical procedures.
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in bladder and urethral stones;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and we will describe them openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that bladder stones occur more frequently in children, and this is signified by the urine escaping from the bladder akin to water due to its subtle nature;
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and there is visible sand in the patient's urine, causing them to feel a burning sensation upon urination, which may occur multiple times before eventually ceasing;
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	And many of them have foundations sunk deep;
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	And the healing is light for children up until four years of age, and it is very difficult in old men, and it is moderate among young men, to those who are between youth and old age;
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	And the treatment is lighter for those who have large stones than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to remove all the bile that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For sometimes it becomes difficult to reach the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by their feet, lift them up and move them downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, sometimes coming out on its own.
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	Then have the patient sit between your prepared hands, with their hands placed behind their thighs, so that the bladder is completely lowered downwards.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	Then search for it and touch it inside.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	If you feel the stone in the space, then hurry now to cut into it.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not fall upon touching all at once, then moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand if the patient is an infant, or your middle finger if they are a grown young person;
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	And push it into their fundament, search for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, then cut at the neck of the bladder.
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	Then press down with your finger, and push the stone out from where you want to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	Instruct the assistant to press on the bladder with their hand and tell them to stretch out the testicles upwards with their right hand, while removing the skin that is beneath the testicles in the area where you will be cutting, using their left hand.
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Then I inserted the spatula cutting, from which this is its shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And splitting what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the groin;
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	and be straight over the stone, and press your two fingers towards the anus or the foundation, and make the incision so that it is wide on the outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, but not too large;
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	by chance if the pressure on your two fingers at the anus is such that it would be without effort;
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and you should know that there are stones with angles and edges;
si est griés a issir;	It must be drawn out gently;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and if it is shallow, resembling a hazelnut, round, with only a slight opening.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	On one where there are angles and margins, make the incision larger;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	and if it does not come out, you must extract with tongs that are like a file at the end, to pull out the stone so that it doesn't escape.
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	or push aside the subtle instrument curved at the end.
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you cannot manage it like this, then enlarge the wound opening, and if blood oozes out, cauterize with vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	and if there is more than one stone, first push the largest one towards the neck of the bladder, then cut above it, then pull with force, and the smaller ones after that if there are several.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, one must take care of it, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	where either he dies, or urine comes back through the wound that the flesh cannot seal;
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but nevertheless try to pull it out, either by drawing or breaking with tongs, until you extract it in pieces;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	and when you have completed your work, fill the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, bind it tight, and place atop a cloth moistened with oil and wine, or with oil and rose water in cold water, to soothe the hot abscess;
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	Then resolve the patient onto their neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen the bindings, thoroughly wash the wound with oil and water, then treat it with ointment of daffodil and unguent of basilicon, until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if an abscess arises in the wound and bladder blockages with blood, and urine is retained which escapes together with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	So push your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will run into the bladder, and cause an infection;
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then cleanse the wound with water, oil, and silk, and treat him in all ways that you know until it is healed;
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And you must ensure that whenever you treat him, the two thighs are tied together, and gather your medical supplies accordingly.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small, and it is lodged at the urethra's entrance, stuck there such that urine cannot pass through;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	if the treatment I describe here fails, then you are justified in cutting it out multiple times.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proved this thus.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take an iron rod, shaped according to this form, with three angled prongs at one end like a pitchfork:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	then take the thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot retreat back into the bladder;
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	then gently insert the boring iron into the penis until it reaches the stone;
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	and turn the boring iron with your hand within the stone little by little until you are able to pierce through it from one side.
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	urine will come quickly; then press your hand over the remainder of the stone that is still inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	If it is immediately broken [the dislocation] and extracted with urine, then the patient will recover.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie one string below the stone and another above it, then make an incision towards the stone between the two strings, extract it with force, untie the string, and clean out the clotted blood from the wound.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat them until they heal.
de la piere des femmes	Of the stones of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	Sometimes stones occur in women, and if it happens once, then the treatment is severe, and it is prevented for three reasons.
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	One reason is that perhaps the woman is a virgin.
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second is that you cannot find a woman who knows well how to uncover herself before mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	and the third way is that, by chance, you cannot find a woman who knows well this art of hands;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is more perfect than the stone of a man, which requires a deeper cut, and there is great fear in it. If necessity arises for this, you must take an expert midwife, and if you barely find one, and if not, seek out no chaste subtle mirror;
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	and the present one is a wise midwife in women's lives or a woman who knows part of the art and instruct her to do what you command for the examination of the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and carefully check if the woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then you must insert your finger into her anus and search for the stone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if you find it, pull the stone out from under your finger, and instruct her to insert her finger into her vagina, then grasp and press your left hand firmly over her bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	If she finds it, have her pull the stone out gently from the opening of the bladder down to just above the thigh root.
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	Strike the stone in the root of the thigh towards the middle of the vagina, where it moved to, and feel for the stone in that area.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and do not move his tooth above or below the stone, let the incision at first be small.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then pour the vinegar into the incision, if you feel the stone growing so that the wound increases until the stone can come out freely, and know that there are many kinds of stones.
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	that is to say, small and large, rough and soft, long and round, and those with furrows.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you know the symptoms, you can understand the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if the blood overtakes you, apply ground green vitriol to the place, and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops.
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	then return to your task until the stone is out, and have the instruments I told you about for extracting stones from men, so that they may assist in your work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	And if the blood defeats you and it is from an artery that has been cut, put powder on the spot along with tent and bandage cloth fibers, do not start again, leave the stone alone and do not pull it out because perhaps the patient would die.
puis cure la plaie.	Then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the area can be accessed, return to your work until the stone is completely removed.
de hernie carnouse	Of fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	A watery mixture is nothing other than a collection of moisture or white liquid, which comes from under the heart of pigs and can be found inside eggs.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	And it is called "syfac," and sometimes it appears properly in the egg's membrane so that one might think it was another egg.
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	And it is the pig's skin, which lies between the white liquid we mentioned earlier.
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	And this does not happen if you have no pus.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this rice water is due to weakness that comes to calves, and this matter is spread.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And sometimes it comes from blows to the joints, and this moisture has many colours:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	where it is discoloured towards yellow, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and this happens often;
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to recognise this assembly, for if it is white and soft as we have said, then the abscess will be round, like an egg, with pus long in shape but not opening the joint, because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the very tissue, then it is an abscess which has retained part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks it is another kind of egg;
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	And if moisture is between the skin of the calves and the white sinew, one can feel it well.
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	Therefore, when you wish to know the colour of the moisture, test it with any object that fits as described above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to that which follows after the introducer, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we treat it with iron, the patient must be bled according to their strength and the fullness of their body.
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	Then place them on their back, on something slightly elevated, and put beneath them a lot of cloth.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	Then sit on their left side, and instruct the helper to sit on the right, and stretch out the leg towards one of two sides of the calf's heart.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the spatule knife, and cut the skin of the calves among them from the length up to the wrist, and let your incision be completely straight while separating the skin of the calves until you see white flesh, and carefully peel it according to your ability.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	then pierce the white flesh with a water-filled tube through the wide opening, and extract all the water, then put your thumbs in place, and stretch the white flesh upwards.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the heart of the calves, but only the white flesh;
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	cut all of it or in pieces especially the side of him carefully, for if you do not peel it well enough, water will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	And if the egg has been knocked from your work, put it back into place once you have completed the surgery of the sinew.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then join the two lips of the wound in the heart of the swine with one suture, then treat it like any other wound until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the egg corrupted by another illness, you must tie the suspending vessels to prevent blood loss.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	Then cut the swine open along with its suspending structures and extract the egg, treating it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if the fluid is gathered in two parts together, know that these are two roots.
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	If you cauterize the other part just as you did the first one equally, then wipe off the blood, and place on the wound moist linen soaked in rose oil.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	Place some other linen soaked in wine and oil above it, then put the two pieces of cloth on top, add doubled rags, and tie it all with bandage that is made like this.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two cloths, and stuff them with wool like this example so they are sewn together at the waist of the pants, one piece goes under the buttocks up to the back, while the other goes on top towards the armpits.
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	And with the other two at the head on both sides, let it all be tied together in the buckle of the pants.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	et sometimes this cauterization method is used instead of iron surgery, and you must take a subtle cautery knife, cut the skin on the testicles, heat it as we have said so that the white substance containing water is uncovered.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that white substance with small pricks, flay it with this hot subtle cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And cut it in every way you can, until everything is eradicated.
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and ensure the fire does not touch the egg.
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	and know that this work is safer.
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and be careful of blood loss, and learn from the works of surgery.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if anything opposes you, whether an abscess hardens or blood flows elsewhere or any other matter, treat what opposes you as described above.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is afraid and does not want to undergo this procedure due to its horror, then induce perforation as I have told you, for when you are certain through the signs we mentioned that water-carrying branches are present, make the patient sit on a raised seat;
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	Then pierce the abscess from below with a spatulate object as wide as possible, and place the perforation along the length of the body.
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	And let the openings be wide so that all the water may flow out freely.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Afterward, place cotton on the spot and bind it, leaving room for the remaining water to flow, then treat until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	And if the white cloth does not allow the water to drain into the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a feather or an instrument used to draw out water from edematous patients, which has this shape mentioned earlier.
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	Widen the pouch of the wound, and know that the water will return, and it is re-assembled after six months or so, and when it is re-assembled as before, thus the patient will live through their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess on the buttocks
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the incision of this branch there is fear in many dispositions, which is why it seems better to me to leave it alone.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I will tell you about the work and its similarities to an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I say therefore that many abscesses arise on the body, especially on the head.
et c’est par mout de cas.	And it is due to frequent occurrences.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	That is to say, by excessive acidity and bile which has spread to the head or through injury.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	And the colour of the abscess is according to the colour of the body;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	It does not cause any pain, yet it is an aggressive abscess.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And sometimes there are fearful, hard abscesses of dark colour which arise from the rupture of an artery or the swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is due to an arterial rupture, it is recognised by the hot disposition of the abscess when you press it with your fingers.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	And you must not touch it at all.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	Those who are subject to swollen veins are recognized by their reaction when the fingers touch them, and one can easily perform the operation on this resemblance as well as other parts.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	And you cut the heart of the vein, then stretch out the egg above, and tear away the white substance, and remove all parts of the egg's suspension.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already hardened with these parts nested together, then you must pull out the egg and cut it.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is hollow at the surface or inside the vessels, you must remove all of that membrane and cut it roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is at the back, you must cut it all away and remove the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, cover the wound with wet wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other cures until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess on the buttocks
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess wrapped in a bandage resembling a turban, with the softening of the tendons, and the patient cries out terribly when it bursts.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And the cure for this disease is just as fearsome as the one before, yet we will tell you its treatment according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	You must have the patient sit on an elevated chair, then place the tendon suspension below your two hands, at all vessels that are near the artery, and hold them firmly while stretching it greatly.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	Then cut through with a broad sharp spatula across the vessels until they are uncovered, and then peel back on either side as we have said before when extracting arteries from the temple.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then I insert a needle where there is double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein came out, and then tie it again to the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then cut them exactly in two, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound like the others where we tie a bow, so that no vessel leaks and nourishes one of the clots.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	Because from this there is no harm, and if all the vessels leak, then you must treat the clots in all the vessels.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	So that the flesh does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, dry out, and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	For rupture of the spleen
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The events of this chapter occur through the incision that leads to the abdomen or the extension on the stomach in the region of the intestines, which is why the intestines descend from that rupture towards one of the openings.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	And this rupture is either from the incision or its extension, and these two types of ruptures occur due to many reasons:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	or from blows, or jumping, or heavy lifting, or similar activities;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	And the signs that indicate an extension of the incision are a gradual appearance of symptoms over a long period and it does not occur suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And the abscess is equal in size up to the surface due to the incision pressing on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it's from the section of the spleen; there is sudden pain at first and different abscesses appear under the skin close by due to the intestine coming out of the body through the rupture in the spleen.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines descend with the gut, and are held there, causing great pain to be endured by the patient, especially when they are pressured.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments with fear, which is why it must be avoided.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the method of operation is that you instruct the patient to pull their intestine back into place with their hand inside the wound, if they are able to do so.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	Then be mindful of his neck. Place your hands under his collarbone. Lift his thighs.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	Then extend the heart upwards, and cut all the skin from the lower back to the length of the body.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then push the lips of the anus inside with hooks according to how much you need to open the wound, and make sure that the esophagus can exit.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then remove the fat that is under the skin of the lower back until all the white fatty tissue is exposed on all sides.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	Then insert your index finger into the one that follows the coccyx, which is between the first sacral bone below the egg skin, and between the second sacral bone, and separate what is behind the egg, and between the second sacral bone.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	And then move your right hand inside the hearts of the coccyxes, and stretch the first sacral bone upwards towards your left hand, and lift the egg toward all the sacral bones on the side.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	Instruct the assistant to stretch the egg upwards, and untie what is below behind the binding.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	And feel with your fingers for any coiled intestine or hard sacral bone, and if you find anything, push it towards the stomach below.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	Then take a needle with one thick thread made of ten strands, and insert it into the posterior part of the sciatic nerve, which is behind the skin covering the buttocks;
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	After the waist, then cut away the flesh that appears to be made up of strands, until there are four threads remaining;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	Then tie them together one over the other in a cross pattern, and bind the sciatic nerve, which we said is beneath the skin of the buttocks, with a strong two-part ligature;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the flesh around the threads and bind it in a two-part fashion so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter from outside, preventing any abscesses forming;
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and place again the bandage according to the first long bandage with two fingers of that one, and after these two bands leave a gap below the heart of the calves as wide as a finger;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and after, do all of the other [round] movements according to the shape that the egg has;
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	then press in the area below the skin of the calves until blood flows into the bowels, as we have said before;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then bring moistened wool in oil, and put it on the wound; then apply the bandage as we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white flesh is cauterized as we have said, after the incision, due to fear of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this often happens, and leave the bandage until it sticks by itself;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it delays to fall, let it be soaked in warm water, and apply what we have said earlier, until it falls off.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then treat the wound with another remedy, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	Of fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I have never seen anyone who dared to do the operation with an iron tool.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it is done like a spiral vine that wraps around a stick, in such a way that you tie vessels together, gently twisting them after cutting.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	then cut it in half, and treat the abscess with what works, until the vessels fall away.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	Sometimes rupture occurs in the groin, as we have said, and the testicles become visible.
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	And none of the intestines descend to the calves, but if they do, it is little, and repair every hour.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	But nevertheless, if it stays too long in this position, the wound or ulcer grows so that the intestines descend.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this happens due to the extension of the ulcer that is in the groin, as we have said, because it extends and softens, then swells and opens.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	And the treatment is by cauterization, as we have said before.
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And sometimes it is treated with iron in this way.
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	The patient often lies on their back between your hands, then scrape the area around the rupture swollen for about three fingers wide according to its size.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extract the synovial sac that is beneath the skin that covers it, then take some fat and place it on the spot where the sac was exposed.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	press it perfectly against the abdomen, then cut the two visible spots of the synovial sac above the top of the fat, and cut one after another.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then extract the top of the fat, and do not cut any part of the synovial sac nor spread out its contents or anything else, as I have already instructed you in the treatment of intestinal prolapse.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	then treat it by following the procedure for treating wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the sons, clean them and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The sinew is restricted, and it has no appearance in the rupture, but cauterization is suitable here, and more proximate to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	softening of the skin of the calves
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	The skin of the testicles often becomes soft in some men because the contents inside are softened, and this is evident to see.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	and it is necessary, when one wants to cure him, that the patient lies down on his back, and the surgeon cuts the skin that has softened above the natural skin.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	then sew the two lips together in one seam, and if you see any excess of the softened skin first cut it away to three seams or four firmly.
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	then cut between the seams, and treat it like other wounds until they are healed and the threads fall out.
dou chastrement	The castration.
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Know that cauterization is forbidden in our law, and for this reason I would rather not speak of it in this book.
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and it is only necessary for two methods.
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	One is that a doctor must know how to answer when asked, and he knows the treatment.
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	And the other reason is that we often need to castrate certain animals to assist us, such as goats, sheep, cattle, and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say, therefore, that castrations are performed in two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	By either attraction or incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In the method we use by attraction, we make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles are softened and drooping;
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	Then grasp them with your hand until they are removed and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	For the castration of the testicles:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	It is necessary that you hold the animal and press its skin above the testicles with your left hand, then bind the belt, and cut each testicle with one stroke when you have properly scrotumed them.
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	leaving no place for the common surgeon nor the subtle surgeon who is over the vessels,
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	and this manner of castration is better than that which is done by attraction because with the latter some matter from the testicles might remain and thus the animal still desires lust.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Des hermaphrodites: Of hermaphrodites, where one finds both male and female generative organs mixed together in an individual; this is caused by heat or cold in the womb during pregnancy.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	A hermaphrodite is of two kinds among men,
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	The one is such that between the two testicles appears like a woman's genitalia in its natural form, where there may be hair, and sometimes it discharges urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is found in women, appearing on the wrist like a rod and two knobs.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment of men and women is such that you remove all joined flesh, and treat it like any other wound.
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	In the second manner, for men whose urine spurts through the skin of the testicles, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	For the sting.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	Tetigoine is a joined flesh on the natural part, so long as it is too ugly to look at.
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	And some women have it also large like a hand, and that is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	You must hold the excess flesh around the wound with your hand or pincers, and gently cut it.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do not go too deep, lest blood flow out, then treat with another treatment until it is healed.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	And at another place where it arises in the mouth of the wound, and it fills, and perhaps bursts out, and is like a cow's udder in appearance, and so the ancients called it "udder disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	You must cut it, as we have said with cauterization, and treat until it is healed.
de erratique	of wandering stones
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	Erratic it is when the woman's nature is not pierced or the opening is small;
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	And it is natural by birth, or accidental due to illness which has come about;
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	where it is attached by a clamp, or by a fine wire or spike, and it is firmly fixed in the marrow, be it on the side, below, or wherever.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	and prevent conception, childbirth, and perhaps even the flow of menstrual blood;
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	and knowledge of this is obtained through observation of the urine.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the obstructions are close by, take them out with your fingers or a rod.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is fixed with a fine wire, and it is close to the two cubits, then hurry up, and cut it thus:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	then extend the two lips widely, so that the fine wire is exposed, and cover it with your fingers;
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	Then take wool, dampen it in oil, and place it on the spot, and have the woman lie with her husband every day, so that it does not heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the suture is hard and thick, you should cut it with a spatule similar to a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the obstruction is made of unworked wood, suspend it from an oak branch and split it;
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	And have ready the hemostatic medicines, as needed, such as dragon's blood, incense, along with egg whites;
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	Then bring a broad hollow cane so that the wound cannot heal;
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	And thus it shall be for a long time, and bring him a dry linen tent;
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat other treatments until he is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when there is a newborn child in the womb, it must be delivered in this manner, unless there are encrusted abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an encrusted abscess in the womb, one should not apply cauterization.
des emorroides	Hemorrhoids.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins without a usual cortex, and when hemorrhoids are old they become thick.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	And we have already mentioned in the division their similarities with others, and the signs, now I will say which ones receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and hardness, when they are deep in the anus and cannot be felt, should not be treated with cauterization.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the swamp, where one can feel it, are those whom one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	You should thus place the woman in a cold house, then stretch out the hemorrhoid with forceps, and cut it at its root, then powder over it with medicines that restrain blood flow, such as dragon's blood and incense, and similar things.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	Then press her feet against the wall for an hour, then place them in cold water.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	And if blood flows from it, have her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate rind, gallnuts and similar things; then take barley flour, mix it with honey and egg white to make an ointment which you place on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if there is no bleeding, that's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If not, have him apply cups to his back and breasts without piercing them.
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	Then take linen, soak it in plantain juice or hawthorn juice with old wine, and apply to the affected area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess subsides, treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	And the one called "albathir" is red, resembling rough skin, it should be cut like the telul, as I mentioned.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	Abscesses of the breast.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses occur in the breast, such as cancer, stony abscesses, herpes, tumors, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and various other diseases that I have mentioned in my classification.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	Therefore, I must discuss in this treatise the hot abscess that appears on the vulva, which is not one of the abscesses that are meant to burst.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	And if you wish to know the work of iron [i.e., surgery], then look whether the abscess is acute at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Then do not hasten to pierce [it], but let it die until the pain is eased.
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	And then make the patient sit on a seat, and have two small seats for him to lean on, supporting his back and bringing together the parts outside of the leg.
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	And let his thighs be spread apart, and place his arms underneath his knees, and bind them well with a good bandage.
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	Then suction from his right side, and introduce the instrument with which you work the mouth of the marrow, from which afterwards the matter comes.
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	and it is necessary that when you go to introduce this instrument, that you insert the point first in order to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters inside with the instrument does not go further than it should and does not harm the patient.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	and if the instrument is larger, one should cover the depth of the wound with cloth so that the instrument does not harm him.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	and it is necessary that he put the handle of the instrument on top and hold the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscess opens up, and it is softened by hand, one should cut it at its head with a spatula.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	And when the bowels are empty, you should place moistened dressings in rose oil or dry green oil into the wound.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	place the dry dressing outside of the wound over the cavity, and put over the cavity and the hand clean moist wool that has been boiled with mallows.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it after two days of dressing, until it is healed.
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and sometimes you should rinse the cavity and wound with an enema of water and honey, then with water or boiled roots of lily and long aristoloche.
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then return to the dressing.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	If the wound is swollen in the scab, you must avoid cauterizing with iron but treat it as we have mentioned previously.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	Mestier est premier a la baile qu'elle conoisse la figure de l'enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l'ar: 
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	then hasten the child to go out (of the womb).
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	then know that these births are according to the natural position, and the baby comes out headfirst, with the second twin following.
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press on her belly so that the baby comes out soon.
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	for when it descends headfirst, so does the twin with him, and the mother's excesses are cleansed through proper childbirth.
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	and this one who comes out differently is not born naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For sometimes it comes out on its feet, or the body or shoulder first, and hands, or on its belly, often, and occasionally turned onto its neck, and in other bad positions.
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	If it is necessary for the nurse to be wise and skilled in these matters, and beware of errors and deception, I will show you all the ways in which she must assist him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the child comes out feet-first naturally, and the woman gives birth painfully, and her strength is weak, have the midwife sit on a stool, where other women hold her.
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	And mix her nourishment with cooked olive oil or fenugreek, then put the nurse between her two hands using the small spatula which is shaped like this: [shape description]
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	And break the amniotic sac, and scoop out its nail so that all of the moisture that is within flows out.
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	And press the woman's belly so that the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must give the woman an enema made of ground fenugreek with sesame oil.
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	Then make her sneeze with juice of rue, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour.
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	Now press the child's belly.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if both hands pop out, you must gently push them back in turn.
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	And if they cannot go in, place the woman on a chair, lifting her feet upwards.
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	Then get up the chair from the ground, holding onto the woman so she does not fall when standing up.
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the hands cannot go in and the child is dead, cut her hands with a knife as mentioned before, extract the child, and push it back evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	Of the child's birth upon its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child begins to walk, you must push them upwards.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	And then turn it over gently, until it is even.
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then take one foot and stretch it gently, again and again.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	When they jump up to the hips, instruct them to grab hold, and make them sneeze vigorously.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps, so be it, if God wills it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not go beyond as we have said, turn it over and over until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is lightly done.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it does not come about as we have done, say one must take muskroot from the pharmacy, and sesame oil, and molten gum, and grind everything in a mortar.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and apply this ointment to her female nature, then have her sit in warm water up to below the ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is moistened below, make her a collar of myrrh, and place it underneath, leaving it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then have her sit on the chair, make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, gently press on her belly, for the baby is jumping now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the birth of the child upon its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the baby comes in this manner, put balm on its hands back and forth;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then be mindful of her neck, let her feet hang down, and have her lie on the bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and she bends her hands back and forth, then he presses her hands onto the stomach, and removes the cushions underneath, until she is properly aligned below.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the child does not jump, take her feet and move them vigorously, then massage the stomach upwards, finally put in your hands.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and shake the child back and forth;
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and instruct the woman to hold herself so that the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the birth of the child with one hand hanging out
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	I must devise a way to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if one cannot retrieve it, make the woman get up and walk.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot walk, have her lie down on the bed, and lift her legs vigorously;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	Then bring forth the musk concoction I have described.
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	And if she does not give birth, make her sit on the chair, then carefully help to bring back her hand.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	Also guide the child according to its natural position, make her sneeze, and instruct her to grasp [the child] until the baby is out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the exit of the child upon its neck, and have its hands spread out, and its face turned towards the back of its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary for the midwife to hold her hand, then turn it back and forth, and lift [the baby] gently.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when it is equalized, place upon [the baby] the natural musk concoction with oil, as we have said, then instruct her to move a little bit at a time.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	and when you have done this, make her sit on a seat, and instruct her to hold still.
et la fai esternuer.	and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same manner for all secondary dislocations
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes out forcefully in this manner every time, cut the phlegm with your nail until all moisture is drained.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if the child spits on their face and neck, wipe it away from the root so that nothing is left behind, and clean the child.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then push the child inside until you have positioned it correctly, and tell the woman to hold still once.
adonques si istra legierement.	now gently pull out the legs.
de l’issue des gemelz	Of a dislocated ankle joint.
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; 
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	And this is not a strange thing, and often happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two things are strange indeed, yet they exist.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know them, though they multiply, divided by the surgeon's knife, bound to sorrow.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	And sometimes they arise naturally as we have stated.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	If they arise severely, treat as we have said, with a skilled surgeon acting swiftly and gently.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And act so that it moves towards salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	Sometimes they are formed in the month of I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, and even up to XV, all shaped as children by the wondrous flow of blood, and it is essential that the surgeon knows all this, for such things may befall him.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	si do as is required.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman for a dead child in her womb, as I have mentioned before, and it does not come out naturally, and you are forced to perform manual labor;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	you should know if the woman is of sound virtue and has no accidents or fears of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	the woman should be supine on her back, with her head tilted downwards, and her legs lifted;
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the minister should hold her in two parts, or tie her to the bed so she cannot move during the extraction of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the woman's mouth with moist oils mixed with a poultice of althea and fenugreek seeds, then anoint her hands with these oils and poultices;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	Then place them in the mild bath, then position it where they put the weights so that they are suitable for this, and be careful if the child is fitted with one so that he does not fall on his head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	If you insert the weights in their eyes or neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or armpit or near the ribs, and if he falls onto his feet, then pierce him with it or hold it to his lower ribs.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	And it is necessary that he hold the weight in his right hand and place the basket between two fingers of his left hand, and put all this into his hand gently, then insert the weight into any one of these places we have said until its contents come out.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And this is the form of oncine (swelling):
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then insert it against another oncine (swelling), or the third if you require more, so that the extractions are equal;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then stretch them evenly from one side to the other, so they can be removed, and let the oncines (swellings) interlock to keep them in place, like this is the form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	If any part remains, anoint the wound with some of your fingers' oil, and press those into that part, and pull on the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if nothing remains there, place this oncine (swelling) higher up, and do so until it comes out entirely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot move it due to stiffness, you must wrap it in a cloth until it is entirely covered.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	Then cover the knuckles of the sole or heel, and do likewise for the other hand and both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the child's head is large and it becomes stuck during delivery, or if there is an acute assembly of membranes around its head, you must press the pointed spatula between your fingers, split open the membranes, and extract the fluid.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	Or you may use an instrument called 'almidach', the construction of which is described in the following chapter along with other instruments.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	And do the same if the child has an abnormally large head naturally.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	then extract the bones with tongs, and if the head pops out and is held by forceps, let it be split open so that the moisture which is inside comes out.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot come out, cut it into pieces as much as you can.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, you must pierce it so that the moisture flows out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on his feet, the attraction is light, and the guidance to the mother's breast is easy.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is trapped in the belly or the head, you must extract it with fabric wrapped around the hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and split open the belly or the head so that the moisture inside flows out.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if the other limb is removed, and the head remains, then insert your hand into the shoulder socket perfectly, and draw it down to the mouth of the socket;
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	then insert two or three fingers, and withdraw them gently;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the mouth of the socket is narrowed due to abscess which has occurred there, it should not be operated on, but moist and oily things must be applied;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	he applies poultices, along with warm softening and moistening agents dissolved in water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is lying on its side, and you are able to put it upright, then apply what we have said about living children;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	If one has no power over it, then break it into pieces, leaving nothing of the sinew behind.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, if it brings on the hot abscesses we spoke of that come from the marsh;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And if there is an outflow of blood, it should be dressed with cold water compresses restraining the flow, and other treatments should be administered.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly a child had died; then another formed on top of it, and this one also died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess formed in the buttock; it swelled until it opened and began to produce a great deal of pus.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat [the wound], and I thought about it for a long time, but could not heal/close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a plaster of strong attraction, and an [the first] bone came out, and after some days another one did too.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly astonished as there is no bone in the belly.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	So I thought it must be bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I cauterized the wound, and extracted pieces of bone from it, such that the woman was in a better state.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	And for a long time the woman dressed it thus, and only now does there seem to be a little lump in its place;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	And I have not written this chapter except to aid those who, when they find a strange case, might know how to help it.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To return the marrow to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Ci après vient le forme du pressoir, à quoi on a les livrés.
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Et à deux tours aux deux têtes des deux liens.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	However, the horns should be more subtle than those of the restrainer, and they should be made of ebony or boxwood.
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	And the mouth of the post should be two fingers wide, and the edge of the wood one finger thick, and its length a palm and half.
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	And in the middle of the two bindings there should be two fittings made from this same wood, firmly attached to each other, half a palm long or slightly longer.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	And these two fittings should be inserted into the mouth of the post to open when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, resembling the shape of a pair of tongs;
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and it should have two jaws, as you see, one palm in length, and two fingers wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you see to open the womb with all the instruments, have the woman sit on the bed, her feet hanging and legs spread, then insert the two jaws of the instrument together into the womb, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then operate your hand with the instrument, just as you would with tongs evenly, according to the extent that you see fit to open the mouth of the womb, so that she may do what she wishes.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	Cist estrument sunt tuit sormontez, 
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	And when the physician has prepared them, it is all the more urgent to operate on them, and it is of higher importance for men according to their condition.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despair if you do not have the instrument ready, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the midwife is hindered during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath and then make her sneeze with conviction; bind your hands over her mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she faints from this, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, take a pot and pierce it where the cover is, and place herbs that can open the mouth of the sufferer gently inside, such as valerian, wormwood, anise, chamomile, cassia-lignea and centaury.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	All these herbs, or some of them, should be boiled in the pot with water over a fire.
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	Then put a cane or tube from the pot, and place the other end in the mouth of the patient, and hold it so that the vapors enter into the patient's mouth.
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	Then make them sneeze, as we have said before.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the assistant runs out of medicine.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if it remains after this treatment and does not leave, instruct the nurse to wet her left hand with oil of sesame or muskroot infusion, then place it on the affected area, and call for the midwife.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	Once she has found it, have her grasp it gently but firmly, ensuring the patient does not twist during the extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	But she should move it slightly to the right and left, and then pull gently.
si venra et se desaerdra.	Will come and will dislodge itself.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the wound is narrow, we have mentioned the treatment of coughing and herbal fumigations;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it does not work with all that we have said, be careful not to go astray when extracting (the humors).
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that he who is at the mouth of the wound should tie himself to the thigh of the woman and then cleanse her with ointment made from four ingredients.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	it will heal and reset (itself), and come back strongly.
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	but nevertheless, when it heals, if foul-smelling wind comes to the stomach and head, it will afflict the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	So suitable fumigations are required for this:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	None of the ancients have tried fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates a woman to retain her flowers and menstruation is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it should be similar to that of a dog, with the head placed above the fire in such a way as to allow for careful observation.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And the fumigation should be over the coals, letting the fabric smolder until it is completely consumed, then start another one.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the fundament.
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born without the anus being pierced, instead having it blocked by some delicate membrane.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	So at the bath, she should pierce this membrane with her fingernail, and not use a sharp spatula, taking care that it does not touch the surrounding area.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place on it wet linen soaked in wine and oil, then treat with ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will heal, insert a piece of lead wire into the hole, leave it for several days, and remove it when the child wants to go outdoors.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And sometimes this blockage occurs suddenly in wounds or abscesses;
si covient coper celui soudement:	Thus it is necessary to cut into that blockage:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	Then treat as cured, just as we have said about the case of the tongue.
de la fistule dou fondement	On the subject of anal fistulas.
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that come from under the anus are suppurations, and swellings that come from around the anus outside, or in the space between the two parts, whether there is one fistula or multiple.
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	And when this suppuration is old, it should be worked on, and still moist with white or subtle bowels, and sometimes these fistulas are penetrating.
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And it is known to those who have experienced this through evacuation or flatulence when the patient evacuates, and perhaps a worm jumps out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if there are fistulas that perforate up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and reach up to the hip joint, and up to the knee bone.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one recognizes a fistula that perforates the anus, but not through it:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and it is that you insert your index finger into the anus, and carefully push a thin needle of iron or steel into the fistula if there is no curvature.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it is twisted, insert a slender probe or horsehair until you feel the probe or hair with your finger.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	if you cannot feel it, nor does air or wind escape from any opening as we have mentioned:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	know that it has not pierced;
si te haste dou curer.	hurry to treat it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula has perforated up to the bladder or up to the urine duct, it allows urine to escape, and cannot be healed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If the probe has pierced down to the hip joint, then it is positioned correctly.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no twisting and the pain is around that area, then it indicates a bowed condition, and neither medication nor immediate dressing will help.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And for these fistulas, there is no cure but to work on them, and the foolish pride of surgeons who involve themselves with it.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In that which is not perforated and is not ancient, there is hope for healing with iron, as I have experienced, and the patient lies between your hands on their back;
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	And lift their legs up to the thighs, and have their thighs bent towards their belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then insert an iron probe, or brass if there is curvature, until you know where the probe enters.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels it around the anus, you must insert your index finger, and then feel that the probe has pierced [the fistula];
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	And if you feel a gap between your finger and the bone or flesh, then know that it is pierced.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If you do not exert pressure there, one cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One says that they can be healed well sometimes, but this rarely happens.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	And the assistance provided is to heat the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as previously stated.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	Then push it fully heated into the fistula until it reaches its base.
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	Do this twice or three times until you know that these faulty flesh bits are burnt, which resemble a bird's feather.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then treat wet wounds with butter until all moisture disappears; afterwards treating them with an ointment that coats and heals the skin.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If this wound cannot be healed in any other way;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if the wound is inside and does not reach down to the bone that lies at its base, but rather there is between your finger and the wound a thick covering of flesh or sinew, and you see the fistula in what remains of this covering over the core;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	cut away from the beginning of the fistula and push back before the wound, then you may cauterize after so that it reaches to the head of the wound.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and the wound will be released and fall out.
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	Then beware of these flawed flesh wounds which appear like a bird's feather, and leave nothing behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the blood defeats you, flowing between your thumb and the incision, then cauterize with fire or medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cautery brings together two good things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	that is to say, the burning of these joined flesh wounds, and the stemming of blood flow and drying of moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then treat the wet wounds with butter or crushed matter until the skin turns pale and the burnt flesh falls in the pallor.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then treat the wound of suppurating ingrown toenails with hardening dry medications.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes up to the anus, and is far from the body, put your finger in the anus and feel it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the wound, and between two is the membrane or the skin or flesh where it is about to break, then have no fear that can be seen as a sign of hope and trust through one of these three ways:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	where you cauterize it as we have said, or cut it down to the bottom, or if you can treat it with tents and heal it as initially intended.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too deep, so as to avoid cutting the membrane that holds the foundation, and it results in involuntary evacuation of feces.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then heal it, as we have said.
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	perhaps it will be cleansed, or you can remove this covering and clean it after being cut near the foundation with a tent or another pointed instrument.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then remove this faulty flesh which is in the wound as much as you can.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	Study to restore the wound, and stop the fistula from forming outside of the anus.
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If it were less serious for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And sometimes their fistulas form in this way:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and it is when you insert a tent into the fistula, and it is situated by the anus near the skin above, take a perforated tent according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	...and insert the curved wire into it in such a way that the probe follows this path.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is penetrating the edge of the anus inside, then remove the thread from that perforation, like you would insert your finger into the anus;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	And draw the head of the thread, and join the two ends together, holding them tight to each other, and leave it for one or two days.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	And restrain it at times so the son cuts off its limbs which are between them, and they fall.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then treat the wound until it is healed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not rupture, make it burst in every way you can, unless it is too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not suitable to operate on if too deep, then treat it as we have said until it heals.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the sharp-spined spatula that is used to make a fistula is very thin on one side and piercingly sharp.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And on the other side it is not sharp, so as to avoid cutting what should not be cut; as you can see here.
des emorroydes	Of hemorrhoids.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Hemorrhoids occur in two ways:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	When they are inside the anus, like grains of resin, and there may be small or large ones, with some bleeding from them, and there may be one or many, these protrude outside the anus and at its head.
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	but those which are outside have little moisture, and even now or a little citron water or a little blood, and they have the body's colour;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment for those who have them inside the fundament is that you instruct the patient to strain themselves to go into chambers, until the fundament leaves them outside, and the worms appear.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you rush, and grasp it with the pincers or hold it with your nail, then cut it at its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the pincers cannot hold them due to their moisture, take them with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamois.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and extract them with your fingers, then cut them, and apply some hot powders on them in place of cauterization.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	Where you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then treat other treatments until they are healed.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	And if the foundation cannot come out, administer to the patient a biting and harsh enema to wash what is in the fundament, so that it can be expelled clearly.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	When patients complain of pain, and if the filament is far from the foundation, then the treatment is easy.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	You take them with your nail or pliers and cut off the filament, then treat it as we have said until it is healed without requiring an incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	It is necessary that you administer the suture in this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take a twisted thread, and push it into a needle, then draw the thread through and pierce the needle from the other side, turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and let it be wide.
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	Tighten the thread firmly, then tie a knot in it, remove the needle, and do this for all others, leaving one to drain any excess blood.
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then place on the base a damp cloth soaked in rose oil or wax, and put it on the base, instructing the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Leave it there until they subside, and once they do, treat them with ointment and other remedies until the area is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	dryness of feces or fundament
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is constipation of feces in the intestine, and due to the constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine is ineffective.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	You must cut away at the point of a spatule or with your nail the bark above it, so that it does not become damp.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then treat it until it is firm as it should be;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot heal, then start the scraping again more vigorously than before, until it bleeds a lot and is raw;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it until it is healed.
dou fremit	where there is trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A formix is a small faulty appearance between the body, and goes deep into the skin;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and sometimes it strikes cold, and one feels it like a shivering death, and it spreads throughout the body, especially in the hands more than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is such that you take a quill from a goose feather, or a strong vulture feather, and place this quill on the trembling, so that the purple circles touch the trembling all around.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand around the entire quill so that you grasp it all around the trembling, and place it perfectly, and eradicate the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you wish, make this with a cane of brass or iron according to this form, and let it be hollow underneath and flat on top.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	Do not pierce [the skin], for you must hold it with your fingers, and apply pressure.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see fit, cauterize the trembling, as it is explained in the previous chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the enema form.
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Sometimes one uses silver, or melted lead alloy for the cautery.
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	And sometimes one makes these small and large instruments according to their intended use.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those that are used in the treatment of children and for those who are weak and ailing are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the enema instrument is broad at one end, where the belly is tied in this way:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	And if there is a separation where the belly is tied, as you see, and the intestine is pierced inside;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	And it has two openings on one side, and only one on the other.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	And let the belly or container for medicines be made from an animal bladder or parchment, pierced all around with small openings, and have one inch between each opening. Then insert into these openings a strong thread of twisted gut formed in the shape of an X or woven around it, and assemble the belly as you would a goat.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	And when the medicine is inside, tie it to an instrument with a strong thread in front, then administer as a clyster.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and this is the form of the circle
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	and let the medicament not be too hot nor too cold, and grease the head of the clyster with oil or egg white, or something similar, then insert it gently;
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	then the ministers squeeze it with both hands together until it is completely empty, then remove the clyster, and have the patient lift their legs to the wall, and if the medicament wants to exit, hold it as long as possible;
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he sleeps for an entire night after, it is even greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you catheterize for a bellyache, and the medicament wants to exit quickly, so redo it until he is cleansed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the haemorrhoids are on the anus or there is an abscess, let the clyster be as gentle as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And this is the subtle form of the enema, on which the skin is held taut:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have already spoken about the treatment of wounds in the classification [or division];
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	and now we will tell you the treatments with your hands and medicines, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are inflicted, and where the wounds are located, as well as what has caused them.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by stone-throwing, and the cuts of a sword or knife, or of a lance or stick or arrow, or similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or they are made according to the location of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar parts;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, starting with simple head wounds, since they will be remembered in their own chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head, and the bone is not broken, take note if it's due to hitting a stone or similar objects, and the skin is still torn, and the wound is large; you slightly suspect of an abscess forming hot.
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	Make it bleed just a little from the superficial temporal artery especially if there is very little blood coming out of the wound, and let the bleeding be on the opposite side of where the impact occurred.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	And purge the patient of fullness from wine and fatty meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not wish to bleed, his flesh should be reduced, and let him drink no wine nor eat any meat.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and place upon the wound, if warm abscesses come forth, cotton moistened in rose oil only or in styptic wine;
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no warm abscess, place upon the wound, if it is fresh and full of blood, and not moved by the air, a powder which I will describe shortly.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the air has moved it, apply some ointments until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like that of a sword cut or similar, and the lips cannot be brought together with sutures, then they should be joined by stitching, as I will explain for wounds in the abdomen, specifically about stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is exposed to the bone, gaping open, and only held together by a little skin, then cut it off.
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	Then treat the wound with medicine, restore hard flesh in place of leather, and instruct the patient to eat coarse meats like boiled beef, wheat, cooked pork, chicken, and similar foods.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find skin with corruption that has not reached the bone, carefully cut away all the corrupted tissue, and discard it; then treat it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if there is an artery in the wound or vein that does not stop bleeding and cannot be stanched with medicine, remove the artery; if you find it severed, tie it up with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if this does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and ensure you add this powder which binds, as soon as the flesh has healed.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	and the type of powder is as follows:
pren encens une partie;	take one part incense;
sanc de dragon II parties;	dragon's blood, two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	galangal root, three parts, and finely ground powder, apply to the wound, holding it firmly until it dries well and joins with all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	then bind it tightly, and leave it bound without loosening, if there is no swelling;
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	for the medicine is not removed until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one uses only quicklime powder when they do not have incense or dragon's blood, but the cold has moved away from the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the burn has moved away from the wound, especially during summer, then do not put this powder on it.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply some digestive ointments, or poultices made of barley flour with water and honey, until it becomes soft.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the bone fracture accompanies the wound, and it is minor, extract it with delicate pincers;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you about skull fractures later.
de la plaie dou col	On the neck wound:
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck and it is straightforward, there is no significant distinction between this and a head wound; however, if the carotid artery or other arteries in the neck are severed.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the black part, there are no other means than to leave it untreated, and do not apply any constrictive measures, for it harms the bone and causes it to retreat.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	And do not place anything cold on the wound, for the nature of nerves is cold, and their continuity extends to the brain, which is the highest organ.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but let the medicine be warm, just like heat washed in lukewarm water, and mixed with rose oil, and wax also washed in lukewarm water, and other minerals according to this method, and moist salves.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, cut it open and bind with bandages; then treat it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and hairy, and filled with worms, pierce them below that level;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is severed, and bleeding ensues, uncover it, scrape it, and cauterize it if necessary.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	and if the windpipe of the throat is severed, or the heart, and the conduit remains intact, by which breathing continues, cut into the heart above the trachea in the neck, but do not touch the throat itself, only restore it to its natural shape.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then hold it firmly in place, and leave it for a few days, then treat it with draining ointments until it is healed.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	And if the wound has penetrated to the bone, then probe it.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	If there are fragments of bone in the wound, pull them out forcefully if you can, and for those that cannot be removed, leave it to become putrid, and let the discharge be eased and alleviated.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on it the powder I mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has formed a fistula, treat it as I have described in its respective chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	Of the wound caused by a spear or knife.
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a blow from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, observe whether there is any windiness coming from the wound when the patient walks.
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	Know then that the wound is mortal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	And if it is not deep, and fresh with all its blood, do not apply the powder in the first hour, nor bind it to stop the blood from flowing out, and returning to the heart, which would kill the patient;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	But put on an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	And if you have no ointment, put old cotton into the wound to draw out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	Then there will be no spasm, nor bad heart tremors or strange breathings;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	And when you see favorable signs, know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Treat it then with bandages and other dressings until it is fully healed;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	And if it fails to heal, and there is continued discharge, then know that it has developed a fistula;
si la cure si com on doit.	Treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, whether on the chest, arm, or back, treat what is visible first.
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	If it is large, suture it.
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	And if it is small, use powder. If the wound penetrates deep into the bone and has splintered pieces, clean the wound, and realign the sharp ends of broken bones if they are disjointed.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not removed, let the wound rot, it will ease the extraction.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for wounds on other body parts, the treatment is as we have said before.
dou derrompement dou ventre	Rupture of the abdomen.
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The ruptures of the belly are large, medium, and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	From the large wound, sometimes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines protrude, which requires the insertion of other objects.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	And the suturing is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one, because it requires more precise placement of the intestines, which must be done carefully.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	Because the intestines swell when they feel cold, making them harder to place precisely, and for this reason, the medium-sized wound is better, as it allows for easier repositioning of the intestine to its correct location than other sizes.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And know that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	The two common sutures occur in the suture of the belly, and the suture of other wounds of the body, and there are two other specific sutures that are common to other wounds.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	However, they are more specific when it comes to the suture of the belly, and I shall describe each one and provide clarification.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and a part of the intestine lies outside, and it is easy to replace, it can be done through one of two ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	Or because of the small size of the wound, as we have said, or due to the intestine being swollen from the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, heat it this way:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	Moisten a sponge or soft cloth in lukewarm water only, which you have boiled in sharp vinegar and cypress, and apply it to the intestine until the swelling is gone;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And sometimes make this restraining wine, and it has been proven to help with swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the swelling subside, moisten the intestine with water or other liquids in which mallow and elderflowers have been boiled, for through this, entry is eased to little things;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	And if nothing can enter, make a small hole in the wound with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	and the first treatment is to cauterize the area around the wound, one must not cut it unless there is great need for doing so;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and these are the instruments to split or open it:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if you cut inside at an angle and outwards, and see this form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines have burst out, so replace them dry according to their natural form in their proper place if you can, for it is worth trying.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is wide and located below the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on their back and raise their legs higher than their head.
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and if it is located below the belly, place the head and chest higher than the lower parts; also, if the abdominal rupture is in one of the two halves, position them so that the wounded part is higher than the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And thus you must manage what I say for large wounds and small ones.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	For small wounds use what is available to you, then with your hands administer merciful medicine that holds the entire wound together, and join its lips.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	And this is the common method of sutures, and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the wound's width, then leave two inches from the head of the wound, and there insert a needle with good strong thread.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	And pierce the two sides of the skin with the two sides of the siphac, which is beneath the skin inside, so that you make it pierced from that part, and join the two heads of the siphac together in fours.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	Then strain a double thread around the needle in two parts, then bring together the two sides of the wound accordingly, and leave one finger's width, and insert another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	Then tie the thread like you did with the first needle, and do not stop until all needles are tied according to your needs, until the entire wound is constrained.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	And use medium-sized needles, between fine and thick ones, because the fine needles cut through all the flesh, and the too thick ones cannot enter well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	For this reason, they should be medium-sized.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	And one should not insert the needles too far beyond the flesh and skin, lest they cut and open the wound before it is sutured.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and then cover the joints with gauze made from needles, so that they do not wound the patient when asleep, and put a little tent or bandage over the joints of the needles to hold them in place, and leave it until the wound is healed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	this method of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it requires just one or two needles.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second kind of suturing is common, and it involves bringing together the two sides of the skin and the two sides of the subcutaneous tissue with one needle or a strong middle-sized thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	and when you have pierced these sides all together, bring the needle back to the starting point at the other side in the way one sews clothes.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	And place a space between each stitch equal to the thickness of one thumb.
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	These stitches are for a man, and I stitched up a wound on a horse's belly which was pierced by a knife, and the wound was over a palm in size, and the intestines were protruding two palms in length, and the wound was located in the middle of its belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned his intestine after it had been outside for twenty-four hours, and the wound healed in fifteen days; I treated him, and he was cured.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the surgeon had judged that it would kill him, but this was a miracle.
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	And I did not treat it with any ointment because I was in a place where none could be found nor any medicine.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And I placed old cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Or I will tell you of the two proper methods of suturing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle, and push it from the outer part until it reaches inside;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	when it has pierced through the heart from right to left, leave the tip of the needle where it is or rests inside after you have pushed it in, and make another hole on the other side from the inner part until it reaches outside;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And the understanding of this suturing is that you sew it just as furriers do with furs, leaving one side of the needle unthreaded and taking it up again on the other, until the whole suture is completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second method of suturing, as Galen calls it properly, is when anyone does it by joining the two parts together naturally and applying one tip of the needle to the other in such a way that...
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Insert a needle at the base of the nose, and pierce that spot only, and leave the two nostrils alone.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	Then turn the needle, and pierce it from outside to inside, towards the two nostrils.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Pierce each one from outside to inside, in two other places of the nose that are on the other side.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And this is the binding way, or suturing method, most commonly used.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Galien says this word, and they testify that one must suture the abdomen with two needles, each having its own thread.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	And one needle must be pushed from one side, and another from the other, in the manner of those who sew straps.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	And know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, its stitching is more serious than those of other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgments about this wound are such as the judgments for other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	And it is when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, rather than moved by the physician, then reset the intestine and sew it.
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	Then apply the powder of burnt animal fat, and if the physician has moved it, then put some fresh ointment so that the wound heals.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	And bind the wound with thread, joining together the lip and the cheek.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat the wound like any other until it is healed.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	And if you don't have any medicine, apply old cotton wool to it as soon as it starts to produce pus, and move it twice daily until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you do not need any other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple.
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	And if you suspect that the wound may cause a spread to vital body parts, then it is necessary to wet a light linen cloth with tepid warm oil or rose oil, and place it around the groin and under the armpits.
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	and if he feels pain or inflammation in his bowels, which often happens, then cleanse them with a tepid black wine enema, especially if the inflammation reaches the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and pierce it from within, knowing that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to treat than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine that is called "jeun" cannot heal when it is injured, and this is due to the fragility of its veins, and because of the delicacy of the entire body, and the closeness of its nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the wound gapes open, push it back like with the intestine, while it is still fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	and if it is old and turned black or green, you must tie the black part so that no blood runs out of it, for there are veins and arteries within;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	then cut what is between the tie, and hang the two heads from below the wound up to outside in order to ease its extraction when the guts fall out, and the wound heals;
de la routure dou boueil	On the rupture of the mouth
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestines are round and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people, as I saw that a man was wounded in his belly by a lance.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, from which came discharges and flatulence.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I treated it as best I could, and did not cease to remove the pus until he was healed, and the wound closed up.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw it healed, I feared that the patient had an ailment in his belly.
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there was no ill, but he remained in good health, eating and drinking.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and some experts said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied up like this:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	take large plasters, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the plaster has opened its mouth, put it on both lips, so that it tightens its mouth above them;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then cut the plaster's head and this will hold so that it cannot be undone, then put another plaster after in the same way as before, until the wound is fully bound up;
et cout la plaie.	and cut out the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	These chiefs are applied to the intestine, and there is no harm to the patient, and one can bind the intestine with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal, in this way:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Take the end of this gut string and make it very smooth, then tie to one end of the gut a fine flax thread twisted around it. Then insert the thread into the needle and pierce through the gut, then pull back up through the rupture.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	And this method of joining is not false, but according to the way of trust and hope.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it's in one of the major intestines, there will be no remedy nor health without great skill.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it heals, is universally called a "fistula," especially when it is covered and curved.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	Fistula is truly a faulty hardened white knot, where there is no pain felt and it also resembles the quill of a feather.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	And sometimes it leaps clear bowels, and other times thick ones;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	Sometimes little, and others enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	And I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh covering it, this is unless by one of nine causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	That is to say, due to the scarcity of blood or pus;
ou por sa malice;	Or because of its nature;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	Or due to the hard flesh within it, and on the lips, which prevents new flesh from forming;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	Or because there is too much bowel;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	Where the flesh is porous, and the material of poor quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	where the medicine is not effective in treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	where due to the corruption being a manner of pestilence;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	where due to the characteristics of the region, digestion is slow, healing is delayed, and swelling occurs naturally;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already demonstrated all these causes, their signs, and the treatments of medicine in this section.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now is when I must inform you of the treatment for fistula, which is performed manually.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that fistulas occur in any part of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	for there are fistulas that arise in major veins, arteries, nerves, at the anus, in the intestine, bladder, some ribs, the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	And so until it returns to its proper place of origin, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are of this manner are of quick healing, and there is nothing but work and ignorance [involved].
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	And if there is any fistula that does not reach the place I mentioned, and you are doubtful of its cure, and you wish to know it for sure, then take a probe of iron or steel, if the fistula is straight, insert [the probe].
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	And if the fistula is twisted, then search for it with a slender probe of lead, because lead can bend according to the twist.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	And if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot properly probe it with instruments, then cleanse it by administering an enema through one of the openings, for moisture will flow from one opening to another and clean [the wound].
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	Then treat it skillfully to your ability, so that you may know if there is bone or nerve, and check whether it is completely severed, and carefully ask the patient about their pain when pressing with your hand, as well as where they feel it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	And once you have truly located where it is, whether it is close to a joint or nerve, or an artery or vein, or in any of the areas I mentioned, treat it accordingly as I said before, and remove the fault and corrupted flesh that lies within.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	Then cure it until it is clean and healthy, and if the fistula is well-formed in a straight line, then you must treat it completely as best as you can. Then insert damp cloths soaked in healing medicines into it, pushing them down to the end of the fistula so that the medicine may corrode any remaining excess at its base.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then I apply stimulating ointments to healthy flesh until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if it is not healed by this method, then cauterize as we have said earlier, and if the bone is corrupted by the ulcer, amputate it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a wound or tumor does not harm your vital organs, as we have said before;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackening, remove the affected area until all corruption is gone, then treat it with stimulating substances to promote healing until it is cured.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	and if it is not healed, and becomes swollen again as before, know that you have not reached deep enough.
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	If you uncover and search until you reach the bottom, remove all the corruption, then restore its place.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if it is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the corruption is too deep, and you cannot reach it.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	There may be another cause from which relief comes naturally.
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	And if there is a small corrupted bone that you can grasp with tongs, remove it with the appropriate tool for this purpose. If there are multiple bones, extract them all at once and leave none behind.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	And if moisture hinders you, and there is no risk of harm or danger, then cut through the moisture, flesh, and bone to free it.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, apply something that causes rotting to the wound, and let it rot around the bones until then the bone will be more easily extracted.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	And if it is a large bone, such as from the leg or thigh, clean only the corruption until all blackness is removed, then restore the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	And if a large part is corrupted, and it reaches the core of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	It must be cared for and cut away entirely until the corruption is removed, then treat it until it is healed.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And I will tell you of a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you may take example and aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	He was a young man around thirty years old who had pain in his leg caused by something within the body, such that matter came to the leg and it swelled with a large abscess, but there was no reason for opening [it] from outside.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	But the doctors in their madness worked so much on it that they opened up the abscesses and a lot of matter came out, and it became a fistula, with many apertures through which all the bowels and moisture of the body flowed.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	Many doctors tried to cure him for about two years, but none of them were wise in the art of surgery, until I was called upon. Upon examining his leg and seeing the treatments he had received as well as what flowed from those apertures, I observed that it came out through the apertures with a strong smell.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	The body of the young man became red, and it had a yellowish hue.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I set up a tent in one of these holes, and then searched all the holes, and found that one came against the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I hastened and cut into one of the openings until I exposed a part of the bone, finding it rotten and perforated, with the rot spreading deep inside to the very bone.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I scraped away the part of the bone that appeared rotten, taking care to ensure there was no further rot beyond what I removed.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	I began to treat the wound with soothing medicines for a long time but it would not heal.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	Later on, I restarted the process and reopened the wound to expose the bone as before, finding that the rot had continued into it. I scraped this away too, then removed it altogether, but was unable to make the place heal.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	but I could not do so as I was cutting around one palm's width of the bone, and it was torn throughout all its soft part, then I restored it with medicine;
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and it was healed and joined swiftly, and there was no need to start the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and because of my fear of death from him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For due to the blood evacuation he bled often, but he was entirely healed, and in place of the bone grew a hard tissue, which was well-formed and caused no harm or side effects whatsoever, either at present or later on.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this way:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	take a cord, and tie it to the end of the bone that is protruding, and instruct someone to pull it upwards;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and put another thicker flax rope over the flesh above the bone and tie it tightly while stretching the head (of the protruding bone), so that you draw away the corrupted flesh from underneath and uncover the flesh above where you wish to operate without cutting into the flesh.
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and place a red hot iron or a table under the bone to cut away the corrupted flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	you must take as much care as you can to see and feel the extent of the corruption, and check again once more.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupted but does not open, and the corruption is either in the middle or on one side, you must uncover all of the flesh.
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	then place the red hot iron underneath, and then cauterize from one side of the corruption to the other, and let there be a gap along its length as we have said.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut away the corrupted joint, and cauterize the bone on the other side.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	And if the corruption is present between two joints, there is no other remedy but to amputate.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	And if the corruption is in the wrist of the hand or the ankle of the foot, it is a very serious matter, but nonetheless you must inquire about this corrosion, how it presents itself.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	Clean it in every way you can, but be careful not to harm the veins or nerves.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	Know that there are many types of incisions and saws used to cut these bones, depending on the arrangement of the bones and their appearance, as well as their thickness, delicacy, size, smallness, and hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	And for this, it is necessary to match each type of work with its corresponding tool.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	And know that your work will show you the instrument or tool needed, according to your knowledge of this art and the signs of various diseases.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	Think carefully about the instrument or tool you require according to what is necessary.
dou feu	Of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head may become dislocated either due to internal causes or external ones.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	And when you have treated that ulceration with medicine and it does not improve, then you must amputate the limb up to where the ulcer originates so that the patient can escape death or the greater evil of member loss.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	The signs are that the limb turns black as if burned by fire and it may become darker still. The ulceration can spread from one member to another and then throughout the body.
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If you hurry to cut it, and if this is due to the sting of venomous beasts, such as a scorpion or snake, and if the corrosion is at the top of the finger, then cut it there, and do not allow any poison to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it has reached the hand, cut it at the joint so that the corrosion does not extend to the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	And if it has reached the arm, cut it with a knife.
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	If it goes beyond the cut, it is death, and no strong remedy can be given other than a quantity of its antidote.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	And do the same when the corrosion comes to the foot:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	If it comes to the first joint, then support the other joint after.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	And if it affects the foot, support the whole foot.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	If it goes up to the leg, support at the knee joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	And if it goes above the knee, there is no other option but to leave the patient to die.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	The way to support or set the limb is that you bind it above and below, and have some assistants hold one end of the binding downwards, and others hold the other binding upwards, and you cut away the flesh between the two bindings with a spatula-like tool, until the bone is uncovered.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	Then cover with cotton or silk, and place a linen cloth on either side so that the silk does not touch the healthy area, and no further injury or abscess occurs to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if bleeding occurs when you operate, cauterize the area immediately, or apply some restraining powders.
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then return to your treatment until it is completed, then bind the affected limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it heals.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	and I will tell you about what happened to a man with a sore foot:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	He had a dark patch that looked like a burn from fire, and this corrosion first appeared on his big toe, eventually covering the entire foot.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to cut off his foot, and was healed.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and long after, the corrosion returned to his thumb, and he came to me. I applied resonant materials to it after purifying the body, but could not stop the corrosion.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he saw that I wanted to cut off his hand, but I did not wish it, as I had hope of resonating with the material.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and I also feared that if I amputated his hand, he would die because the man's health was weak.
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he became desperate and returned home, then hastened to cut off his hand, and was healed.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And I have not described cauterization with hot irons because it is done differently elsewhere if there is need for it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	At no time should an abscess appear in the flesh, and remain so long that it forms a large gathering of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	Then it swells up and bursts open, the pus escaping, leaving the wound raw like a hollow vessel;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	And the skin above it is as thin and delicate as fine linen, not extending down to the bone or nerve; such a disease is called 'ulcer', and not 'fistula'.
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	But if it is so elongated that it reaches the bone in depth, then it is called a 'fistula'.
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and let the skin be such that you cut this skin all around, especially when it is delicate, like a scarf;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and does not care about its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you are worried that the skin will rot, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick with flesh, then cut it thusly with a scalpel:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	look if the breasts are large, and the bowels that come from it have a foul odour, then administer an Egyptian medicine enema, which is made thusly:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	take alum, oil, and litharge, equally, and put it to boil in a vessel over fire, until the medicine turns red, and becomes as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	And then take what you need from it, and mix it with water and honey, and flush the breast with an enema, and hold the aperture closed.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	Leave the medicine inside for two hours, then remove it by pressing gently.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Do this several times until the breast is softened, and remove the pus.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	And if you have performed an enema with ash water when this medicine is not available, and it is the case that you take wood ashes from vines, pour water over them, then strain them, and perform an enema until you know the breast is well cleansed.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	And if the patient cannot tolerate it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the ash water, then perform an enema with water and honey where there is a small amount of powdered litharge.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	where you cleanse it with honey and mixed wine, for the honey has the property of cleaning and washing, and the wine makes the blood flow.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and when you have done this, and you are certain that the flesh is well cleansed, then clean it with what makes flesh grow in it, which is a definite plaster made of rose oil and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	where you cleanse it with certain medications and ointments, whose properties I have described in the chapter on ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	and if the hole in the breast is small and the cannula of the clyster cannot enter, then enlarge it with an iron instrument a little bit, and put in it some Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if the wound is too wide, cut it and leave only enough space for the clyster to enter, and if the hole that emits feces is above, close it or lower where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the intestine is perforated, do not allow any food to enter.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	And if you cannot cut the intestine as desired, arrange it in such a way that the intestine falls to its lowest point because when the intestine is perforated, do not allow any food to enter and if you cannot cut the intestine as desired, then prepare it accordingly.
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	that the intestine runs slightly downwards, leaving nothing of the perforation.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take consolidating medicines to apply on the wound, and place them on a linen cloth that covers the entire wound.
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	then cover as much of the surrounding area as possible with a hole in the chest that is wider than the first, then place soft ointment on another linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and apply it to the wound to ease the pain, and do not remove the large outer cloth for several days.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and the one on top of the chest wound should be frequently removed to alleviate the pain and inspect what comes out with the pain, whether it is poison or pus or blood or digestion, or undigestion.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	and keep watch for the patient's pain levels and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has extended in such a manner that you see nature emerging from the wound, then you know the chest is healing, and bring them close to health.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	And then release it in the morning or on the third day; when you unwrap the wound, change to a new cloth and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast ejects undigested food after many days, know that the breast is not healthy.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poison lingers for a long time, do not despair of health, for healing is near.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are men for whom healing of injuries comes late, and others who do the opposite.
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	And if bowel movements become irregular after many days, know that the condition will not improve.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	And if the healing is slow and prolonged, apply drying medications that are moist in substance but dry in nature, such as a definitive ointment containing a large proportion of vitriol. This will be the final medication applied.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take definitive ointment, and make it with rosehip oil, mixed equally in amount with old wine.
puis le confit et en use;	Then cook it and make use of it;
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	And this same thing, when well cooked and thickened, is better without definite ointment present, or you can take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind it, and powder it with honey while it's still on the fire;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	Then glue it to a cloth and spread it over the chest, sometimes administering long-stemmed aristoloche and roots of celestial lily, which is like flour from vetch and centaury;
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	And make use of it with simple or composite medicines:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	Grind them, make powder from it, put on the honey I mentioned earlier, then apply it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and if the wound is long, and not cured by this treatment, then know that corruption has reached deep, and caused pressure on the bone, or hard tissue, or ligaments.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the treatment of the fistula wound, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of the abscess under the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	A panari is an abscess that arises beneath the fingernail or toenail of the hand or foot, or it may arise in other areas.
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and when it is neglected and not treated, an acute abscess develops, spreading pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and may even destroy the entire nail.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and it causes corrosion down to the bone, resulting in a foul-smelling pain, and the head of the finger or toe becomes enlarged, with a purple colour.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the classification, and the treatment does not improve its condition, then you must cut away all that which remains of the nail with an iron instrument, and afterwards cauterise the wound.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cauterizations are a great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is sound.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	And if the nail presses against the flesh, and begins to pierce it, wounding it, you must place a needle under the nail that is piercing the flesh, pushing it upwards, and carefully and gently cut away this flesh, then apply burning and corrosive medicines to the remaining flesh to remove all of it.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corruption has reached the bone, cut it away, and pull hard, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, healing is not possible.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you see the finger is corrupted, cut it away from us, as it is said before, then treat until it is healed.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if he is wounded, and kicked, and feels great pain, then you must first treat him with a cautery.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	cut the nail with a sharp spatula by slicing across it, and ensure that the cut does not go all the way through to the flesh beneath the nail, as the patient would feel too much pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, apply something that soothes it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of the wrist joint of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two extra fingers that grow in some people's hands may be very fleshy, and sometimes there is also bone, and occasionally they have nails, and any of these can appear at the root of the knuckle or on various parts of the hand.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	Those who are born with a stiff finger cannot move it, but those who are born with a bend in the finger might be able to move it.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	For someone who is fleshy, the cut should be light in this way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cut it at its root with a wide spatule.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	He who is born in the root of the joint is difficult to treat:
si te tien dou coper.	So you must be careful when cutting.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For the one that grows in the back of the hand, you must first cut away the surrounding flesh down to the bone, then cut out the bone with an appropriate saw, and treat it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The swellings that come to the fingers together come through birth, or by sudden wounding, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	Thus it is necessary that you cut that suture so that they may heal according to their natural shapes;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two tents or dampened cloths with rose oil so that they do not stick together;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Or you place between two pieces of fine lead until the flesh is sutured as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If swelling comes to anyone's palm of the hand, cut this suture as is necessary.
des vils	weakly.
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Veins are open wounds filled with melancholy humours that come from many parts of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and it happens more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Thus you must administer to him sometimes purging of bile, and then heal with holy water.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The treatment with iron is according to two methods:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	one is that they cauterize it, and draw out the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other method is that you raise the vein and draw all of it out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The incision is according to this method:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	First immerse the leg in very hot water until the thick blood becomes thin, then raise the patient's leg from above the thigh to below the knee.
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then cut the vein in one place, or two or three places with a wide incision, then raise and draw out the black blood by hand, from one end to the other, until enough blood has come out according to the condition of the patient.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	And then let it settle, and instruct them to refrain from meat, consuming only black bile.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	Start the evacuation and incision again when the veins are full, causing harm to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The remedies for this are as follows:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Spread the patient's leg, if it is hairy, then immerse in a bath and bathe the leg with hot water until it turns red and the veins swell.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you have no bath, heat it by the fire instead and then cover the area above the vein from the knee to the head of the leg or underneath the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then work the skin with an unciner, and flay the vein from each side, until it appears when you touch it.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and you see it red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	then push the vein aside, until it is raised from the skin, and then cut it with an unciner lightly, then cauterize in another place above by three fingers.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then flay the skin above the vein until it appears, then raise it with a hook, as you have done, and cut it with another unciner, as you did before.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	then make another cut, or more if you need to, then raise it and cut it with the finger of your foot, then pull it and lift it up until you reach the second cut.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then extract [the wound] layer by layer until it is completely clean, then treat it.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And if you cannot treat it and lift [the skin], insert a needle through the whole length with strong double thread, tie and pull it, place some beneath the line, turn your hand on either side until there is none left;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	Be careful that it does not split, because if it splits you cannot treat nor lift [the skin], and this harms the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	And when you have treated the whole [wound], place on it moist wool soaked in wine and rose oil.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the vein is constricted and twisted and wound together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly, but do not sever it.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	draw it out as we have mentioned before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron with which one cuts the vein is curved, and it does not slice but rather divides the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it is of thick curvature, for if it were fine, it would cut the vein; but let it be large as we have said, and this is its form:
de la voinne civile	Of the civil vein.
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is entwined in the legs, in warm parts of the body where no grass or tree grows and on land that has no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	And perhaps it arises elsewhere other than in the legs, and this occurs due to decay that comes from beneath the skin, just as serpents and worms arise within the body, engendered between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the sign of the beginning of this vein is that a great inflammation comes to the leg, then its color changes, and the vein starts to protrude outwardly, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the wound opens, you must wrap around it a piece of lead measuring one and a half to two inches, tie it there, and leave the lead hanging from the leg. Every time exudate forms outside [the wound], rewrap it with the lead and retie it.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	And if it is too long [i.e., the exudate], cut away a part of it and rewrap with the remainder, but do not cut it at its root so that all comes out.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	For if you cut it [i.e., the exudate], it will sink back into the flesh, causing an abscess and decay in that place, as well as a bad disease.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	For this reason, it is necessary for it to be treated piece by piece up until the head, and not leave anything on the body.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	And sometimes this vein, when treated, measures five palms in length, or ten, and a man came to me whose vein emerged measuring ten palms long, and when you cut it, it ejects one ray of blood through an opening, and pierces down to the bottom, so that all comes out.
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	The matter inside it should be evacuated, and medicine promoting growth applied for several days, then treat it like an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And sometimes this vein is very narrow, especially when it appears at the ankle joint or foot, and a lot comes out through the opening, so that one should not cut it.
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Cure it therefore as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Worms that are born between the skin and flesh.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called 'ox disease' in our land, as it often occurs in oxen, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, moving throughout the body up and down, and one can feel its movement from member to member until it tears through the skin where it was, and dies.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	And it is bred from the corruption of certain humours, just as worms, snakes, flatworms and Ascaris in the belly come about.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	And one doubts its maliciousness because when it moves through the body and reaches the head, and then enters the eye, it may destroy it.
et ceu avient maintes fois.	And this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it being cured and treated, one cannot resist but when it is seen:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	one must therefore bind the place above and below with a strong tight bond, then press upon it and treat it forcefully, and if the pus is perfect within the flesh, and you do not find it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm that it does is to run into the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming towards the eye or head near to it, then tightly hold underneath it the brow firmly, then press upon it, and treat it forcefully;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	And you must use purging of the body with laxative medicine to remove harmful humours and avoid eating meats that cause putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that arises from windiness.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This illness is called 'vakirir' in our land, it is a pain that afflicts certain limbs and can move from limb to limb.
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	And I have seen what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to see a sick woman, she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	And soon after, I saw it rise up towards the shoulder like a worm, more than anything else, like quicksilver when it flows from one place to another.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	The pain departs from that place, and settles in the shoulder, then spreads throughout the body, eventually reaching the other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	It then returned again around the body, as I witnessed it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was amazed at how it moved from limb to limb as I had never seen this illness behave in such a way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	Nevertheless, I had heard that many desired to move the pain from one place to another, but I never believed it until I saw it in this woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	And I thought it was because the woman had a slender body and her veins were exposed, which made this trapped wind visible.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	And it does not appear according to this reasoning for those who are delicate and have moist bodies and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you wish to treat this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said, bind it above and below tightly, then apply pressure until that windiness is forced back into place;
et cauterize le leu;	burn the area with a cautery;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you cannot see it with your own eyes, treat it as if raising blisters, using foul-smelling pills, such as those made from serpent's flesh, and similar others.
des saiettes	Of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and the parts of the body they pierce.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	Their variations include some with large points, others small, some are hairy, while yet others are smooth.
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and among them are those with two corners, some that have tongues, while yet others consist of multiple parts.
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and this which falls on any limb falls according to two manners:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or in the principal member it begins, like the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls then in any place of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you hereafter, appears to you:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	you should be wary of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes after in many situations;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this evil sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then draw it out, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of the brain, when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and if it touches the substance that is above the brain, is when there is darkness and stiffness in the eyes, and swelling and redness of eyelids, and inflammation and redness of tongue, and spasms and loss of understanding, and vomiting bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	And perhaps it exits without fire from the nostrils or the ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps loses speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and jumps out white moist wound looking like pulsation, and also comes out like burnt flesh;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if these signs appear to you, attend the treatment, and draw out the arrow if it is embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The signs of the arrow when it strikes the heart are that it is close to the left nipple, and it feels as if it were stuck in a hard object, not empty.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and perhaps the arrow moves like a pulse, and black blood flows out, and coldness and cold sweat come, and syncope.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Know therefore without doubt that death descends.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign that the arrowhead has not pierced the lung is when there is no foam-free discharge from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's complexion changes, and they breathe heavily and seek cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrow falls into the covering of the abdomen, it is near the small ribs;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	It causes great pain and great difficulty breathing;
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And all the limbs of the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrowhead falls onto the stomach, perhaps something undigested of the meat comes out through the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrowhead falls onto the belly, and no excrement comes out through the rectum, there is no hope in its treatment or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, the urine jumps out and flows freely, and the patient feels intense pain;
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	Know that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, like the arm and collar bone, throat, shoulder, scapula, spine of the back, ribs, thigh, and legs; these limbs are protected according to many precautions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or artery and it is not poisoned, as I will tell you happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to one man that an arrow fell on his neck into the root of the nose;
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and I treated it from underneath the ear fat, and she was healed without numbness.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And in the game I extracted an arrow that had fallen into the fatty tissue of the eye beneath the conjunctiva below it. The arrowhead was embedded and could only be reached by its point towards the shaft, and the arrow itself was as long as a Turkish bow, with a light iron tip without barbs;
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	The eye healed, and no ill consequences befell it.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And I extracted an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with barbs;
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I loosened the barbs, and manipulated it enough to extract it, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I drew out an arrow from a man, which was lodged in his stomach or abdomen, and I thought he would die.
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and after thirty days had passed, it did not change its condition;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut above the arrow, manipulated it, and drew it out with force, and there was no ill effect.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a man who has an arrow that fell on his back, and the wound is closed over;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and the arrow remains inside him, and it does not alter his natural condition nor cause any harm to his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And you see another man, who has an arrow that fell on his face, and the wound is closed over;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and he remained thus without suffering great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many others of the same kind.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And draw out an arrow from the prince's nose that was lodged in it, and it had slightly inclined to the right side;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the arrow was entirely bent.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called to treat it after it had been lodged there for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound to be very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I searched carefully throughout the entire nose, but did not feel it.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt a pricking sensation and pain beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was due to the point of the arrowhead. I applied an attractive and digestive poultice over the spot so that the flesh would not swell;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	And the shaft of the arrow appeared to me.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I put the plaster on immediately, and the wound healed quickly, but the patient remained ill for a long time, until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose.
et il le me dist.	And he told me about it.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I applied a corrosive ointment to the wound immediately, until it opened up, and I probed it, feeling the tip of the arrow as it emerged.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	Then I inserted a probe into the wound using that corrosive ointment, until the tip of the arrow became clearly visible.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	Over the course of four months, I gradually widened the end of the arrow until it protruded sufficiently from the wound for me to grasp with a pair of tongs, and I pulled it out bit by bit, but it would not come free.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	Then do not cease to refine and devise ways of instruments, until I took it one day with well-made forceps, according to that which its form will come in the end of this chapter, so that I drew it out, and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the surgeons judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was healed entirely.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	Now I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you put your care into what I do not say, because the book cannot possibly cover everything;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	But the wise masters know well very little about great things, and on what is presented to them and lacking, find new work, and a new instrument, for the understanding of strange occurrences which happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows exit from members where they are stuck by two manners.
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or through the place where they enter, or through another part.
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and the one that jumps out through where it enters, is an arrow penetrating fleshy parts, and sometimes must be removed immediately.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not need to be removed right away, leave it there until the flesh around it is rotten and the exit path has been prepared.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and also if it is lodged in the bone and cannot exit, you leave it there for a few days and move it every day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it will jump out, and if not, you must pierce around with an awl until the surrounding place is enlarged, and then draw it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the head and goes right up to one of the brain's ventricles, and some of the accidents I mentioned appear in the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If you do not extract it but leave it there until the swelling becomes equal after a few days, for if the arrow reaches the surface layer of bone, this means death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not stuck solely in the bone and does not reach the surface, and the patient remains free of any ill effects for several days, then devise a means to extract it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is deeply lodged in this way and cannot be removed outwardly, then you administer theriacs all around as I have told you.
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the place until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is embedded in the body but cannot be seen, then probe all over it with a small stick.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	And if you feel it, pull it out with any suitable instrument.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	And if you cannot do so because of the tightness of the wound, and the depth of the arrowhead, and there is no bone, nerve or vein involved, then cut until the wound is large.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	Pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs that hold it in place, remove the flesh that is attached to it on both sides as best you can, then break or bend the barbs so you can pull it free.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	Be careful not to break the arrow as this would make its removal more difficult.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, leave it until the surrounding tissue is rotten, then pull it out, for its extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the flow of blood opposes you, so administer that which we have said about wound treatment in this chapter.
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	And beware of incising the nerve and opening a vein, and set up means by which you may extract the arrow without danger, either soon or later, firmly or gently.
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	Place the patient according to the position they were in when the arrow struck them, for this is the greatest help that there can be; and if you cannot do so, then place him as indicated by the signs which the wound reveals.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	An arrow which has entered from elsewhere or where nothing of it appears but the skin is swollen there if one sees or feels anything at all beneath:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	Make an incision above it until the forceps will grasp it, then extract it.
si saut fuer maintenant.	If it should spring away now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, then turn your hand roundly until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if she cannot exit, leave her be for now, then resume extraction until it's complete.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if the arrow is in her bone, push it through the entire shaft.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if the arrow is stuck, and you wish to administer pushing, provide a pointed instrument so that the tip of the arrow enters the hollow of the tool.
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	then push it through thoroughly, and if the arrow is hollow, insert the pointed instrument within to ease its removal.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is poisoned, you must cut away all the flesh around it if you can, then treat the wound as necessary.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow is stuck in her chest or belly or bladder or side and it's close to the surface and you can cut there, then cut.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	And guard yourself from cutting the vein and nerve, then extract it, and finally stitch up the wound if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	until the treatment is clean.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the pincers used to extract arrows resembles the beak of a bird, as you see here: [image]
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are many ways to do this.
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	large, medium, and small, according to the amount of arrowhead.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the wooden wedge is also like a bird's feather, to push against the tip of the arrow, as shown here in this image: [image]
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the pincers for extracting and probing is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	Veins of the body common to all.
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	There are thirty-one veins from which one can be cured, of which sixteen are in the head, namely:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	Two "herbech" arteries located behind the ears;
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the two visible temporal arteries;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	And two veins which are in the two eyelids, which are called 'spirals';
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is at the back of the nose;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two glands which are on the neck;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins which are on the upper lips of the mouth, and these are called 'circles';
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the two veins which are underneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins that we commonly heal are five in each arm;
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	One is the cephalic vein, which is on the left side, and laymen call it 'the head vein';
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	The means is called "faste", and it consists of the cephalic and basilic [veins], which lay people call the "heart vein".
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	And the basilic vein is found on the right side, and lay people call it the "abdominal vein", and it lies above the muscle, and it is through this that one is healed, as it clearly appears near the armpit.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	The cephalic vein is the one that lies between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches.
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	In the leg and foot there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	One is located beneath the arch of the left foot, and the second is the saphenous vein which is at the right ankle;
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein which is called "nesse", that is in the ankle on the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg there are three veins beneath those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The bleeding of the veins that are behind the ears helps with chronic colds and headaches.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	and the quality of bleeding is such that you raise the patient's head and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth.
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	then hold the patient's neck with a strap so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the head.
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	close your fingers to your thumb, and where you feel the pulse under your finger, make an incision there.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	Then take the lancet and insert it beneath the vein until you reach bone. Then lift your hand so that all of the vein upstream is exposed. Cut through both skin and vein in one incision across two fingers' breadth, and allow blood to flow freely as long as you wish.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then restrain it and bind it tight until it is healed.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	I have already mentioned the incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The bleeding of the two arteries that are in the two temples is beneficial for long-lasting migraines, persistent eye infections and acute watering of the eyes.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	The quality of bleeding should be as follows:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	And let the patient strain their neck until the two veins are clearly visible.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	He will feel the pulse below your thumb, and then make an incision there.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	Then place your heart over the vein above your index finger, push the lancet underneath and lift up the vein and skin as you did with the other two veins, and let the blood flow according to your needs.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then release the patient's arm and place your finger over the vein for an hour before covering it with cotton.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And then bind it tightly, leaving it like this until it is healed.
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	We have already spoken of their cutting and extraction at the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The bleeding of the vein on the forehead is just as valuable as the bleeding of the cerebral [vein] for ancient diseases of the face and for migraine and redness.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and its quality is that the patient strains their neck by twisting it so much that the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument which is called 'fosseur', of which this is the form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point on the vein, and press down with your hand or another object, and let out as much blood as you wish;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then release the patient's neck, and bind the vein so that it is secure but not too tight, without constricting the entire hand at once.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	However, the flames must not be too sharp;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	And let the wound be crooked, for the bone is close by, and perhaps it will break the flame if it is delicate.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The bleeding of the two veins that are in the temples aids the eyes, and treats inflammation, redness, and swelling in the eye, as well as diseases of the face.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the quality of their bleeding is such that the patient stretches their neck by twisting with a cord, as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then wound it, and let the wound be transverse, slightly shorter than the length of the flame, and somewhat wide, for there is no flesh there.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flame is delicate, perhaps it breaks;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	Then drain out the blood until you have what you need, then bind it with cotton, and wrap it tightly.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	Opening the vein in the nose is good for fever, sudden headache, and illnesses of the face such as migraine and facial redness, especially when it is long-lasting.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	And the quality of this bloodletting is that the patient should stiffen their neck, then strain their nose with your left hand, and take the delicate long flame, inserting it between the two nostrils where the vein does not open fully, and the blood will begin to flow.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not go too deep, let the blood flow according to your need, then leave it for a night, for it is quickly restored;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The bleeding of the two arteries helps with narrowing the throat, and in beginning of inflammation, and in many diseases, and impetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and tumors;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the bleeding is that the patient stretches their neck beneath one another, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	and let the masters be above the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a chair, then bleed the vein from the long side a little broadly, then draw out blood temperately, or as much as is necessary;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	Then remake it on the other vein, untie the bandage, and hold all the veins moderately, so that the patient does not suffocate.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and leave it until morning, for the wound to heal.
de la sainie des leivres	The bleeding of the lips
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The bleeding of veins on the upper lip helps with glue in the mouth and gum corruption, and fissures of lips and nose and around it.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the qualities of the healing process require you to have the patient sit before you, and hold their neck as I said.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	Then turn the lip and look at the two veins, one is on the right lip, and the other is on the left; they can be recognized by being darker in color and having small dark veins around them.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	Treat both of them and if you cannot recognize or are in doubt about which to treat, then cauterize the larger one on each side; do this also for the two veins that are above and below as it is a similar process.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	Of bleeding under the tongue.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The bleeding of veins below the tongue is aided after the bleeding of the cephalic vein, and it helps with narrowing in the throat, and diseases of the eye, and mouth ailments.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the qualities of the bleeder are such that the patient knows to place their hands in front of the sun, and lift their tongue, and look beneath each side for a dark vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	bleed one and the other, but do not go too deep, for beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the neck that are commonly bled are bled in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	where they are pierced with a very sharp, wide-mouthed lancet or a subtle olivewood one as keen blades, and it is called "anesil".
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	And they are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of Martin's flame is very renowned, and it is so wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open up narrow veins filled with dense, visible blood, and those that contain thick and cloudy blood;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the form of the olive-shaped flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	it is more pointed and slender, and it is for bleeding the delicate veins where there is thin yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The bleeding of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, aids in treating diseases below the throat, and in the neck, chest, and abdomen;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And the bleeder must bleed gently, being careful of the artery underneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he strikes the artery, causing blood to flow out, it must be stanched as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And one must not pinch the flame, but cut it like a thread.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilic vein does not open clearly, you must remove it, and change to another one.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	Or if you desire any ray of it, or you heal in its place the vein among the arm:
elle apert manifestement;	It opens clearly
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And apply the flame to the thread, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you wish to know the place of incision, it is necessary that you first pull out the arm, until you touch the site so that you recognize the pulse.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	Sign the place of incision, then bind the arm, and open the vein below with a knife.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	Be careful not to wound the artery when you see the place swell, for that is the artery.
eschui la donques.	Avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it rise upwards like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from the artery.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hurry then, and press your finger there for some time, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, which often happens.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	If the arm is bound, leave it so, and do not move the patient's arm.
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And leave it to fear, and do not move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if the blood is not staunched, and you faint, and there are no medical professionals present, then cut the artery that is open, as it leads to the head.
et estainche li sans.	And staunch the blood.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a piece of fig bark, split it, then take one half and bind it firmly until the next day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	If the blood is staunched, that's good.
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If it is not, then treat as mentioned before with powders that staunch blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And the binding is not severe in many conditions due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm's ligament.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The bloodletting of the vein in the middle helps as it draws blood from both above the head and below the body, for it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	And the bloodletter must take care not to go too deep, lest they hit the nerve below, and if it is struck and swells, the bleeding will be severe, and perhaps they cannot stanch it;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	And this nerve often lies close to the surface, and if it does not appear in some people due to its subtlety, then you must bleed it with a slender instrument;
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	And avoid the nerve with your strength.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, make a long cut to open it.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The bleeding of the cephalic vein is beneficial, as it draws blood from the head and aids the eyes.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is necessary to bleed by piercing with an olive twig or a myrtle twig, for it is the safest of all veins, as it has neither nerve nor artery underneath.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, one must seek the lightest spot, and not do much harm if one misses the first time, and then begin again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And by chance the spot swells in some men when one misses the first time, but it does no harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of bleeding depends on your judgment.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you must know about bleeding is that it should not be used except to preserve health and prevent future illnesses.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	and let the incision be made on one of the three veins located at the elbow:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	that is to say, cephalic, median, and basilic;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and if one must bleed at the beginning of Lent, in autumn, and in winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	and one must bleed either the first or third day, two to three hours after midday.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The time for administering bleeding is not fixed but whenever required, day or night, at all hours and any time.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And one should not bleed children until they are fourteen years old, nor a pregnant woman within the first four months and up to seven months of pregnancy.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	They ought not to be bled who are aged over sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when someone wishes to be bled, in whatever manner it is done, one must first cleanse the bowels with a light clyster if there is an abundance of retained feces so that the veins do not draw harmful and superfluous waste from the intestines which are detrimental to the principal members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	One should not be bled if they are too full of meat or intoxicated until such time as these conditions have passed nor is it suitable for those who suffer from dropsy.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	And if one wishes to be bled after suffering from violent abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea, frequent intercourse, exertion or labor, lack of sleep and fasting and for those who have no strength left in them due to injury or illness...
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then subtly reduce the humours, if the blood is thick, through food, drink, and medicine, if you have the power.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	Then enter the bath, if nothing prevents it, to thin out the blood, and treat yourself for the pain around the third part of your body, as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	And protect yourself that day from work, exertion, lustfulness, and similar things.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	And remain still and cheerful, and have the surgeon stand higher than you when treating you, and rub your arm twice or thrice before he tightens the ligature moderately, for if it is too tight or narrow, blood cannot flow.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	And then you rub the place with your hands until the veins swell, and they can be felt.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	Then moisten the wound with a little old oil, and place your left index finger on that vein beneath the site, slightly higher than where you wish to make the incision, so as not to allow the blood to escape and cause failure in the procedure.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that flee like cords when incised, and for such cases which are full of windiness, so that when you place the knife upon them, it retracts from the flame and cannot open the vein, thus it is with these.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	And if you open the vein too much, then the wound is too narrow; for this reason, the surgeon must be mindful of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the wound opens up for the first time, it is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	If not, begin again somewhat below that place or above it, if the areas are not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the areas are swollen and the patient is afraid, leave it for one or two days and do not bind the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	Perhaps there will be hot abscesses arising from this situation.
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Do not enter the bath, then restart the incision if it pleases him.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	And if the hole is small and blood flows out delicately, causing you to doubt that it will not come out in sufficient quantity as desired, then press firmly on the same hole with all your flame.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	and work a little quickly, rather than when the flesh is swollen;
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the flesh swollen, do not reopen the wound, and put a little oil liniment on it, for it lightens the body of blood, and is soothing in this place where the oil belongs;
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and thus administer the oil liniment in every wound that you treat for veins, to staunch the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	and this same thing is astringent and bows when placed on the flesh;
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	so subtly does the blood separate and disperse when it is too profuse.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if a large abscess forms, which often happens, especially when there has been no previous bleeding other than the opening of the vein this time or the incision is small, you must act quickly and apply a sponge soaked in warm water and salt to the wound for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and after the bleeding from the vein has stopped, you should do this, and if it remains in place for a few days without any blackness or greenness appearing, then it will not harm them.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see this, apply something made from aloe or myrrh dissolved in calamint juice, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And often an abscess and appearance occur at the bleeding of the basilica:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	Put your hand on it, and if you find the place soft when compressed by the hand, that is a bad sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Therefore, ensure you do not put anything on it that we have mentioned, for perhaps the artery will burst.
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	But apply a dry poultice to harden the place, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	Draw out the blood according to its quantity and the colour of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red.
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	And if you see that it is thick, leave it so until it becomes thin.
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	And if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And for one who is full and strong, and needs bloodletting, make the wound larger, and let the flames be wide.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	For one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is suitable to bleed them often in small amounts, and you must bleed by slicing across, not pricking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this method of bleeding is safe from excessive blood loss and nerve damage, and it is better than bleeding lengthwise or widthwise.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And for one whose body needs bleeding, give them moist bread soaked in pomegranate juice.
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If they are hot-tempered, draw three or four times as much blood. If they have a cold constitution, feed them moist bread soaked in spiced syrup, either of mushed grapes or honey with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, well scented.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints during the operation after a great loss of blood, it is necessary that he inhales beef broth, and subtle scented syrup, and uses other things that we have mentioned in the division or chapter on syncope for venous evacuation.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to bleed out his arm, and operate another time, it is necessary that when he is weakened by great bleeding, he bleeds little by little according to the quantity of his strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if he wishes to bleed his arm after the first operation, and has a strong constitution, it is recommended that he bleeds seven hours after the first bleeding or after nine hours.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if he wishes to bleed from another part of the body, it must be done on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For he has much blood within his body which is already heated, and it causes fever.
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	If one must drain a large quantity, then the opening should be enlarged until it yields in padding.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	Then ensure all the conditions for healing are right, and place your hand on his pulse as he heals, so death does not come to the padding, and this happens many times when healers are neglectful.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	And it is not appropriate when you wish to release the arm, and make blood come out a second time, if the opening is closed, that you press heavily upon it.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	If he bends his arm, make him extend it forcefully, for this would be wrong.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	But leave it until it heals a second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	Where you prick it with the tip of a flame, until the frozen blood escapes from the vein, put on some wool soaked in warm water, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the wound is swollen, leave it alone and do not constrict it until the abscess subsides.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, then drain it from the same place, or from another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein between the arms is drained in place of the one on the head because it is composed [of two].
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the method of cauterization is for the patient to immerse their hand in hot water until the nails are red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then bind it gently so the vein appears clearly, then cauterize across its width, not from side to side nor lengthwise.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	And if the wound is wide and it must be cauterized close to the joint of the hand, and blood cannot escape, put the hand back in hot water and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	And if it is in summer, do not plunge the hand into warm water, for one plunges it more often during winter than in summer.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the incision of this vein is safer than all other veins as it has neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The incision of the basilica vein in the right hand is valuable for all ailments related to the liver, and this is how it should be done:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Immerse the hand, and plunge it into warm water until the vein becomes swollen so that it may be seen.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And if the incision is made lengthwise, and you cut across it completely, it will not cause any harm.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	And do not go too deep, for the nerves are all beneath, denuded of flesh, and then return the hand to warm water, if the blood is frozen in the wound, and cannot escape.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have bled from the blood as much as is necessary for you, put oil and linen on the vein to weld the wound, and do so with each ray.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The bleeding of the one on the left hand is beneficial for the disease of the spleen, and do everything just as I told you regarding the right [hand].
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The draining of the spleen is beneficial for all diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the womb, retention of urine, kidney disease, and similar ailments in the thighs and legs.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the quality of his cure is such that the patient soaks their foot in warm water and rubs it over the vein until it perishes, then binds it above the ankle.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and the vein is in the ankle, and from there up the leg it goes very much downhill;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	treat it then where the slope is steepest, or at the ankle, whichever moves better.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you treat it on the leg, beware of the nerves which are beneath, and treat it across as well, just like when cutting.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	And let the flame be gentle.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot escape, return the foot to the water, and let the vein empty completely.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if you miss the wound the first time, try again a little above it, for the skin is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do likewise for the other foot similarly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The skin of the sciatic vein is found at the back of the ankle, and its incision relieves pain in the hip when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the quality of his wound is such that the patient enters the bath, and presses down on the ankle for four days by twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open.
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	And if it opens, then treat the wound in all ways that you can, and traverse it.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And it is better to cut it, for the skin is salty, and it is very sensitive for most people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not find it, then press any point of his foot which protrudes at the back or towards the small toe, and be cautious of the nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	Make sure to remove any blood that is flowing until you see it stop, then untie the binding and apply cotton, pressing down on it.
ele est maintenant sanee.	She is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	Cupping incisions.
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Cups are made of horn, or brass, or glass.
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	And cupping is done in two ways.
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Either by wounding and drawing blood, or without wounding.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this cupping method that does not involve wounding is done in two ways.
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	Where there's fire, or without fire.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	and venting, which is done by striking and by bloodletting in fourteen places of the body, one being entirely at rest at the top - the head.
et li autres est emmi le col;	and another is midway on the neck;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and two others at either side of the collarbone;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the cupping glass below the chin;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the cups over both shoulders;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and cupping glasses on the hips;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and cups over both arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the cups for both legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the cups for both ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and cupping does not draw any blood, only taking small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and thus it does not weaken one at all, unlike bleeding of a vein;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it should not be administered, nor with fire or without fire, in any illness caused by overeating until the body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of illness cupping must be done, or for habit's sake, we administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or towards the end, and in between at any time;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	For there are those who, when they need to be cupped, have such heavy heads.
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	And for those who find fullness and redness in their face, head, neck, and darkening of the eyes.
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	And for those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, have swollen tongues, and spit up blood.
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And there are those who dream and see blood, wounds, death, and similar things during the night.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is towards the middle of the month, we order that they be cupped after three hours during the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	Bloodletting from the nose helps with the splitting headache that reaches the eyes, and it should not be done after evacuating all the body.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and this cupping is in place of bleeding from the head artery, and one must not use it for someone with a cold constitution or who has catarrh, as it causes them great harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and for this reason, one must not use it on the elderly or those with cold ailments in their head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who bleed often become forgetful, so the cupping glass should be placed a little lower due to the fear of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	Cupping in the middle of the neck is in place of bleeding from the head and basilic arteries, and for this reason, it aids in narrowing the chest, and in splitting the channel of the lungs, and in coughing, and in fullness.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it should be applied briefly, for if it holds too firmly, it causes loss of memory or stomach and heart problems.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The ventilation of the two collarbones is beneficial for head pains, eye ailments, migraines, choking sensations, tooth root pain, and it sits at the place where the basilic vein arises.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And you must instruct the patient to extend their arm fully for measurement, taking care not to constrict the artery and avoiding any excessive bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The ventilation below the chin is beneficial for mouth ailments, such as gum infections, and similar diseases that affect the oral cavity.
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	And it is located at the place where the veins of the two lips arise.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Ventousation of the shoulders helps with illnesses brought about by heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The ventilation of the armpits is just as valuable as that of the three veins of the arm, for it draws blood from those larger veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	And instruct the healer not to make it too perfect, for the bone is bare of flesh, and beneath are nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The cupping glass that is placed on the buttocks is useful for hemorrhoids of the anus and diseases below, and it must be large and made of brass, requiring good traction;
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	And perhaps, if it were thin, it would break;
et i fai grans plaies.	and it causes large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The cupping glasses on the legs heal evidently, for they draw blood from all over the body, and are useful for old pains of the kidneys, bladder, and uterus, and relieve flowers.
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and they are located at the two sophens, and the two ankles; yet they weaken the body over time, and bring about fainting in many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The way to apply the cup is as follows: place it first on an empty area, suck vigorously, put it quickly, move it evenly, and do not stop until you see the area turn red and swollen, and the redness of blood appears.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	then incise, and put back the cups, and take care with the condition of bodies, for there are those who have tough flesh, and clear pores.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	you should only strike once, and make large wounds, with deep punctures.
et suce legierement.	And suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice.
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	The first time to thin out the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the blood is very dense, it is necessary to strike a third time.
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And when we wish to draw out thick blood gradually, we only strike once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we want much blood, we often restart.
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And if the blood is dense, strike it thoroughly, and finish by piercing the heart suddenly; this is necessary for one who has thick and hard skin, and narrow veins, you must oil the cupping glasses with an aperitive and dissolving ointment.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	If it is linseed oil, violet oil, sweet almond oil or cucumber seed oil
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is to heal, use watercress oil, lily oil, chamomile oil or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of amaranth, or balm, or aniseed oil, and similar oils.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the wound has tender flesh and large pores, do not apply oil but wash it after the fomentation with rosewater, or cold water, or black nightshade water, or squash water, or china root water, or any similar solution.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And for those with excessive moisture, rise easily with myrtle water, or sumac water, and similar solutions.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have excessive swellings should rise with old wine, or an infusion of salt water, or a decoction of dill or chamomile, or other similar remedies.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	and it is not advisable to bloodlet with cupping before the bath or during the bath, but after the bath for one or two hours.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and one should not sleep after cupping therapy, it is necessary to stay awake both when one needs to be cupped and during the treatment itself.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And take care if the patient is choleric, and if their blood is too thin and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	they should eat cold things like pomegranates, endive, lettuce, and similar foods;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and eat small amounts of food, lean meat, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And for those with a cold constitution, take honey syrup and drink aromatic medium wine, which is neither old nor new, eat little, and consume small portions of food, small birds, and pigeons.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and on the day he is cupped, he must drink more than eat.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give some men treacle or musk once before or after the cupping to comfort their main limbs.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and let the blood be refined, but it is not appropriate for those who are hot to drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The cups that are applied without injury are those placed over the liver, and over the breast, podagra, and the abdomen, groin, kidneys, and hip, because these members cannot bear to be wounded there, nor is it done for anything but to draw blood from member to member, just as we put them on nipples when a child suckles;
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	to remove the viscosity from the member, just as we apply cups to the abdomen and groin to reduce the size of the member;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and it removes the pain when there is concretion or stone, as it perhaps extracts the concretion by its attractive virtue, or dislodges the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	And thus it does when applied over the liver and abdomen in cases of retained flatulence, these cups are administered empty to simply draw out.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	Sometimes they are administered with fire and sometimes filled with warm water, as in cases of pleurisy, and one may fill the cup with warm water alone or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The method of administering fire cupping is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	It is two fingers wide and half a palm deep with a small hole in the middle, large enough for a needle to pass through, and it is made of soft copper so as not to injure the patient when applied to the limb. 
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	And it has a metal bar running across the middle, either copper or iron, to hold a lit taper and there are various sizes of cups, large and small, depending on the illness and the constitution of those who use them. 
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For children's cupping glasses are different from those of adults, and those of thin people from those of fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And thus one should place this cupping glass on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	Take the candle of wax or tallow and place it inside the cupping glass through the hole that is in the glass, so that the flame is at the bottom of the glass and does not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	Then place it on the limb, with your fingers over the hole we mentioned, so that when you want to, you can let out the vapour, and remove the cupping glass.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And take the tallow again as before, and repeat this often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the cupping treatment administered for pleurisy, it is completely hollow and has no tube or opening, and it should only be applied when it is full of water, and placed directly on the affected limb.
et c’est li forme:	and its shape is thus:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Suction cups are not applied to any limb where one cannot place a cup due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	And on the bare skin of these places if any, such as fingers or toes, and other similar areas.
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	The quality of use is such that when you find suction cups filled with clean, odourless water, take them.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and place them overnight in fresh water until they are tender, and have nothing in their stomachs.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	then bleed the patient using veins and cups, then rub the limb until it is red, and apply leeches;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they become full and fall off, if it is a place where cups can be applied, apply them, because this is very beneficial afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, lift the area with ease, then water, very well, and then bandage it.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the area bleeds excessively after the application of leeches, dampen a linen cloth with cold water and place it on top until the bleeding stops.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the blood has multiplied, apply ground vitriol to warts or similar things, until it is dried out.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	where you place half of a peeled broad bean, leaving it until it dries up in the air will staunch the bleeding now.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you require more, take other leeches.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the leeches will not attach themselves, rub the place of fresh blood with a needle until blood appears and then put them on: immediately upon sensing the blood they will attach.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they are defecating, apply a powder of aloes and ground sel or ashes on them, and they will drop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here we have the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu'il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n'en lurent;
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason knowledge is lacking in our land, because I never found any good one;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing else except through the knowledge of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated patients and gained experience, and through the habits of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained within it, and abbreviated at the end, showing clearly the shapes of the instruments that are used, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is necessary then that we state in the prologue of this book the main points and the chapters where the sage puts his understanding, and remains focused on the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsion or breakage occurs to anyone, you must hasten to bleed the patient on both sides if nothing else prevents it, such as frailty of body, infants, or old age.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	Whether the weather is too hot, or far too cold;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	Eat cold foods, such as cold porridge and goat cheese, but avoid any wine or greasy meats. Do not overindulge in too much meat that fills the veins with blood until you are certain there is no risk of a hot abscess or spreading matter to the limb;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	If the patient relapses, return them to their initial management.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one feeds the patient with meats that have high nutritional value and are rich in fat, such as boiled wheat in water, rice, eggs, chicken feet, cow stomach, duck eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar foods.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For if too much nutrition is taken, the healing process can be hindered and the fracture may occur again sooner.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	Understand that broken bones in the elderly and frail cannot be properly reset or healed according to their natural drying process for limb recovery. Nor can those who are too young, such as small children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	But have no fear, reset over the broken bone with large clamps that grip and bring the limb together, so it is strong as before.
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And do not move it at all from its position, for this reason you must nourish with large pieces of meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from that of the arm, or the leg, and I shall tell you in this chapter all the ways fractures can occur.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is fracture that requires splinting, and another by sharpening, just like the cut of a quill to write.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if fracture with wound, and fracture with just a slight crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And for each method have its tools and proper instruments in the restoration, according to what memory brings to mind when needed.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	And the bone is known to be broken when it is twisted out of place and obvious from the outside, with a sound when pressed by hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	And when there is no twisting or sound upon touch, and the patient feels little pain, then there is likely no break.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but there may well be a twist, or a crack, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You must not move it by hand, but apply the medicines that follow here, and then hold it firmly yet gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the fracture which goes through lengthwise, and where the two parts are separated, they must now be put back together equally, otherwise hot abscesses will form there.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if hot abscesses do come about, leave them alone for one day until the abscess is calmed down;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then set it equal to the stumps that you can find lightly and cleanly, and know that its restoration is easier than those where parts are missing.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then hold it firmly, just as one should do afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if the bone is broken into pieces, stretch it out in two directions, whether it is an arm or foot, or with your hand if it's one of the smaller limbs, or with two cords, or with one cord and use your hand.
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	Place the limb according to its natural position, so that when the broken parts of the member are disjointed, you bring them together by all means possible towards their joints as much as you can, and be careful not to cause any injury or pain to the patient through your work.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	Adjust the two ends of the bones well according to their best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	Feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not yet aligned properly:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	If it heals well, and is not held too tight or pressed so much that causes hot abscesses and contractions in the limb as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is at the right stage, chastise the patient well so they do not move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, or turning around, or in any other way.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	Ensure that the limb is well secured so they feel no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when they feel no pain, it is not yet ready, and must be put in such a position that they do not feel any pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	And take care that it is put correctly, without any twisting when it is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	The qualities of the broken member are according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs vary in size, length, and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small members, such as arms, legs, and similar ones:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	you should wrap it in soft and fine linen cloths;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those that are larger, such as thighs and calves:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	you should wrap it in a wide and firm bandage because the broad bandages embrace the whole large member and hold it tightly from all sides so that there is no slack.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then bind it with light pads, three or four turns according to the member, and tighten your hand slightly over all the bandage then go above the break and tighten less so that the breakage can move a little away from the break.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the ligament little by little, so much that you grasp a large part of the healthy place, then take another ligament and turn again immediately onto the broken place.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then return to the lower part of the break and hold it moderately, neither too hard nor too soft, as we have said in the first passage above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	then place between the ligaments linen or soft cloth, so that it is all even, then tie everything above with a bandage, and put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or abscess, put on soothing hot poultices that reduce the abscess and the swelling, and leave them there for a few days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then strain it over your sieves, and let them be half of a thick cane cut carefully, or of the wood used to make handles, or of palm ribs, and let them be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the sieve one places over the broken bone be slightly larger and broader than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and also as long as it is necessary for the member, be it small or large;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then strain over the sieves just as you have done with the first layer, then bind above it with thread accordingly, just like in the first layer on the fracture;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	the narrower part is above, the wider below;
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and the thread must be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and it should be made of soft flax;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the thread is thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who make their bindings with twisted flax cords, and this is a great error, for the binding cannot be even if it is too fine, and it should not have more than two finger widths between each strand.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is injured by the bones of the stars after the restriction in their veins, place beneath them pads of linen or woolen dressings so they do not wound themselves.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by broken ribs, and the heart is ruptured, I will speak of its treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not fitting to reset all broken bones on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limb is large, it should not be bound with strands until after five or seven days, or more depending on your assessment of the severity of the abscess that has developed;
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	and here is the method of ancient poultices to restore fractures, dislocations, and sprains;
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and it is that you take flour that sticks to the walls of the mill, and mix it with an abundance of eggs, and make this mixture, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it; this is the common way of making a healing plaster for various fractures, especially for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another way of making a healing plaster for fractures, dislocations, and twists:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Take 1 lb of apricots, myrrh, nettle, galangal, asafoetida, and gum Arabic; then add 10 lbs.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	Myrrh and aloe, take 5 lbs.
alechil VIIII З.;	Alechil (an herb used for its medicinal properties), take 9 lbs.
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	et in powder form, and mix it with egg white;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	if the man's complexion is warm, then apply this plaster, for it has good ingredients and quickly restores broken bones, aiding many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another type of plaster that is useful for sprains:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	take mullein and viscum, 10 each;
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	myrrh and aloe, 9 each;
acaice VI З.;	acacia, 6;
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	armenian bole, 10; grind it well and mix with water or egg white, then apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another kind of poultice for joints and bones that have moved out of place, it soothes the emerging pain, softens hardened bone tissue, and treats fractures.
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take some new linen cloth, soak it in warm water and oil, and place it on the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not restore [the bone], but it is good to ease a hot abscess, and properly removes pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another type of poultice that restores broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dried fig leaves and earth-apple leaves, grind them together, and make a poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of a plaster for the restoration of bone fractures and to reduce the remainder of an abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take marshmallow root, chamomile, violets' flowers, vetches flour, of each one part;
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Grind them together, mix with wine, if the limb is hot, mix it with moist coriander water or plain water; and apply this.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another plaster method stronger than the first one for when a persistent abscess affects limb restoration.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	And grind it, and mix it with salt water, or fresh water, or wine, depending on the warmth of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates said in his book that one should not put a broken limb together to restore its strength with anything other than wax and oil; he also says it must be neither too soft nor hard but between the two.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to Galen that one must place on the broken limb, to restore, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another type of plaster that is effective for injury and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take mugwort and chopped men's hair, or bird feathers, and viscum, and mix them evenly with glue, then grind these into a plaster and bind it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then you must undo the binding a little after, taking care that the patient feels no pain and that the bone has not moved out of place.
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	Do not undo it by hand if dry.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the place or itching occurs, or swelling or restlessness is felt, then hasten and undo it now.
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	and take light fabric, and sea sponge moistened, immerse in water, then lift the area until itching ceases, and pain is soothed.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	then let the limb rest for an hour, then place dry wool soaked in water or rose oil above, and bind with linen, until you are sure the abscess is warm.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	and rest the inflamed limb, and pain should be gone, then resume gentle binding with a small amount of plaster, do not bind as tightly as before.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and gently until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess has drained and the redness, pain, and swelling have all gone, and you need to use poultices and bandages, then start it over again just as you did originally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if nothing comes to the limb as we have said, do not release it until after three or four or five or seven days.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And sometimes it is left for XX days, as seen, until the fracture heals, and the adjustment of the flesh approaches.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	Therefore, restrain it more than before, and thicken its meat, as I said earlier;
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	And if you see the place drying out more than necessary, know that no nourishment can come to it;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Moisten it with warm water each time you undo it, every third day, and loosen the binding slightly;
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	Through this treatment, nourishment is cut off to the limb, and amends the mistake of those foolish surgeons, who reset the limb crookedly;
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	This is harmful, and such work is fearful; I see no other option than to leave it and operate correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of the diverse manners of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many types of fractures exist, and they present in various forms; the causes are distinct.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	For there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, where the shaft pierces and removes all bone down to the soft tissue beneath the bone, just as an axe or wooden club would do.
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	And so this type of fracture is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	Where the sword chops the bone from above without piercing it, this type of fracture is called "absolute".
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	And there are wounds from these two types of fractures, large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is embedded impact, or cracks due to stone fragments, or falling on stones, or similar occurrences.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating fracture, which reaches the membrane beneath the bone or above it on the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound is as thin as a hair, responding to the bone with a small fracture, and thus it is called a "capillary" break.
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	and if the wound is made by a blow from stone or by falling, or any similar thing that drives bone inward, and its edges are split like those of cauldrons when hammerers strike them.
si entre li piere dedens.	if the stone enters within it.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more to those with moist or soft bones in the head, such as children's heads.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and it happens in all these types of fractures that small fragments are dislodged, like stars.
et je em parlerai en son leu.	And I will speak to him/her in his/her place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	We know all kinds of fractures through their deformity, and we inquire about them by touch, and from the corrupt flesh that is on top.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The resemblance of hair is understood by the fact that when you uncover the bone and rub it repeatedly, the black fracture appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In treating the fracture, take heed of the patient's symptoms, and if you see no ill symptom, such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, fainting, feverishness, chills, redness around the eyes, and other similar conditions in many cases, then it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you see no alarming symptom and expect recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the wound comes to you first, and it is in winter, you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day so that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the summer, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, lest the membrane beneath the bone become corrupted, and the accidents we have mentioned occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the bone fracture reaches the membrane that covers the brain, you must split the fractured part as follows:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and that you take the sick person's head without pity, and uncover the bone in every possible way, and over the wound's surface as gently as possible, and if bleeding occurs upon uncovering the bone or pus comes from the abscess, then there is help for what must be done, and it is necessary to fill the place with damp rags moistened in rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and let the wound rest until the abscess has healed, and be sure there is no further bleeding;
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	Then start by removing flesh around the bone, and this is done in two ways according to their work:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	One way is that you cut with a narrow incision in front, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then he makes another incision greater than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second way is that you make multiple different incisions, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, and made of hard iron:
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and you work lightly so as not to harm the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	If the bone is hard and strong, then you must drill around it rather than cutting into it with knives or iron rods, so as not to penetrate too far beyond the skull, and there should be a ridge or circle above the point, which stops the tip from passing through.
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and you must have several of these, so that each one comes into place according to the type of bone, so that you have drills for all your tests.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	and this is the form of the three types of drills:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The quality required to pierce around the broken bone is that you place one drill on the bone and turn it with your hands until you know that the bone has been pierced.
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	Then remove the drill slightly further away and repeat this process all around, then use the scalpels to cut the space of the bone that is between the perforations, doing so as finely and gently as you can, as we have said, until you extract the bone with your hand or any of the instruments such as forceps or pincers.
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	And make sure you do not touch the brain or the sciatic nerve.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced and treated the bone, it is necessary that you remove the remaining splinter with an instrument similar to a small scalpel, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other scalpels.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	And if there is any leftover small bone or scales, remove them lightly with one of the instruments.
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	Then treat the wound with tents and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	The other method of treatment is that which Galen describes, which is more gentle.
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And press it very firmly, for this is his instruction.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	You must first expose a part of the bone where the fracture appears, so that when you have uncovered this area, you will place underneath the head of this lens-shaped instrument; and here is its shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut on one side, as the blade is sharp on both sides, so that the cutting edges face towards the bone.
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	Then strike gently with a small mallet on top, so that you lightly chip away at the bone all around, and take great care of the membrane below.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is attached to the bone, remove it gently, as you can lift it without causing harm or fear of injury.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	Et if the bone fracture does not pierce through to the marrow, and the bone is merely cut above, with small pieces present, you must smooth out this roughness, and remove the scales with a fine rasp which you should have in varying quantities, to apply appropriately in each place according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Use large rasps first, then finer ones, and do not cease until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In each of the other hair-fine cuts and subtle fractures, you must adjust your approach according to its direction.
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	And this is something that cannot be fully answered by someone who has merely studied this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is uncovered, you must take a piece of linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, dampen it with rose oil, and place it on the wound.
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	then take another piece of cloth doubled over twice or three times, dampen it with wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth.
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	do this as lightly as you can to avoid damaging the wound, then apply another bandage on top without tightening it too much so that it only holds the cloths in place.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	leave it like this for one or two days until the abscess is cooled down, then remove the bandage and apply medicine such as lily roots, wheat flour, incense powder, aristologist remedies, and similar things.
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and of these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and administer it immediately with mild medicines without any biting;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	and ensure that the wound is always clean, leaving no ointment nor allowing any pus to accumulate, for when pus gathers on the brain membrane, it runs and putrefies, causing great harm to the patient;
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	for when you apply biting substances onto it, they corrode from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take heed therefore, if any bad accident befalls the patient, as we have said, it is undoubtedly doubtful.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if blackening appears only due to the medicine applied, and that it has such a property, you must take one part honey, three parts rose oil, and mix in a small piece of linen cloth, then place this onto the wound;
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let the physician proceed with treatments as necessary, until healing is complete.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Know that sometimes both parts of the collarbone are broken or just one, for there are two bones.
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	The broken end is cartilaginous and does not break further; it only becomes dislodged or twisted, then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	If one of the two parts is broken, you must insert your little finger into the collarbone's gap and align that break within your index finger so it fits snugly, then gently push from outside until the collarbone regains its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	Do this gently, and wait for the patient to indicate no pain from your treatment.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is above the nose and cannot be properly set with fingers alone, you must put a stick, slightly thicker than a finger, equal to the head of the shoulder bone.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the fracture is of two parts, make another just like it, and restore the first one as soon as possible on the same day, if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If not, after seven or ten days, when the hot abscess is pacified, then place on the head of the nose tented linen bandages if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Where you place another on the other side, if there is a fracture there;
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	And let the bandages be so thick that they fill the holes of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some restorers say that one must wet the bits of cloth with butter, changing them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It does not seem good to me, but they must be moistened with a mixture of egg white and flour paste;
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	Then let the tent remain, until the bone is hard, and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And sometimes goose quills are inserted in place of tents, and if there is soft cloth around it, and the fracture is held, and the patient blows through it.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	Or do as you wish.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses form in the nose while you are working, put some wax ointment or cotton moistened with rose oil, or a piece of diachylon there.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if no abscess forms there, apply an external plaster made of bran flour, incense powder, and egg white, then put on light dressings, but do not tie the quill.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	If the quill's fracture is small and broken into tiny pieces, extract them with suitable instruments for this purpose, then clean the wound, treat it with appropriate dressings and ointments, and apply plasters.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no wound within the nose, treat it with tents, and place thin planks of wood inside until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	From a fracture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is fractured sideways, and there are no external wounds, and the fracture is only outwards, without splitting it in two, unless the edges overlap slightly inside, one may easily detect this.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	You must, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your index finger into the patient's mouth;
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	And if the fracture is on the left jawbone, insert your right index finger and gently push the broken part inside, then adjust it with the other hand from outside, ensuring it is aligned.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jaw fracture is separated in two, you must administer traction on both sides until they are aligned.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	If there is movement or a crack in the teeth, secure them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk, then apply wax to the broken jawbone and cover it with a doubled piece of cloth.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	and place on the cloth a large well-made star or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jawbone, and tie it as firmly as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light meat dishes.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the shape changes, then untie it on the third day, and then reset what has changed.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	and put an ointment on top, made from mill dust with plenty of egg or sesame seed flour, after you have removed the crust.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	and put light woolen ointment on top, and if the ointments harden, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until he is healed.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	Many times it heals in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if a hot abscess arises, so treat it as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is a fracture with an accompanying wound, treat it as long as no part of the bone has been removed;
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	so delicately to remove it with appropriate instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Once you have removed all the displaced pieces and there are no remnants left, clean the wound, if it is wide, then apply suitable dressings to promote flesh growth until it heals.
de la forcele	Forceps.
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The forearm breaks in multiple places towards the front, near the shoulder, and this fracture occurs in three ways:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	Where it is broken and separated into two, with pieces, and this is the easiest to reset.
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	Or there is a fracture accompanied by a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the treatment is as follows when the fracture occurs without an accompanying wound: have two assistants where one holds the shoulder with the broken forearm while...
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and let the other stretch the neck towards the affected part;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then place your two hands evenly on the fracture, so that its shape is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor conclusion (to it).
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you need to further extend it, place under the patient's shoulder a round sphere of cloth or wool, and let its size be according to your need;
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	stretch and lift the arm, holding the sphere in your hand, so that you can evenly place the fracture as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the bone out because it is too deep, due to that reason, the patient must often lie on their back, and place a medium-sized pillow beneath their shoulder, and have your assistants push the shoulder downwards so that the bone of the fracture is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	Then adjust the fracture with your two hands, and if you find it misaligned, you must cut above it.
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	And draw the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join due to any obstruction, then cut it with one of your incising tools.
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but apply the force beneath this instrument to secure the skin flap.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and it resembles a spoon, without teeth, and is as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work.
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and have two heads, as you can see, with one wide and the other narrow, just like the gap in the wound that was created when you drew out the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are confident of a hot abscess, cauterize the wound, and if the gap is small or you suspect a hot abscess, fill the wound with lint and tents according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if a warm abscess appears, dampen a cloth with rose oil and vinegar and wine, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The tightening of the bone, when it is without wounds and uncut, is that you place on the bone a plaster made with mill powder and egg white, and put light dressings on top, and place a sphere beneath the pillow if you need to.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	Then take a very wide bandage, one palm-width in width, then place two layers of cloth on the dressings and plaster.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a slender stick three fingers in width and length, and wrap it around the bandage so that the end of the bandage hangs.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	Place the stick over the fracture, and wind the bandage around the neck, beneath the healthy shoulder, and underneath the injured shoulder.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and reset each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the fracture properly, and you clearly see that the marrow has not moved from above the broken bone, then encourage it every day, and when the ligaments loosen, restrain them again.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	and make the patient lie on their back, and place a small pillow under their shoulder when they sleep, to raise the shoulder upwards.
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	this lightens the fracture of the collarbone due to the alignment of the shoulder, or you bind their arm to the neck and do not release it unless some unfortunate event happens until 20 days pass.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	then reapply the plaster if you see that it is necessary, and restrain them again, leaving them in this way until they are healed.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	And it is restored most often within twenty-eight days, and less for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	For a broken shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	Soon it happens that the shoulder dislocates from its wide or middle position, and is not set back into place through touch alone;
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	If you fix it according to the shape of its break, and reset it following its natural form, in any way that you can;
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	Then put on the place powder of mill with abundance of egg, and light tapestries, and place over it a double cloth;
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	Then place on top a wide and thin pillow, slightly wider than the shoulder, and if there is thinning of the pillow in any part of the shoulder, fill it with flax tapestries so that the pillow remains even;
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	And then hold it firmly with a large bandage all around, so that the star cannot move from its place, and check the binding each day.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	And every time it softens, bind it again, and keep the star level if it has moved from its place, and have the patient lie on their side.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	And the shoulder is healed in twenty or twenty-five days.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when this number of days is complete, you may unbind it, and be certain, for it is not light bone that moves easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a fragment of the bone protrudes before and pierces beneath the heart, they should do as follows: remove it and treat any abscess with cauterization, as we have mentioned for fractures previously.
de la brisure dou pis	Of the fracture of the humerus...
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The foot is sometimes broken in half, but this occurs rarely.
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	But it often breaks at the outer edge.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it bends downwards and causes great pain for the patient due to a lack of alignment, resulting in shaking and trembling movements. Sometimes they vomit blood and one can see the ends of the bone through the skin, which indicates a severe fracture.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is such that the patient often lies on their back, and you place a cushion between their shoulders, then press the shoulders, and bring together the sides of the two ribs with your hands, and carefully align it evenly in every way possible, until the bone structure is as it should be;
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	Then apply plaster and fine cotton wool soaked in thin brine of salt, or another light wood, and wrap it with a cloth, binding it to the broken bone so that it does not move;
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	And wrap the bandage around the back in a circular motion, tightening it gently, and loosen and retighten every hour, if it softens, then tighten again;
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	And if it needs to be released due to corrosion or itching that arises in the place, or pain or abscess, hasten and release it, remove the plaster, and address what has come up regarding treatment methods.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then reapply the plaster, and hold it tight until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	Of broken ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Know that the rib fracture occurs only in the thick part behind the back and at the head inside, and it bends only because they are fragile.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	And one feels it well during examination with the fingers.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatment is that you set the break evenly, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the plaster, and restrain with a splint if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the rib fracture tilts inwards, the patient feels great pain and stabbing, like a stitch, as the bone pierces the membrane.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And it causes severe pain, with violent vomiting of large clumps of blood, which is an immediate danger; the old people have applied great remedies.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And there are some who say it is necessary to administer foods that bloat the belly in order to push the rupture outward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this unless heat has already come to the abscess.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has, then drain it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And some of you may say to put cups on the spot to suck strongly, and this seems reasonable;
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	However, there is doubt that the cup will draw out excess humours to the spot due to its weak suction.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some of you say to cover the site with damp wool in warm oil, and put tents between the ribs to make even the length around, then be cured by the treatment for pleurisy, food, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear due to the bone pressing against the tissue, and there is doubt in the patient's mind, then it is necessary to make an incision over the location of the broken rib, and one must place an instrument beneath to protect the lung.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then one must cut the bone, and pull it gently, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if hot abscesses develop, apply moist rags soaked in rose oil on the affected area.
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat the area prone to abscesses regularly, ensuring it lies constantly on its side where necessary until it heals.
de la brisure dou col	Regarding the broken neck...
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Sometimes there is a fracture in the bones of the neck, and this may cause it to bend.
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	And also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you wish to know if they will heal or not, take note: if you see their hands become soft, swollen, and lifeless, unable to move or stretch, and when pricked with a needle, there is no sensation.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is deadly in many positions, and if they feel better when you move them and apply pressure, know that the bone's socket is saved, and the patient can be cured with proper treatment.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	If a similar issue arises in the spine of the back and you wish to ascertain whether it is healed or not, observe if the feet are weakened, and if there are accidents involving the hands, and on the back watch for windiness and involuntary defecation.
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And when he has been placed supine on his belly, there is involuntary defecation.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is reminded of it on his back and wants to mount, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Know that it is deadly:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	if you do not treat it well.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if these accidents do not befall him, then the matter is more trivial.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the treatment is that you spread on it warm oil of roses or yolk of egg, until it is soothed;
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	Then apply one of the soothing and drying plasters, bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest;
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And let him not sleep on that part of his body where he feels pain, until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bone becomes dislodged, it is necessary to cut above the heart.
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then treat it with ointment and freshen the flesh until it heals.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the 'head of the cow', push it with your left hand's palm until it is level with the other hand's power, then apply a plaster and a bandage over it, if you need to.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then restrain it, and if there is any dislodged bone inside, take it out through the wound, then treat the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the broken hip bone.
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	Sometimes it happens that the hip bone is broken, and if so, there is no great diminution at the head.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	and while it is long, and bent backwards, and comes to the patient pain in place, and pricking, and swelling where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the restoration is such that you extend your hand over it, so that you are above the break;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and feel where the fracture is and what its shape is;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	and if the fracture is at the head only, make this fracture even, so that it has its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is lengthwise or inclines inward, then make the patient lie on their belly so that you can see this break clearly to restore it.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have made it even, put on an emplastron, then place a stick of wood or heartwood over it, and bind the fracture so that it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and place the space under the ribs, so that the strap is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if hot abscesses arise there, do not touch them until the hot abscesses are soothed, and apply what we have previously mentioned.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	then return to the restoration, and hold it as necessary, if there is no bad incident;
et c’est li maniere.	and this is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	On the fracture of the shoulder.
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The assistants are those located between the armpit and the top of the shoulder, and if they are broken, one must restore them according to one of two methods:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	one of which is that you take one wooden rod with an average thickness, according to this shape:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	Et tie the two shoulders with two bindings, lift them upwards, and place the patient on a seat.
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	Then throw the broken arm onto the wood until it reaches the armpit, and place in the middle a curved piece of wood, then lift something heavy where the ministers extend downwards.
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Then place the splint so that it breaks evenly with their hands together, until the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	The other method is to lift the patient onto their back and bind their hand to their neck; command two assistants to hold what is above the break with their hands joined together, while another holds below at all points of the binding, stretching each part as required.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is stronger, tighten the cord below the fracture, and above it, and extend each of the assistants to their respective positions.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the break is close to the head of the shoulder, you should place one binding underneath the armpit, and the other towards the neck, underneath the splint.
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	Also, if the break is towards the neck, you should place one binding lightly and without force, so that the splint sits evenly on the spot and against the neck.
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then set the fracture evenly as it ought to be, holding it still if no abscesses come about.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if abscesses do appear, don't hold it still for seven days, and apply moist woolen cloth with rose oil until the abscesses are soothed.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	Then hold it still again, and the way to do so is to place a poultice on the fracture, then bring the arm over the shoulder, and put your hand on their shoulder or chest.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And wrap it with a cloth, holding it still over the shoulder and arm so that the arm is held in place like a star, unless something prevents this or if the bone is displaced.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone will move, use splints, and place a larger and stronger splint over the fracture, allowing one finger width of space between each splint, and let each splint be large enough to extend three fingers on either side of the break.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	Then tighten the splints on top of one another, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter about fractures, tightening them more firmly and less loosely.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the placement of the splints and their tightness, as we have said, during the work of restoring the broken limb, and you suspect an abscess may form due to heat, leave it bound until the seventh day, just as we mentioned.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	Then inspect every three days the bandage, that no itching or swelling may arise in the place, nor nourishment come to the member because it is too narrow.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the treatment succeeds, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if none of these accidents occur, do not remove the bandage until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back with their hands resting on their stomach.
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	place under the shoulder a cushion filled with wool evenly, and check every hour during the day or night, that the shape of the broken limb does not change, nor the bandage become loose.
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	if it succeeds due to the virtue of medicine, give them the diet we previously mentioned, ensuring that their food is very refined.
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when it begins to recover, let it be big.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	It is customary that the shoulder and leg should be treated within forty days overall;
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	and then it must be loosened and administered with baths and medicinal ointments to correct the position.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the dislocation is bad and tight, it may take one day or two months to loosen.
de la brisure du bras	Of arm fractures:
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscile," and one is small, being the bone that follows the wrist.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other one is large, which is below towards the little finger.
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	Should the large "foscile" bone break alone or just the small one, or perhaps they both break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small bones are broken, restoration is easy, and healing occurs quickly.
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	And when the large bones break, healing is more difficult, and the injury is graver than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small bone that is broken, you should slightly extend it and set it evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	If it's a large bone, you must extract it with greater force.
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	Place them on a cushion and hold the wrist of their hand higher than the others, with their little finger lower than the other fingers. Have the patient cross themselves over, and place a cushion in front of them higher than they are to prevent any strain or discomfort.
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	Then have your assistants extend their arms to the part below their hands or wrists, while another assistant is above them.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	Then place them in an even position according to their best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it has broken into pieces, place each one back in its position; and if there is a piece missing that holds the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make an incision above and remove it as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if with the breaking of the wound, I have spoken about it in the singular chapter;
si pren la cure.	take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if in the beginning of the restoration, warm abscesses appear, so apply I cloth bandages made of rose oil and white wax, that are neither too hard nor too soft;
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and bind the cloth bandages gently above, so that the warm abscesses are eased.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	And then remove the wax, and apply the plaster of the mill powder with abundance of egg, then place the splints, and let the splint for the fracture be closest to and slightly wider than the others;
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	And know that there must be six stars on the arm, in several positions:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	Whether the bone is broken in one place or two;
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	Hold tightly above the break, more so than elsewhere, and ease off as you move away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter;
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	And let the cloths that are placed on the break be soft and moist, not hard or rough;
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And let the thread that is used to hold it be of flax, neither too thick nor too fine, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And support the limb and the joint after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any bad accident befalls the limb, such as itching which comes to the limb, then you must sprinkle the limb with warm water until that itch is soothed.
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And let the limb rest without constriction.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Then resume the binding, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones dislocated, or something similar occurs, address it accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you suspect that nourishment cannot reach the limb due to its restriction, it is necessary to soften it a little, and leave it thus for a few days until circulation returns, then bind it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said come to pass for the patient, do not release him until twenty days have passed.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	For that which is around it, then bind his hands to his neck, and keep the necks equal, and guard against movement and turning, and let him sleep on his back;
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	and know that this fracture is healed in thirty days or thirty-five, and perhaps even twenty days, according to the combinations and complexities of virtues.
de la brisure de la main	On the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that the back of the hand and the knuckles rarely experience breaks but rather frequent dislocations.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the heel of the hand is fractured or bent, it is necessary for the patient to know how to cross their legs, and sit upright directly in front of them evenly;
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	then place their hand on the stretched cloth, and have the assistants stretch out the broken bones, aligning them with the marks, until they are properly joined;
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	et put the plaster and the swabs, if no abscesses come, then place a stent according to the size of the wound.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and wrap it in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the break is around the edge of the sole, make a sphere out of linen cloth and instruct the patient to press it against their broken foot.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	then strap it with a long cloth and the stent should be made of soft heartwood as large as the sole of your hand; secure it tightly, as is needed.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is on the outside, it must be that you place a splint above and another below the broken bone so that the hand remains open and straight, then bind the whole thing around the hand, and tighten the binding between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the break is at either of the thumbs then it must be immobilized as needed.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	and hold it with a flat surface, and if you see that there is a small straight stick to raise the broken bone, and do not move it;
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	and if the fracture is in another place, like in the index finger or any of the others, make it equal, and bind it with the healthy finger that comes after.
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	or you bind them all together in an 'I' shape, which is better if they move, or place a stick under it, as with the thumb.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	and take care in the restoration and arrangement of hot abscesses, and aid those who suffer from them, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The bone of the thigh is often fractured, and it is easily seen when the leg turns forward or backward;
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	And restoration is done by binding the ligament above the break, and another below it.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patient lies on their face; then each minister extends their binding to their respective side equally.
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and this is when the break is in the middle of the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is close to the hip joint, let one of the ligatures be towards the armpit and the other ligature below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And also if it is close to the knee, then let the binding be above the knee, and the extension below.
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	Then the surgeon must align the bone with their two hands, so that it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster and bind it, if no abscess forms there.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if an abscess does appear, let it cool down, then return to your work and care.
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The leash is made in such a way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	You must wrap over the fracture with strong bandages doubled in two or three layers, and let the excess remain, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the thigh, and thread a long piece of string between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and bring the ends of the string up above.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	Then turn the bandages back over the leg and thigh, put some splints over the fracture, and place a splint over the bone of the leg.
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	Then fill the empty space between the leg and thigh with soft cloth to evenly distribute the pressure, then start tying in a triple or quadruple knot over the fracture.
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	and when you go further above the fracture, hold it less firmly.
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	then tie two threads to the ends of the bone that you have inserted between the leg and thigh, and bind three splints above them. Then return below the end of the thread until you reach near the foot.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	hold it firmly so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this, ensuring no abscess nor swelling or other similar thing develops.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	and if it does occur, then untie it and address what has arisen, as we have said many times.
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if there is any fragment of the bone held within, it must be removed, as far as possible.
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	and if one cannot, it is necessary to split the place and draw out fire.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	and treat the wound as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And sometimes the thigh is broken in such a way that one must insert nails into it, as with the shoulder and arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	however, the patient does not suffer any harm from this restoration.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored in an average of 50 days, perhaps a little less or more depending on the diversity of temperaments.
de la ruelle dou genoil	From the groove of the knee.
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that at the knee area there are few breaks, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is only a crack, or a hole, and this happens to every wound, and unhealed wounds, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And this restoration is done by placing what is rounded in its place equally with both hands until it can be assembled.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	Then apply a plaster and insert a round nail if you need one, securing it as required. Then continue with all the procedures we have described for other fractures such as hot abscesses and similar conditions;
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you apply to each case what is appropriate for it, until they are healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	On the break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is rightly called 'shin' and the other is called 'calf';
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And they have similar fractures like those that occur in the arm, and for this, the restoration is equal to that of the arm, and the treatment methods are all the same. If both bones are broken together, it turns the leg from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the fine bone is broken, it twists forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the larger bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is clearly visible.
et torne desoz.	And it turns downwards.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	So extend it gently, place it straight, and bind the splints evenly.
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	But nonetheless, if the fracture is severe and there are multiple pieces, the extension should be less intense and more gentle.
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And ease it according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed your work, take two wooden splints that cover the leg from one side to another, and they should be as long as the leg from knee to below.
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	Then wrap two layers of bandage around them and tie it in the middle as well, so that the leg cannot bend to the right or left, and thus it is secure.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	And they apply one splint along the length of the leg, which is made of wood, and it holds the leg in place to prevent any movement, and properly done, it supports the fracture or wound.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	and move each leg daily, to check for abscesses or other complications.
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	heal it until it is fully cured.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of broken bones of the foot.
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but in the bones of the foot, there may be a break or crack, and it can be crushed in various ways.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if there is a broken bone in the foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, place the patient's foot on the ground as if they were trying to walk, and then put your foot on theirs, where the bones are raised, pressing until they return to their places.
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	Then apply a plaster and bandage it on top, and place under the belly of the foot a small board with two curved ends, then tighten it to the foot appropriately, after you have wrapped cloth around it, and other things that are necessary.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, untie the binding, for you will find the bones equalized, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if there are any broken fingers, restore them as we have said for the fingers of the hand;
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	Then place a splint on the broken finger in line with its length, and let it be slightly wider, then put under the foot that table I mentioned, and strain it appropriately;
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	And if there are two or three or more broken fingers, place a splint on each finger according to its size, wrapped in a piece of linen, and strain the table under their foot.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And let it be stretched over the top of the table away from the foot's belly so that it holds it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And you must not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, just as we have said before.
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And treat each accident as it ought to be treated.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Of the fracture of the bone in the wrist.
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the woman's hip bone is broken, make her sit with her legs spread apart, then lean her towards her back part and hold her from behind;
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	Then fill the wound of the patient with cotton until it is filled up;
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	Then make the woman stand up, and lift her back bit by bit until the cotton comes out, reaching the entrance of her body, and the bone returns to its place along with the stool.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and once she is done, put it back in, doing this for seven days or so.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	If the fracture is restored, and if you see it, take a goat's bladder, tie a reed to its opening, and insert the whole bladder into the body.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	Then blow strongly through the reed so that the bladder is fully inflated inside.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	The body will thereby restore the fracture.
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	It should then be filled with cotton and left in place for several days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the wrist bone of a man or woman is fractured, restore it as we have said for the hip bone;
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	These fractures are not hidden from one who applies study and practice to them, and reads my book attentively.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the fracture indicates to many the right way of restoration:
enten le donques.	understand it therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In the rod, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and insert it into the rod;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	Then wrap it with fine cloths around, and leave it for three days therearound, and it will be swiftly healed.
de brisure avec plaie	When fracture is associated with wound:
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with wound, especially if it's large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder, to be immediately treated so that the wounds we have described may testify (to its efficacy).
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, treat it with vitriol to stop bleeding, unless you have other means, then restart restoring the fracture that very hour or day, provided no hot abscesses arise.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if hot abscesses do arise, leave the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess is pacified, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you will bring about an evil event.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible on an exposed heart, you must set it gently with your hands at a small extent.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extension is not equipped to align with your hands, use this iron instrument which has seven or eight tines and is as long as the width of the wound;
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and for this the surgeon must grip three or four, according to what is needed in each treatment of a fracture;
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and be round and slightly thicker so that it does not bend under the pressure on the limb during your work, and be sharp at the front, and thick in the middle towards the front, like this
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And it is called a "palanche," so the curved blades must be placed over the head of the protruding bone;
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and push it in once until it returns and is even with the other one.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot grasp the bone well, then you must cut off the head of the bone until the instrument has a hold of it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot reposition the bone as we have said, then use an appropriate tool for this, either a chisel or a saw, according to your ability.
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	then remove what remains in the bone of roughness and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	Si do your best to ensure it is back in its place, then soak a cloth in black styptic wine, and apply it properly if that was the issue.
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not apply any ointment or other oily substance to the wound, as it will cause it to become infected and corrupt.
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	Then apply stars when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered. Cover it all around with a bandage according to the size of the wound, and be very careful that the wound is not constricted by the broken area.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	and often these foolish surgeons have done this, causing death or corrosion in some cases.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And the constriction should be looser and softer than other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear an adverse event may occur as we have stated, and you find pain at the site, it should not be treated with stellar [astrology] remedies.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but wrap around it, instead of using stars [astrology], hard rags, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound is swelling again, remove what you have put on it previously and apply a healing ointment, such as tetrapharmacon ointment and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you should loosen the limb twice daily, in the morning and at dusk, until it is fused and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And the limb should be bandaged in such a way that the swelling flows downwards gently.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if after many days it does not heal but swells again, know that there are small bone fragments present, which is why you must examine the wound with a probe and remove all these troublesome pieces causing this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula forms at that spot or some other kind of infection develops, you must treat it according to what he said in his previous chapter.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken and exposed on a limb, as with the bones of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not draw it [the wound] out, for many times death follows, but leave it until it rots.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	Perhaps after twenty or thirty days it will fall out by itself, then treat the wound if you are able to.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The scabs that form over the suture.
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	We often encounter the healing of fractures, especially when they are near the joints, and it is an unpleasant sight to see the appearance of the affected limb.
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	And sometimes the limb may not be able to perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Take care then if it is fresh for us.
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	If you administer styptic medicines such as aloe, incense, and myrrh, as well as sarcocolle, alum, and similar substances, in whichever of these things you choose or use them all together, and mix it with a styptic wine or egg white or isinglass.
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and place them on a cloth with pads, and hold it tight, and do not release for two days.
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	then remove the first bandage, and start another one, until the inflammation is gone.
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or you bind it onto a well-made wooden board;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	because the property of wood is that it removes all swelling from the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the inflammation has already hardened like stone, and it needs to be removed, scrape away the top layer, and expose the excess.
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	or you reduce it with a scraper until it is removed, then treat it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	Of the limb which is weak after recovery
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the bone fracture is healed, and afterward the limb remains weak and delicate, this happens for many reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	because one reason is that it was bound too tightly, and was not bandaged as it should have been;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or because there were too many bindings, preventing the nourishment from reaching the limb;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	or due to excessive bloodletting;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or because of too much movement, not at the right time;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or due to having little blood in their body, they become weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the treatment is for you to have the patient eat, and make their body tender, so that the blood is multiplied within them;
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and administer it well, and give him joy and permission;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	then apply pitch onto the limb, so that the pitch draws out the great nourishment, and irrigate it often with warm water, until the nourishment reaches the limb;
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	Of a twisted limb after the sanctity.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bone is evidently broken, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function:
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb anew, and many a foolish doctor has done this in our land;
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and these procedures are blamed for causing great harm, often resulting in death;
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	However, if the nodules and torticollis are fresh, they should be treated with hot water or softened herbs that have been cooked, such as leaves of marshmallow, roots, and honeysuckle, and similar things.
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	Make a softening plaster, such as well-made daisy plaster, and take the juice of marshmallow, mix it with goose fat or sesame oil, and apply this plaster on top.
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	Alternatively, take fatty figs, grind them with colander husk, and similar medicines that reduce swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the swelling is removed by rubbing continually and for a long time with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	Let there be gentle movements to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	If the torticollis is old and hardened like stone, requiring removal with an iron tool, it should be cut down to the bone using a delicate and light knife.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and apply a compress and devote attention to their care.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs in someone, you must reset it immediately without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if one delays, the joint will swell, and perhaps it may be reset painfully into its place;
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	due to which one should not move it at the hour when it is swollen:
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	often causing infection and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	nevertheless, when this happens, have the patient bleed, then leave them be until the abscess subsides;
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	then bathe the limb in warm water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each limb as it returns to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from head to foot.
des mandibules	Of jaws.
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	Often it happens that jaws are dislocated on both sides, and dislocation of both occurs in two ways:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	where they are slightly moved from their places, and softened somewhat;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	or they are completely dislocated, and hang downwards, and the saliva falls from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and his speech is slurred.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When a dislocation is minor, one can recover through many treatments.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and perfect, then you must reset it promptly, and not delay;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	and in such a manner that the assistant holds the patient's head, and pushes their finger from one of their hands into the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on two sides;
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	And the other fingers of the hands shall be bent outwards, to make them equal.
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And instruct the patient to soften their jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	The assistant should apply equal pressure until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if it is badly dislocated, especially if both jaws are involved, bathe them with hot water and oil until they can be gently reset.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	Do not delay in resetting it, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth is well closed with softened gums, apply moist lint dressings in a soft ointment made of rose oil and wax, then lightly bind it with soft cords.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	And let the patient sleep on their back, with their shoulder extended between two pillows so that they cannot move it to the right or left, and do not try to bend it. They should eat lightly until the pain is gone, and keep their jaws clenched shut.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	Then let them eat whatever they want lightly, and do not strain themselves by opening their mouth too wide when eating or drinking, until the jaw is well healed and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be brought back to their proper place within an hour, and they do not return to their correct position, fevers and persistent soreness will occur, and possibly violent purging, and perhaps vomiting of clear fluid.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, know that it is ruinous;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and many times the person dies within nine days.
de la forcelle	Of the fork.
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The fork cannot be dislocated from the inside, along its length or at the base; and is sometimes dislocated outwards, which can easily be felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the recovery process is as follows: let the patient lie frequently on their back with their arms outstretched;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then press the place hard with your palm, and it will return
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then apply the plaster and bind it tightly;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and if the shoulder is facing towards the knife, it cannot be reset;
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	if not, and if it dislocates at any time, reset it to its place as we have said;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	then put on the plaster and bind it, securing it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed;
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	in the same way, reset the shoulder blades when they have dislocated from their place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	Saiches que li espaule n'est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: 
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	Of which one is that it dislocates to the part of the socket below
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second [dislocation] is at the part of the shoulder blade;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and by chance dislocates above, and this occurs rarely;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inside towards the nerves;
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	and often dislocates below towards the socket, especially in those with little flesh, for it easily falls through to the bone.
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	in those who have sufficient flesh, it falls [dislocates] slowly and returns slowly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And occasionally it happens to some men that there is a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells from a hot abscess, and they think it has dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	Therefore, you must test it until you are certain.
et adonques encomence la cure.	And then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is understood that dislocation occurs when the arm falls towards the shoulder blade, and there is a notable difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one; you will find an evident disparity between them.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	and you will find a hollow at the shoulder head, and beneath the shoulder blade up to the neck is like an egg.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose nor move in any way.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you will find it evident at the neck.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this manner of dislocation is not difficult to reset when it is new or the patient is young.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the procedure is that the minister lifts the patient's hand upward, then places your palms underneath the armpit, and forcibly lifts the dislocated joint upwards to its place;
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	and the minister lifts the hand, extends it upward, then places it underneath;
si venra hastanment.	thus will come numbness.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come about as we have said with hands exposed afterward, then the patient must be bathed in warm water;
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and the minister applies soothing and softening ointments, such as a decoction of althea, fenugreek, and melilot in water, to be applied accordingly;
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then the patient is turned onto their back, and a block of even wool, neither too soft nor too hard, is placed underneath their armpit, then place the heel of their foot on the block, lift the head of the virtuous shoulder, and pull the patient's hand;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and another minister holds the patient's head, so it does not move downwards.
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	this shoulder returns immediately, and if you see that it resets following this method:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and have a man who is larger than the patient be present;
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and he should stand straight facing the patient's side, and push their shoulder from under the armpit of the patient, lifting the armpit upwards so that the patient hangs in the air.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	another minister pulls the patient's hand downwards towards their belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, you may use something heavy with them, and the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And it is also reset in another way:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And one fixes a long stake into the ground, so that the head is as round as a pistol, and it should not be too thick nor too thin.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	Then one should be placed underneath the patient, but let them have soft blankets on top, and the patient must be extended along the length of the stake.
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then one must stretch their arm downwards on the other side in such a manner that the joint will return to its place gradually.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	And if it does not wish to go back into place due to all the things we have said, then do this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	Take a stake two arms lengths long and four fingers wide which has a rounded head so that you can insert it perfectly beneath the shoulder blade according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	Then place over his head a soft linen cloth so that it does not hurt the patient, then put it underneath the armpit of the patient;
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	and extend his arm onto the long side of the log, and tie the shoulder joint to the log, and the arm to the head of the patient, then place the arm on a plank from an upright ladder, and let the hands be extended downwards, and leave the body hanging from the other side:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	the dislocation has returned again now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is thus, in whatever way, you must put under the bedstead a woollen pad of equal size, then apply the plaster prepared with flour of mill, together with incense and egg white, over the whole shoulder and around it; then strain the binding under the bedstead suitably, and turn the bandage back upon the plaster, and embrace the hand to his neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And ensure that he moves little, so that the limb may be comfortable, for it will heal sooner;
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then let him move more after five or seven days, and set the limb again;
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And if it is closed and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is dislocated due to moisture that has entered it or for another reason, you must apply cauterization to three openings, as described earlier in the chapter on cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all that, and it dislocates again after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot lift his arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is either cut, stretched, or weakened.
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and understand that the joint will never be properly fixed in place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation towards the armpit, breasts, or back is caused by a thrust and stretching of the hands, and another remedy should be administered there.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing process the member becomes cracked and moves slowly, the patient should bathe frequently until this cracking is alleviated, and it returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	On the dislocation of the neck
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated to a small degree, and it returns in the same way;
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	And if it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation has not been reduced, for it can be seen clearly and felt well;
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	And reset according to each particular case.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick person's wound with the healthy one, you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is separated, and cannot bend the arm or reach their shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And you must reset it even if there is an abscess present, for if the abscess occurs, it would make reduction difficult;
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	and perhaps it cannot be fully reduced from end to end, especially when it is at the back;
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	it is worse than other dislocations, and causes even more pain, and perhaps death may result.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And the restoration is as follows when it can be reduced: extend your hand to their two hands;
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And let his arms be spread out, with the hands of the patient placed mirror-like according to the cut around, above and below, then push the joint towards the armpit or the palm root until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he bends his hand towards his hand, and press firmly on the root of the damaged palm's wrist.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not want to return to its place, apply strong extension.
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and make two ministers extend the arm, and let two ministers bend it, so that it does not move during extension;
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	then turn the arm from each side, then wrap it with a double-folded long and wide cloth;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the mirror has joined the joint to the hand, anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint firmly until it returns;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	When it is in place, apply dry poultice with egg white on top, press firmly, and bind the arm to the patient's neck; leave it for a few days, then remove it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is firmly in place, unbind the bandages and leave it alone.
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	If you see that the joint is not well-bound, restart with the poultice and bandages, leaving it for a few days until it is firmly in place.
puis le deslie.	Then remove the bindings.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if the patient feels a tearing sensation after the joint is reset and it moves again, bathe them and massage gently, pressing until they feel relief.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	Where you put on the joint a sheep's fat pad, then leave it there for a day and a night, then remove it, and have him enter the bath;
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	And when he sweats, rub the joint gently, then put back the fat pad, and have him enter the bath again;
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do this twice or three times until he is healed;
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	And if you see pus, put on moist warm cow dung mixed with butter, and keep it on top;
si revenra a sa disposition.	It will return to its normal position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The wrist dislocated, and its recovery is light, lighter than the other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	Nevertheless, it must be reset immediately to its place of origin, in the same hour that it is dislocated, unless the area becomes swollen or an abscess forms there.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the resetting is done by placing the patient's hand on a table, having your assistants stretch out the limb, and ensuring it is aligned correctly, so that you place their palm over the appearance of the joint, pushing until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	Nevertheless, one must check that it is indeed in place;
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Then have the patient put the back of their hand on a table, both during extension and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, have the patient put the back of their hand on the table, and place your hand over that joint's area.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it stays in place now, that's good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If this is not done, strain the emollient plasters to soothe hot abscesses, and leave them be without restarting.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot endure it, and you are unable to put it back in place after a few days, the joint remains twisted;
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and it does not harm the patient for as long as the hand is softened, and cannot grip anything at all:
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	then know that the nerve or artery has been severed;
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	if there is no other way to grasp it except by cauterizing around the case, and perhaps nothing else will help.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, apply the plaster we mentioned, then strain it and leave for five days, then release and leave as such.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is any injury, then bathe it in warm water, and rub until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Sometimes the fingers of the hand dislocate in every direction, sometimes on the back of the palm or the belly;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Thus stretch the finger, and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns, then support the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated.
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	Leave it for two days, and then make it equal on that day;
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	Bind it at night as we have said, unbind it during the day, make it move, and bind it again at night;
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Do this often until it is narrow, and do the same if it is dislocated at the palm of the hand, and act as you have done before, until it is healed;
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And do likewise when it is dislocated in any other place.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Of dislocation of the spine from the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine from the back or neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no treatment, as death comes swiftly to the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And its signs are that the evacuations come out without wanting it, nor can she hold them in, and many times certain members are softened, or the two thighs or both arms or one.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And many times the spine is dislocated into four parts.
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	that which is displaced to the rear is called "crookedness".
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	the treatment is that you must wait if it came from childhood.
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	there is no cure or healing for it at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of treatment say there is little benefit in all of it.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have shortened it according to my intention, and I have designed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the case of curvature which occurs at the foot in front, no one knows its cause nor its treatment;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	And also that which occurs directly on two sides, and it cannot be treated except for that which properly comes to the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	And it is that the patient should be extended on their face in an equal place, and have a strain beneath them, so they do not get hurt;
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then fix one iron rod firmly in the ground at the head and another at the feet, and tie a cord beneath the joints of the patient, and another to the hips, knees, and ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	And have two assistants hold the bindings, one on the head and the other on the feet, between the two firebrands.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	And ensure they are well secured, the firebrands as we have stated, and let the physician place their palms on the spine firmly, until it returns to its proper position.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	If it does not return with this treatment, take a board three arms-length long, and place it under the patient's side, let the patient lie on their side with their head resting on the board, then put the middle of the board on the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	And let the physician place their feet on the other end of the board, pressing firmly until it returns to its proper position.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and if you see this, make him turn his hand over.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	and put two red-hot irons on the patient's head for a long arm, and towards their feet another two, with each iron being separated by about one palm's length.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	and have one hole in each iron where the pivot goes, and let these irons be firmly planted so they don't move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and between each pair of irons put one turning iron, upon which the pivots turn, and have two small irons about a palm's length to turn the pivot.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	then bind the pivot which is among the handles to the pivot towards the head, and another binding from the feet to the other pivot, each of the assistants turns their own pivot with all their strength, while the master keeps the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, apply a drying poultice with an abundance of egg, then some swabs, and finally the stem of a tablet three fingers long to treat the area of curvature and the healthy part of the spine. Then bind it with a bandage as we have said, using subtle nourishment for the patient until healing occurs;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	and if any issue arises at the end of treatment, administer softening and soothing medications along with the stem we mentioned earlier;
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	and sometimes it is administered in one piece of lead, and at other times the appearance arises in the lower spine of the back, which people believe to be a case of dislocation;
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	and this is the bone which appears, for this reason one must not presume:
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	may cause death to come upon you.
des dislocations de la hainche	Hip dislocations.
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Know that only the joints of the hip and shoulder are subject to dislocations, not any other joints;
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	inside and outside, and in front and behind;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and especially inside, or rather dislocated forward and backward.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	The knowledge of its internal dislocation is as follows: when one joins the affected leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the sick knee appears more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their sick knee to the fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And it is the place next to the swollen abscess that is hot, because the hip joint has come loose there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him for whom it happens in reverse is that this affliction stands contrary to what came before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And for the signs of the one who is about to experience this in front, it is that he stretches his leg well according to its course.
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	However, he does not bend the knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot forward, and retains his urine, and the ankle swells, and when he goes, he steps on his heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who has it behind are such that he cannot bend his knee or double up, and one leg is more twisted than the other, the groin is softened, and the shoulder head is in place under the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The remedy for this type of dislocation is that you reset it if the dislocation is old and remains according to its position, there is no treatment.
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	And one must not have any presumption about it.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And for the one with fresh dislocation, which has four types of dislocation, hasten to return the joint, stretch it inward and outward, and move it right and left;
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	By chance, it may return to its place, and no other treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return with this method, you must prepare one strong assistant and stretch the leg vigorously by hand, or bind it with a ligature above the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	Another assistant should extend their hand above in such a way that they press their hands under the patient's armpits, then bind them tightly with a ligature around the thigh.
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	Another should hold the head of the ligature.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they extend upstream and downstream all at once, such that the patient is lifted from the ground all at once, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common for the four similar cases, and if the dislocation has been corrected, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If not, it's necessary to apply treatment in a similar manner.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is on the inside, you must place the patient on their healthy side, then put the bandage at the root of the thigh and the part below the groin, stretching the bandage upward towards the groin and towards the hip;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	Then have another attendant take his arms and embrace the thick part of the injured thigh, stretching it outwards forcefully.
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	It will return to its place immediately.
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	And this type of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot secure it in this way as we have said, then you must bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft bond above the heels and below the knees, keeping the injured leg extended twice more than the other.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	Then be hung above from a post, and be raised above the ground two arms in length;
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then command one attendant to embrace the head of the thigh, and let another attendant be suspended with the patient, who firmly embraces the thigh, for the joint returns now forcefully.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is outward, let the patient lie as we have said for one with curvature, and bind the soft bond above the injured leg properly, and also above the foot;
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then place two red-hot irons, one on the head and another at the feet, then insert a red-hot iron between the thighs of the patient in this position.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	Cover it with wet bandages so as not to scorch the patient, then stretch each assistant toward him, and have the assistants mirror the position of his hand at its dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place [the patient] on a board, i.e. a plank, and press them as we have described for 'gilbosse', and let the patient lie on their sound side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is forward, it is necessary to extend the afflicted leg until it reaches its full length, according to what I have said.
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And have the assistants place their weight on the afflicted limb, then push with one hand and stretch downwards towards the knee with the other. 
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is outward, one should not stretch the patient downwards nor lift them off of the ground. Instead, they must be positioned as if their hip were dislocated outwards, just as we have described placing a person with two dislocated hips on their back. 
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	And place it on his face, with the bandage extended as we have said before, and one must apply pressure to the joint against the board.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	And it will be effective when the patient extends their legs, and they are even in length.
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	Then adjust the thighs, apply the plaster, and use a bandage to hold it tight so that the hip does not move.
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	And let him rest for three or four days, then untie the bandage, and apply more plaster on top.
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	And if you see that they are even in length, bind it as before, and leave him like this for another three days.
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	Then untie it, and have him walk gently until the limb is strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The knees are dislocated according to three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	That is to say, inwardly and outwardly, and behind;
et ne desalue point devant.	It does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the sign of this is that you instruct the patient to bend their leg towards their thigh, and if it does not reach their thigh, know that they are dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And the restoration of all these is that you make the patient sit upright, and stretch their leg if they can, and place your back on their face, and put their foot upon your feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	Then take their kneecap in your palms, and pull it between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee sharply.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	and another minister extends his foot, so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he flexes his leg lightly at his thigh;
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	put the plaster on top, and make him stretch his leg towards his thigh, and bind them together tightly for three or four days, then untie it;
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and the patient should not exert himself to walk until the limb is strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not aligned, apply strong traction, as we have mentioned in the treatment of hip injuries, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	Of the dislocation of the heel...
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels may be partially or fully dislocated, internally or externally...
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the sign of this is that the ankle is swollen, and more so on the side where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	the reset is gentle, and it should be gently extended with the hands when he is only slightly moved.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated completely, you must make the patient sit upright, and have one assistant hold them by the leg above the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then draw the foot towards you with your right hand, then to the left twice, then stretch it upwards, and push the foot gently upward;
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	Do this twice, as we have said, pushing and drawing the foot each time;
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	If it stays in place, that is good;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	But if not, start the process again, for it will return;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	And if it cannot be done that way, then have the patient lay on their back on the ground, and firmly fix a forked stick into the earth between their thighs, then wrap the cloth around them to avoid injury;
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then have the ministers hold the thigh, and another minister extend the foot with their hands or use rope to tie it above the ankle;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then each minister should extend equally, and the stick is placed between the patient's thighs to hold them in place as they are extended.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Next, have the lead surgeon grasp the dislocation evenly with their hands, and another minister hold the healthy leg underneath; the dislocation will then return under pressure.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is in place, apply the plaster and swabs on top, bind it tightly, and tie the foot to the leg; ensure the ligaments above the ankle are not too tight.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	Leave it for two or three days, and if the bond softens, then strain it.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	Then untie it on the third or fourth day, and prevent the patient from moving for four days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if they move before this period is over, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If an abscess forms here, you must treat it as we have said elsewhere until it is healed.
des dois	Twice.
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the thumb is dislocated, it should be gently stretched without work, and this is a minor thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	If the dislocation is in any of the back or foot joints, you should make the patient sit on a flat surface or a straight chair, and place your foot on what appears to be the affected jointure, then press hard with your foot until it returns.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	And when it is even, and nothing appears to be wrong, place underneath the sole of the foot a board with two edges, then strain it hard, and leave it for three days, then untie it.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let him rest until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wounds and dislocations together.
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound occurs along with dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, often the patient dies.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	Be not presumptuous in the treatment if you are not wise in this art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you lack compassion, mercy, and patience.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	Employ at the outset soothing remedies for abscesses first, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of recovery.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	And when you see some hope for the patient's recovery, then reset this limb now even if hot abscesses form there.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	When the limb is replaced, administer soothing things for hot abscess, and treat the wound as required with drying ointments.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if the dislocation involves a fracture with small broken bones, remove them, and do as we have said for simple injuries.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	Beware of entering a state of fear as I have mentioned, for this is worthy according to your Creator and for the well-being of your arm and body.
