O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, most dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of medical science along with its fulfillment, and I have made an end through its explanations and by its revelations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely 'surgery'.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forbidden in our region and is hidden from all, so it has been lost and neglected; only a few brief references to it remain in the books of ancient authors who have described this work with their hands.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity; intentions have become closed off, and knowledge has been pushed aside.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	Or it seems to me that I wish to revive it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and explanation, and of abbreviation.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	And then will come the forms of the cautery irons, and of other instruments for the work with their adjustment as well as an explanation of its preparation as needed.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good master of hands is found in our time, the art of medicine has become elongated.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for whoever undertakes this to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that they know the judgment of limbs and their shapes, connections and separations; be aware of bones, nerves, veins and arteries, and have knowledge of the numbers and movements of them all.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And for this reason Hippocrates says that the name along with the noun is much, and with work it becomes little.
et meismement en l’art de main.	and especially in the art of medicine.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We tell you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the aforementioned things should take care not to fall into error or harm people.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	Thus, I have seen many who involve themselves in this science, abandoning it without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I saw a foolish doctor who cut into an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and he cut her carotid arteries.
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	Which caused so much blood to come out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I saw another doctor treating a stone in an old man's bladder, and the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	He carried away with him a piece of the bladder, and the old man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if they cut it out he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And I saw another doctor treating a duke of our land who had a broken leg with an open fracture wound.
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	And the ignorant surgeon restrains the fracture on top of the wound with bandages tied too tightly, leaving no room for the wound to drain, and thus he leaves it untreated.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	And he commands that it must not be untied.
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And so it was delayed, causing the leg to swell entirely and the foot to become damaged, leading to its ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I was called upon to attend him, and I hurried to come and release his leg.
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	And when I released it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	However, the damage to his limb had already taken hold, and I could not cure him.
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	And the corruption kept spreading through the limb until it was all lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And then I saw another marvel which aggravated an abscess, and then it inflamed due to the wickedness of its nature.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a cancer, when it is caused by melancholic humor, it should not be treated with iron unless it is in such a place that all the corrupted matter can be entirely removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And for this, my dear son, you must understand that manual work is divided into two categories:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	that is to say, work where there is danger in many situations;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I shall demonstrate in each place of this book where there is fear and risk.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	This is why you must be cautious so that the foolish surgeon does not speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	Take up your tools carefully, approach your patients gently yet firmly, and employ the best methods so that by God's grace you achieve success and are praised.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	And leave behind terrifying illnesses of serious illness;
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Remove your weapons from whatever makes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you can travel from this world to the other with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galen says in some of his admonitions:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not undertake the treatment of any serious illness unless you are called upon as a foolish physician.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapters are about fire cauterization and other medical treatments for acute diseases, and the chapters are arranged from head to toe.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	And the shapes of instruments, and the tools for cauterization, and everything else that is necessary in this work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and cupping, wounds, arrow extractions, and similar matters.
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	And this chapter sets out the order of operations and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and related matters.
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	And it sets out the order from head to foot, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Before we embark on this work, it is necessary for me to explain the qualities of remedies and their potential harm according to each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of healing, and their hindrance, are a long speech and subtle science, and hidden secrets.
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	And many wise men have spoken of this, and agreed upon it.
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	And their words suffice for little to me, because I fear lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that cautery universally helps all constitutions where there is matter, except for two constitutions:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	That is to say, a hot constitution without matter, and a dry constitution without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In a hot and dry constitution with matter, some argued and said that cautery is of great help;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	And others said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	That cautery is not beneficial for illnesses that arise from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to treat illnesses caused by heat or dryness;
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	And he who says otherwise, claims that cautery provides great relief to hot and dry ailments that arise within the body of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	When you compare the body of a man to fire in terms of moisture and complexion, you find that the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	But in any case, do not rely solely on the opinion of someone who has experienced it, but rather on that of an expert who understands through long practice the chapter on cauterization, and the variety of human constitutions, as well as their dispositions and the causes of their illnesses, and how they arise over time.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	We need not fear for other constitutions, especially in the case of cold and moist ailments.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the doctors assembled and agreed on the cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my son, that fire together with cauterization is one of the secrets of healing, and of greater benefit than burning medical cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and it does not come forth unless to the member that is cooked, and it harms no other member if left alone.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	Burning remedies spread from one member to another, leading to diseases that require prompt treatment.
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	And sometimes the patient may even die as a result.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fires due to their height and the goodness of their substance do not harm, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And this I have found through experimentation and the length of my service and study in this art, and it is based on the truth of things.
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	And for this I excuse myself for the length of my words, as I do not wish to take away from you the secret which is hidden in fire, and the quality of its work, how it begins to heal illnesses of the body, just as the philosopher says when demonstrating.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	so receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be done, choosing careful timing.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, for the harmful things arising from below can be removed by the help of cauterization.
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	and especially if the cauterization is necessary for pain, it must be done quickly to prevent further serious harm from coming to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	and never think of doing it like foolish doctors do;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no relapse;
et il le dient ensi;	and they say it like this;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not as they believe, because cauterization is only a medicine that changes the complexion and dries out the humors causing the pain; it is more powerful than any other medicine due to its speed of action, and for the strength of its work and its mastery.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And it is remarkable that the disease may sometimes come according to the patient's complexion, the location of the disease and its strength;
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	and are gathered in it the excesses due to the consumption of meat and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered where there is little excess and moisture, such as dental cauterization for pain, and similar things, and this type of pain does not return.
mais ce avient poc.	but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the last resort in medicine, and it is true;
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	but they do not believe that cauterizations are valuable after medicinal treatments, but their understanding is false, and cauterization is the last resort in medicine because when we administer various treatment methods for any illness, and they prove ineffective, then we use cauterization, which works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Thus it is clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancients said that cauterizations with a golden instrument are more beneficial than those of iron, and they attributed this to the quality of gold and the nobility of its substance.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	And they said that the place of cauterization does not cause inflammation, but this is not always true as I have tested it myself and found that it occurs in some men.
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	And gold cauterizations are more beneficial than those of iron, just as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	However, when you heat a golden instrument, you cannot tell when it is hot by its colour and it cools down quickly.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	And if one heats it too much.
si font au feu;	They are done by fire.
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And thus there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And so we use fire cauterization, which we have adapted to fit our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have ordered this chapter on the head to foot so that it might be easier for you to find your way through it.
dou cautere olivaire	Olive oil cauterization.
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cauterization is effective for moisture and coldness in the brain, and there are two ways to perform it due to a disease called 'soda', and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, ears, causing multiple symptoms like dreams, toothaches, sore throat, and especially all diseases stemming from cold such as paralysis, sodas, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a solvent medicine, modifying the head three or four times, according to what the virtues, moisture, and habit of the patient can endure.
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	And then make the patient's head sweat again.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then have him sit with crossed arms between your hands, and place his hands on your shoulders.
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	Afterwards, place the root of your palm at the root of their nose between their two eyes.
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And where your two thumbs will come, bleed then heat the cautery called "olivare", of which this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And place it on an ink-marked spot, then move your hand gently downward and inward in a twisting manner.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	Then lift your hand slightly, and reposition it if you see the bone moving even a little bit.
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	And if you don't see it moving, restart the cauterization until you see the bone as I've told you.
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	Afterward, take some softened silk and put it in a pile of soft cotton, then place this on the spot for three days.
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	Then apply moistened cotton mixed with butter over it.
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	Leave it in place until the burning sensation has gone.
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating the wound with the remedy known as "tetrafarmacon", until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And the ancients said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purges itself.
et por ce si aide mues.	and for this reason, aid is provided.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some said that one must leave the cautery in place until part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone, and it shall be treated.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And others say that one must leave the cautery on so long and press it with such force that it pierces the bone as wide as the "vertuil" that women put in their sleeves, because this allows the humours to escape more easily.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and one must leave the wound open for a long time.
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	Afterwards, it should be treated and sutured.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two types of cauterization do not seem to me to be good at all in every way, except for some people where there is a sense of fear.
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and it seems to me that I should leave it.
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	for the bone is weakened by the constant movement of nature, as we witness in other limbs.
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	Even when the bone of the patient is weak by nature, and the first type of cauterization seems more effective and useful to me, I employ it together with these treatments for a cure.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	Of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When a patient experiences chronic head pain that persists for an extended period, they should use herbs and pills known as "cochie," along with purgatives, oils, and poultices.
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	For if you perform the cautery as we have described before, and it is ineffective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take heed if the patient's shoulder is of strong constitution, and ensure it is not too cold.
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Then cauterize below the aforementioned cautery site slightly.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	Afterwards, cauterize each corner of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and perform a cautery where it is called "the vessel".
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	And there is a place for the application of cups.
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	Adjust your hand so that you do not see down to the bone.
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	The sick person feels much greater pain with this cautery than with others, and I will speak about that later.
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	and it is fitting that the cauterizations of the horns are more subtle than those used for cauterizing the middle part of the head, and this is the procedure:
dou cautere dou chief	For the head cautery
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When there is sudden pain in one part of the head, and the disease extends to the eye, and the skull has been cleansed with purifying medicines, and other treatments that I have mentioned for dividing diseases have been applied, yet none of these provide relief:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	then treat it with two types of cauterization, namely medical cautery and fire cautery.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	Medical cauterization involves taking a piece of alum, removing the bark and cutting it into two pieces for the skull bones, then making an incision in the temple where the pain is located such that you can place the alum beneath the skin.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	and when it is repaired, bind it tightly and hold it like this for twelve hours.
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	then untie it and treat with strong garlic juice, leaving the wound like this for two or three days.
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	then apply cotton soaked in butter until it forms a crust.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment, cure the wound until it is healed.
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	And if you see fit to use some of the caustic medicines that I have written about in the twelfth treatise on caustic medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is performed in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery, which has this shape:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	It is called a "closure" because its head has the shape of a closed fist with one curve and in the middle it has a small prominence.
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and place it on the painful spot, hold your hand and turn it slightly to one side, so that half of the blade is scorched.
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	lift your hand so that the artery doesn't burn, which is outside, and let an abundance of blood flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	Afterward, place cotton covered in linen on the wound, and leave it there for three days.
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then apply moist cotton with butter, and treat the wound until it is healed.
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	and if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called 'cultellare', cover its entire tip, and be careful not to cut the artery in this fresh migraine.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat a migraine as we have previously mentioned in the division of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the previous cauterizations with medicine and iron are insufficient, then you must heat up the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white.
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	and incise instead on the spot with a line half an inch long, and remove your hand once, being careful not to cut the artery or reach the bone.
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	and be mindful of the jaw movement when one swallows, ensuring that it does not move or cause spasms in the patient, and guard against excessive blood loss from the artery if cut, which is a great fear especially for those who are unaware and uninitiated to such matters, like students without experience.
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	And leave the work halfway done;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	But I will tell you how to staunch the blood when an artery is severed, and I will show you where it occurs in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that these cauteries are not sufficient for the illness, and the patient is still suffering, cauterize it on top of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	And if you observe this, apply the cautery we mentioned in the chapter on arterial extraction, using the double-bladed cautery.
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And these cauteries are better and more helpful than that one.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	From the pain in the ears due to coldness.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ear arises from coldness and one has applied solvent medicines and other treatments as we have mentioned before but the pain persists, then heat this cautery tool called a "point", of which the shape is as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After pricking all around the sick ear, or around both ears if pain is felt in both, and move slightly above the root of the ear once you have marked the point to cauterize.
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and make X points around each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards, treat the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	Of mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	Wounds that must be treated with cauterization are only those caused by flux, as we mentioned in the classification of diseases.
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	And do not apply cauterization to similar conditions that arise from drying out or the breaking of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you treat this type of wound that originates from the flow of humors and purgings of the head and gargles, and it doesn't improve, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauterizations.
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	One at the root of the ear, another slightly beyond the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	Place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and have them cauterized at the top of the ear slightly below the crown of the head, and another one on the temple as long as a thumb.
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	Leave the cautery in place until half of the heart is burnt.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	It is similar in appearance to the cutellaire we described earlier, but it is a little more delicate and the knife should be slightly larger.
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, leave the wound as I have said before until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but the patient does not improve and has no fever, then make four cauterizations.
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	Two above the two corners of the head, one in the middle of the head, and another at the place called "vessel" as we have said before, and the last cauterization on the mouth of the stomach.
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	And it is treated as we have said previously.
de litargie	Of lethargy.
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this illness, give the patient large herbs and pills that purify the brain.
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	After having raised the head of the patient fully, place on their occiput the mustard plaster which is described in the treatise on plasters.
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	and this is the method of the cautery:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	If you do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If he is treated thus, it is good.
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	And if he is not, perform three cauterizations on his head down to the neck, leaving a two-finger width space between each.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	Treat it as you would the others, and if you feel it necessary, and the patient can endure it, perform one cautery in the middle.
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if necessary, put two others above the two horns, and treat it until it is healed.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	and let the cauterization be called 'olivare', as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	From the coldness of the head.
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	The head must be cleansed of hairs and other things, as we have said before;
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	after washing the patient's head, then cauterize them on the head and on each horn, behind it, and three times along the spine of the neck;
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	and if you need to do more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, then do four cauterizations along the spine of the back.
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	And leave it until the part of the heart closest to the wound is burned, then lift your hand.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	After the treatment is complete, wait until it is fully healed, and use the cautery called "olive oil," as we previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptic should not undergo fire cauterization unless they are phlegmatic; and it is necessary to first temper the brain with herbs and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, when the patient is an adult and can take medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is a child who cannot tolerate it, perform a gargle and chew softening the brain often with good meat.
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	After that, split the head in half lengthwise, and perform a cautery as we have said before on each side of the skull, and also over the brain.
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if the patient is strong and suffering, perform a cautery as I have described for those with paralysis and body weakness, on their spine from neck to lower back, and use olive oil in the manner that I explained before.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, perform a subtle cauterization according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy, excesses or corrupt humidities and thick phlegm are present, then cauterize with multiple cauteries as we have mentioned for one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy the excesses decline towards it and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink so that their brain is cleansed, according to what was mentioned previously in this division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After rising, lift the patient's head;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	Afterwards, make a linen pad well-made, like a circle, and place it in the middle of the head;
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	And have the patient lie down with crossed legs, ensuring they are well-supported on all sides;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	After presenting the linen pad, you must melt some old sheep's butter;
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	Heat it over gentle fire so that the skin tolerates its application;
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	Then empty out the circle from within the head, and leave it to cool down;
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And do this for the patient once every week with some other good treatment until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you wish to cauterize, do so by making multiple dots along the entire length of the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This manner of cautery moistens the brain equally;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	And then place wet cotton on top, soaked in butter and goose fat.
de l’awe des eulz	the awe of eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the awe first comes to the eyes through the signs I mentioned in the classification, then begin and give the patient something purifying for the head, protect them from all moisture, and make them sweat in the bath multiple times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	Afterwards, instruct him to lie down and apply a cautery on the head, and perform two cauterizations above each of the two temples if the descent of the fluid is towards both eyes together, or one if it is directed at one eye.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	Cover the entire cautery area with gauze over all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temples.
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	Be wary of bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with a cloth as tightly as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will instruct you on extracting arteries and performing incisions, the caution on how to staunch them.
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	and sometimes a cautery or excision is made below the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	The body of tears.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed to be on the veins or by the arteries that appear outside the head;
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and it is seen that this is of cold, phlegmatic superfluities, then apply the cautery I mentioned at the beginning to the eye area.
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	A cautery on the head, two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or excisions below the two bones.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	And if more is needed, cautiously cauterize above the eyebrow with small cauteries.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	From the body of tears through within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you treat the patient according to what we have said in the division, and they do not improve, then give them three nights of drinking cow's urine.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	After the king's head, cauterize the middle of the olive-shaped cautery site.
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	And place two 'clavilis' cauteries above the wrists, slightly below the hairline.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	Beware of the artery so as not to cut it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery called 'clavilis':
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called 'olive'.
de coi ci est li forme:	Of which this is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you wish, place two additional cauteries on the wrists as long as the eyebrows are.
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And do not leave your hand there except for as long as one-third of the paper is burnt, according to the manner I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	On the hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	There are times when the eyelashes turn inward, prick the eye, and cause irritation. For this, cauterization is performed in two ways:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	That is to say, with fire or burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they grow and become even, then place the patient in your care.
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	After, lord, on the paper of the eyes draw a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs;
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then put moist cotton in egg white and parsley mush on the eye, then heat the following cautery which is of this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After cauterize on the drawn figure often and again until the heart is burnt in that place;
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	And the sign of success in this work is that you will see the paper retract and hairs raised to the edge of the eye;
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	Then lift your hand away, and leave it thus for three days, then put moist cotton in butter until the scald is gone;
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, allow the wound to heal completely.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if after this the hairs appear, and the skin is softened, then resume the cauterization on the same spot, just as you did initially.
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	If the hairs fall out, cauterize until the skin rises to its natural level, is even, and no longer pricks the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	Medical cauterizations that burn are when you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow large and evenly, then make a parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	Then take French soap and quicklime, of each one ounce, and grind them together well.
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	et press it with a cloth so that it does not cool down, then spread it over the shape you have made like a myrtle leaf, and place some eyes on the paper;
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	and if the illness is only in one eye, you must operate on that one, but if it is in both eyes as well...
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and place under the eye cotton moistened with egg white.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	and let the patient's head be on your healthy side and place your index finger pointing at the medicine, then press the pouch and mix it every time the patient feels a sensation of heat from the medicine, for they will also feel a burning sensation.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for some time, remove the medicine with your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the sensation of heat passes, lift up the cloth and see if it is also raised like a leaf would be lifted by fire or an incision.
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And if it is so, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If not, apply more medicine to the place where the medicine has been applied, until your work is even, and your eyes are focused.
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place moist cotton soaked in butter until the burning heart is appeased, afterward treat the place with an ointment called "diaphenes," and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you must be mindful of your work, take great care that none of the medicine gets into your eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes soft afterward and hairs prick in the eye, repeat the medicine on this softened spot from the paper itself, just as you did before.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Afterward treat it until it is healed.
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And you should know that the eyes of men vary in size and smallness, and according to this, be your constraints.
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And let not the correct path be denied to him who studies this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the treatment of fistula by cautery.
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit it, then you must apply cautery according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to place their head on your lap.
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	Hold the minister's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or twist its neck.
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	Afterwards, place moistened cotton below an egg or in parsley juice over the eye.
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	Afterwards, heat the cautery which is such:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and it is shaved at the head like the shape of a vaulted roof, along with where the cauterization is to be done;
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	if you see, it should be pointed from one side of the head to the other, and if you see, it should also look like a tent;
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	but nevertheless, this one who is shaved is better for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After that, press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus, then dry it.
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and if it is closed, operate on it, and draw out the poison forcefully.
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	after that, place the hot cautery on it properly, and keep your hand on the cautery at the part of the nail above the eye, so that your hand does not falter.
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	and place the cautery into the grease of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the bone with the cautery, it would be beneficial.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If not, restart the cautery again, once more if needed, and leave it for three days;
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	After, place wet cotton soaked in butter on top, and treat with a drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass without healing, then apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed;
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and treat it according to what comes in this chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	There is also a type of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Understand the fistula, and split the site open;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Afterwards, place into the fissure one subtle camel's hair of which it is made:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	Et they make it to the quantity of one third of a plank.
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	Et hold your hand or arm firmly, and do not move the patient at all, so that the molten lead does not run into his eye.
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	And one must put on the patient's eye moist cotton with egg white or honey.
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	The lead fills the place of the fistula, and the wound heals miraculously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, you must administer a perforation with a knife, and return the fistula to the body of the knife according to what is necessary in its proper place.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks occur on lips, which are called "scabs," especially in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have described in the previous section, and the treatment is not effective, then heat a small knife-shaped cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And put it into the crevices until it reaches the bottom.
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards clean the area of wax so that it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	from an abscess in the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess forms at the root of the throat or in the uvula, palate, or tooth roots, it causes decay and swelling, becomes inflamed, and develops into a fistula.
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	And treat it as we have said in the previous section, but it does not heal.
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	Then you must apply cauterization according to the size of the fistula.
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	After the hole or opening of the fistula, hold your hand so that the hot iron reaches the bottom and passes through it.
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Do this once or twice, then treat it as we have described in the treatment section until it is healed.
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if they are cured thus, it is good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if not, one must expose the area and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in this chapter.
dou movement des dens	By the movement of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it does not help, then place the patient's head on your thigh.
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	after, heat the cautery as follows: place a cane over the tooth.
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and put the hot cautery inside it until your hand is warm enough that the patient feels heat reaching the tooth's root.
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	After lifting your hand, resume the cautery according to your will.
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	After that, fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and hold it there for an hour; rinse thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	In this way, the moving tooth is confirmed to be stable, the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of pain in the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When toothache comes from coldness, whether it be cold or hot, and medical treatments are ineffective, then cauterization is necessary in two ways:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	Cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Cauterization with butter is such that you take cow's butter and put it in the end of an iron or bronze spoon;
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	After that, take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a probe, then moisten it in melted butter, and place it on the aching tooth until it cools down.
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	And so it often happens that its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you want to wet wool and cotton in cold butter, and place it on the aching tooth, and apply a hot iron until the fire reaches the end of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The cauterization by fire is such that you take a cane of iron or copper, and make it thick enough so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth;
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After heating the cautery, from which its shape will come about, place it on the tooth and hold your hand there until the cauterization is cooled.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, for the pain will be relieved that very day or the next morning.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary for the patient to fill their mouth with good butter during the urgency of this cautery, and then let the cold (or ice) come after.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and here is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make the cautery for the jaw, as you wish, according to what power (or ability) you have;
et c’est li forme de la caine:	and here is the shape of the cane:
des scrophules	Des scrophules
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When scrofula is caused by cold and moist humours, and it does not respond to treatment with medicine, then heat the pointed cautery which follows after in this shape, and have two openings for the smoke to exit on the other side of the cautery;
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	and apply a hot cauterizing agent to the abscess once or twice as needed until it reaches the base of the abscess;
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	and if the abscess is small, apply the cauterizing agent according to its size, leaving it for three days;
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	and place moist cotton soaked in butter over the burn until it is healed;
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	afterward, treat the area with ointments and dressings until it is fully healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When moisture accumulates in the body's channels, especially when it originates from a cold constitution, the patient must first be emptied through dissolvant medications;
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	afterward, apply a cauterizing agent to the root of the throat, being careful not to reach the throat and only burning a small portion of the heart.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After making another cauterization at the junction of the neck and spine, perform the cauterization called 'clavicle', as described previously.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat the area just like we said before until it is healed.
de la toust	Of the cough.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	Whenever any lung disease is caused by cold dampness, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and it is an old illness, then perform two cauterizations on the corresponding meridians.
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	And another cauterization in the middle of the chest between two breasts;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	And these cauterizations should be called 'clavicle' according to the previously mentioned shape or method.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see fit, perform cautery by pricking with the entire point which is called "punctum," as described before in ear disease.
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and let the pricking be down to XXX or around it.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the site according to what has been said before, let there be three rows of cautery marks in this shape:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because these cauteries are lighter, you do three at a time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	Of the shoulder dislocation.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	Afterwards, remind the patient of his back and side.
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	after that, lift up the heart which is within the tickler with two of your left hand's fingers;
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat up the cautery which has two iron handles as described before:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterise the heart until it is perforated to its side, and you will get a figure of four cauteries.
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	and for this reason cautery is performed with the three-iron cautery, hence the form of cauterization has six cauteries.
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and the nerve follows the subtlety of a tent, and this is the shape of the three-iron cautery:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And sometimes it is adjusted to this one nerve, so there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	Then apply the cautery, pound bell peppers with salt;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Afterwards, let the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until it is well-settled.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated again soon after, then this indicates that there are underlying problems; thus perform a cautery on the thick part above the clavicle, or many cauterizations when needed.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture has been removed, and the patient healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach coldness and too much moisture come such that it is extracted from its complexion, and the catarrh multiplies for him despite usual treatments providing no benefit, then the patient should be reminded to lie on their back with legs and arms stretched out.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	In this procedure, make three cauterizations underneath the armpit with as much space as two fingers, to each clavicle cautery, and two cauterizations outside on both sides so that the shape of the cauterization is a triangle, and leave such distance between them that they do not join together when the flesh rots.
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	and let the cauterization be so thorough that it purifies both parts of the heart; and let the shape of the cauterizations follow this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form:
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and for him who fears this cautery, cauterize by pricking and bleeding on the stomach there. Puncturing according to the quantity you desire to insert;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	then cauterize with all the 'point' cautery.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound we had previously, let it heal.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When the liver experiences pain from cold and moisture and due to excessive wind, such that it is removed from its natural state by superfluities;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the patient is treated with what we have said previously about divisions, but it does not benefit them, so the patient must be reminded of their illness and its severity.
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and for a third-degree cautery, the signs are as follows: this form and this image with these quantities on the liver, under the hypochondrium where the man's ribs come together.
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and leave space between each cautery equal to the width of your thumb.
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	and let the length of each cautery match that of the body part being treated, not pressing too hard with your whole hand throughout the entire procedure.
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	and burn only half of the heart-shaped cautery, keeping the patient upright on their feet throughout the procedure.
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if he cannot, let him lie down, extend his legs, and raise his arms;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	and if your intention is to cauterize these cautery wounds with the surgical knife, provided that you are skilled and wise in this art, be careful not to burn the entire heart, as you would dry out the whole body;
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and do not let it reach the mouth, for the heart is very delicate in that area, and you would dry it out to see it.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When there is an abscess on the liver, and you want to know if it is within the flesh of the liver or in the membrane:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	If it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not too severe.
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	And if it is in the membrane, they feel excruciating pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And so when this treatment is required, the patient must be reminded of it on their head.
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	Then cut away the flesh where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a ray; this is its form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	Cauterize with the cautery until the heart is burnt, and go as far as the saphenous vein, so that all flesh is destroyed.
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment according to the type of cloth used until it is healed.
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And it is not appropriate for anyone but those who have studied medicine extensively to use this cautery treatment, by whose hands these ailments were cured at times.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can operate boldly, and yet it seems to me that it is better to leave him alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	The cautery of hard wax
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancients said that one should make many cauteries with the roots of aristolochia, and in this way:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take one long root of aristolochia, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and also as thick and as long as your two fingers;
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	Oil the root and place it in the fire, then cauterize with one cautery between the forearm and neck, and two small cauteries a little lower down on the part that is below the beard;
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	And two cauteries between the fifth rib and sixth, inclining slightly backwards;
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	and one cautery between the breasts, and another on the stomach, and two between the shoulders, and two on either side of the breast outside the cautery that is between the shoulders;
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	and do not squeeze your hand, but apply pressure gently as if scenting.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And some ancient sources say that no man should use fire cautery like a barber's tool, and they heat it up and place it between the ribs until it reaches this abscess;
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	and if there is pain outside, as we have said in the case of liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula develops which cannot be healed.
de la mice	Of the mouse.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the illness of a mouse according to what we have said in the section on treatments and it does not improve, then there are three methods of cautery which are all beneficial.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	Of which one method is to make three or four cauteries in a line following the length of the arm, according to the shape of the liver abscess cautery that we mentioned earlier;
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	And do not rush your hand with every cautery, let the patient rest often on their back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	And another method of cautery is to heat the cauterizing iron with two handles, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder.
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Lift the heart which is on the right side of the chest, where the patient's wound faces left, and let the elevation by which you lift the heart be according to its length along the body, and the cautery should be made according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After inserting the two heated handles until they pierce through to the other side of the heart, then pull out the cautery iron forcefully, and thus there will be four of them.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see fit, cauterize with a three-nered cautery.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has removed putrefaction over a long time, and this is better than other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	From dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not suitable for dropsy, except in the case of the method known as 'ascites'.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you treat it according to the methods we have mentioned in divisions, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary for you to make four cauterizations around the lump, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back on the spine, and one towards the breast.
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and let the cauterizations be close to the base of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	Afterwards, leave the cautery open to drain pus over a long time, and do not neglect the treatment of the patient after the cauterization.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	and healing would hasten, and the two intentions would be combined with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The form of the cautery for the belly is the clavicle, which we have shown before.
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	And that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what was previously mentioned here.
de l’enfleure des piez	The swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and they are full of yellow water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and ring finger.
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	And lift your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, lest you burst the yellow water; let the cautery be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	Afterwards, make two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the small toe.
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	And let the long cauterizations be one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg.
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	And leave the caustic applications for a long time without treatment, until it heals.
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After treating other ailments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	From the residence
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When an abdominal ailment arises from cold and moisture, such that the retaining and digestive faculties which are in the stomach and intestine become weakened, and cannot be cured by ordinary remedies;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	And if you see the patient in great suffering and with strong constitution, then make a large cauterization on the stomach according to what has been discussed previously regarding gastric cautery, using the circular cautery iron.
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	And four small cauterizations around the navel with each one slightly larger than the previous one, and two on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you observe abundant moisture and the patient suffering, perform a cautery on the wrist, one cautery above each elbow, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	For the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When hemorrhoids are present in the fundament, whether one or more, and they are ancient, consisting of large cold, moist, corrupted humors, and are treated as we have described above, but to no avail, then perform cauterizations.
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	Above the spine of the back, where it is entirely outside [of its normal position], first perform one cautery and then another in a triangular pattern.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	And if you believe their stomach is cooled and the meat not cooked, and one sees their face swell, then on the face perform a large cautery over the stomach as described before, another on the liver, and yet another on the spleen with each cautery being performed in turn.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	Leave the cautery open for an extended period of time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, let the wound heal completely.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	Of fleshiness which is named 'thelul'
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you treat a wound with a hot iron, heat up the cauterizing tool like a razor, and then place it fully ignited on top of the wounded area.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	And leave your hand there until the cauterizing tool reaches the edge of the wound, causing blood to flow out.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	Do this twice, and if there is a lot of flesh, cauterize each part as we have said.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	After the treatment with beneficial ointments, let it heal until it is completely cured.
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	And if you use a larger cauterizing tool on the wound, it will provide greater relief.
de plaie mal curee	of poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure suturing nor incision, which we shall relate in its place, such a sickness comes that can only be healed through cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When any person develops a fistula and it is filled with pus and putrefied moisture, you should first try a subtle treatment, and make sure that you know all about the treatment's effect.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	Afterwards, heat up the cauterizing tool resembling a razor, and push it into the fistula according to how much has entered, and repeat the cauterization as many times as needed until all corrupted flesh is burned away once or twice or three times depending on how severe the injury is.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	And beware of burning the nerves which are sensitive, and of large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	If the fistula goes into the body of the bladder and the intestine, avoid these places, and do not make incisions there as it is dangerous.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	After treatment, examine the wound until it is healed, and if the wound has been dry for a long time, with all matter removed, then know that the wound is completely healed.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	And if matter remains unremoved, understand that the wound is open, and bone at its base has decayed.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	And as for one of these which we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	Of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When pain from cold arises in the loins, and due to severe flatulence, and it does not affect a woman's disposition, then you must perform cauterisation on the loins, one side and the other, with the clavicle cautery as we previously mentioned;
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	and if we cauterise in the middle, there will be three cauterisations in a row, which will provide greater relief.
de la vessie	from the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then cauterise outside on the bladder, where the hairs of the forearm begin, both right and left, with each cauterisation as long as a thumb's width.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	and make one cauterisation outside the back, or two if necessary.
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	And let the clavicle cauterization be done according to the form mentioned above.
de la marris	from the uterus
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the wife is cold and moist, and does not allow conception, and her flowers are corrupted and their endings delayed;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they come, she experiences great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	then it is necessary that we do three cauterizations around the navel, as we have said for bladder cauterization, and two on the outside of the back;
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	And let the clavicle cauterization be done, as we have said.
de la hainche	For the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When the viscous moisture descends into the hip socket, causing it to dislocate from its place, and the sign is that one thigh appears longer than the other when measured together;
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	And the location of the wound is found on the outside of the hip, so you must cauterize the patient over the box of the hip with a circular cautery, and bleed in front of the joint around the box as it turns, such that the bone is within the circle.
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	and let these cauteries be like those with which one has cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if these cauteries are not present, make three olive-sized cauteries, and let the cautery be as perfect as all hearts.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain in the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes to the bone of the hip, which is due to cold and moisture, and the patient has been treated as we have said in the previous section but it does not help, and the illness is chronic:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	Thus it is necessary for you to purge the patient of gross humours with fetid pills or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	After performing the cautery;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	And the manner of cauterisation is according to two methods:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	That is to say, caustic medicine together, and cautery by fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Cauterisation by fire is according to many methods, of which one is as follows:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	You should perform the cautery on the hip's bone with three triangular cauteries according to this form, making sure it is deep and large, leaving a space equal to a thumb's width between each cautery, and ensuring that they are olive-shaped.
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Sometimes a cauterization is performed in the middle of the hip, for which there are four methods according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see fit, use the circular cautery, as we have previously mentioned, in the case of hip dislocation;
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	But make sure that the circles cover the entire hip, and all the flesh around the heart is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is how it is done for sciatica, when the pain is in the hip and does not reach down to the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it reaches the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations where the patient indicates that the pain is felt, and four cauterizations above the ankle, slightly more to the left side.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	And let the cauterization be with a knife, burning through the thickness of the flesh.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the patient feels that the pain extends down to their toes or close to them, cauterize where they feel the pain with three or four points using the cautery called "point".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if necessary, do more of it.
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the patient believes that the pain is below the knee and towards the thigh, use the knife-like or circular cautery on them, and be very careful with all your cauterizations so as not to leave it there long enough for you to burn their nerves and large arteries, and do not cause greater harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who were cauterized on the ankle of the foot, and they left it for so long that the entire leg became swollen, as did the foot, and was perforated and completely ruined.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After an abdominal operation from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, cauterize one and then the other, according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	The wise ones said about the hip cauterization that it is like this: make a piece of iron, and at its head let it be as big as an inch-wide button or slightly less, and have it perforated from end to end with holes spaced out by an inch.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	and they are hinged on two sides, and also like knots, and there is one iron loop well made;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	and it is heated until it becomes completely red and emit sparks, and then place it on the sore hip joint, turning it onto the healthy side;
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and cauterize once with one cautery application and leave it for three days;
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	and then apply an ointment of butter, leaving the wound open for a long time;
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment with ointments until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasim says we rarely use this cautery due to the fear of its appearance, and if we did observe it more often.
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	and yet it is one of the good cauterizations, which can be tolerated by some patients, depending on where it is applied.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The cauterization of medicine that burns is such that you make an instrument with crossbars into which the edge of the door descends, and it should be made of brass or iron on one side, and on the other let there be two handles, and between each a space equal to the thickness of a thumb;
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and let them be open above and below, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	Afterwards place the box of the hip on the patient lying on their healthy side, and press your hand firmly onto the box of the hip;
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After immersion between the two circles of hot water that has been heated by one fire pot, leave for an hour, and let the patient bear its heat and burning.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For it is found to have a bite like fire there also;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	and when the bite is over, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip of cool water, and leave it like this for three days, and apply butter until that which is black from the scald is removed.
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and let it rest for three days so it dries out;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and this would be the final aid after the treatment of ointments until it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain extends to the thigh or down to the leg, make for him an instrument that holds it fast according to what you have done at the hip equally;
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	and this is the method of the hot splint, and I have written it in the treatise on medical correction.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, equal amounts of each, grind them together, then put in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	where there is a small opening through which the point of a lancet can enter;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and place above this another vessel well-weighted, and put on an alkali and heat it with gentle steam until there are two inches of water above the powders when you have properly grasped it in your hand;
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and leave it thus until water and moisture descends into the weighted vessel, then take all this water, and pour it onto heat and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And then there will be great pain, administered by many works of medicine and cauterizations of other members.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it makes the same work like fire, and has other medicines with which one cauterizes well the hip thus as theses and honey of anacardium and hot soap; all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a cure where a man was healed from the pain in his hip and sciatic vein, and he praises it greatly, saying that no other treatment was required, and that he was cured immediately upon completing this cure, and then he bathed as he instructs below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And it says in this manner that you take some fresh and dry green litharge (lead oxide), and grind it very well with one pound of grease, and put it on the hip and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain is located, and bind it there.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	and leave it for three hours; by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burn.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	Then have him enter the bath so that his body is slightly moistened, and then let him into bed, and the pain will disappear completely and he will be cured.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such medicinal cauterization without prior bodily evacuation.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's dung, it helps greatly;
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and the cautery should be done in such a way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen and smear it with old oil, and place it on the depression between the big toe and the one next to it, which is called 'foscile'.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After, take dry goat's dung and ignite it until it becomes charcoal, then place it on the wool, leaving it there until it is extinguished.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	Repeat this process again, and do not cease until you feel it has reached the hip and the pain has ceased.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	This method of cautery is called "goat's dung cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	Of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether due to falling or impact or excessive bleeding, or from any similar matter of cold spreading material; for none of these situations is cauterization beneficial except in the case that it arises from an influx of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	The patient should then be purged with foul-smelling pills or similar to empty their bowels, followed by three straight lines of ink on their back where the pain is felt, and in each line, apply five cauteries or more depending on the strength and endurance of the patient.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	And perform the cauterization according to the method called "pricking.
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	And if you see fit, make three or four clavicle cauterizations in the middle of the bone following this method:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	Often this illness afflicts young children, and the signs of its onset are narrow shoulders when they lift their arms, and fear.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	And you find at the last vertebra of the spine, an appearance different from those above it.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this one and wish to treat it, cauterize it with the full-circle cautery in this manner.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	Ensure that the cautery touches each part of the vertebra evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you wish to treat it, cauterize around the vertebra with two or three lines of pricking points, and let these be close together.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Afterwards treat the area until it is dry according to what we have said, and ensure you do not apply cautery over any swelling that is on a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	From the pain of joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When joint pain arises from moisture that has spread to every part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, which doctors call "gout," and when it is caused by coldness and cannot be cured with medicine, it must be treated with cautery in this way:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Make a row of cauterizations around the ankle joint, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a need to treat the front of the foot, make a cauterization on what they call the "point.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	If the pains extend up to the knees and other joints, which happens often, make three or four cauterizations on each knee, in all places, with every cauterization olive-shaped.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you need more, make even more, but do not hold your hand too close other than so that the heart of the cauterization iron is hot.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pain extends down to the knees and back, apply the cautery as we described in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are in the hands, make two lines of punctures around the wrist.
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	And if there is no remaining pain in the fingers, make punctures on each joint and also upon the hair of the hand.
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains reach the arms or shoulders, cauterize each part, and provide good care to the patient and have them take medicine.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you provide good care and remove phlegm, the patient will recover with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the fracture of the cheekbone
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When a rupture occurs in the groin, and the testicles descend to the thighs, if it is recent, then when you see it being cured, ensure he does not eat that day.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	And have him use things to loosen the belly, so that the feces descend from his stomach.
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	Afterwards, make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his breath until the testicles are retracted, then pull them with your fingers, and cut above the rupture over the bone of the pubic region, and continue cutting in a sign similar to half a circle across his body.
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then heat the cautery which takes this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	So long as they are white and shed no scent.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then reposition the balls to their place;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	And the minister should hold his hand so that it does not return backwards;
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	And spread the patient's legs well, place a cushion and a rolled cloth underneath them, and another on their lower back to hold the hands;
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	Then place the cautery on the sign with all your might, and hold it straight while holding it until you reach the bone; if you do not reach it the first time, repeat it again until you get to the bone;
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	And be careful that the eye does not jump when you do the cautery;
que tu ne le brulasses;	Que tu non li brusques.
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Et qu'en cela, le patient ne meurt pas, ni n'ait d'autres maux.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	Know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	Il convient que les cautères pour enfants soient subtils selon leur taille, et pour les grands de même en proportion.
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	Après trois jours, traite l'endroit du cautère au beurre jusqu'à ce que la brûlure disparaisse.
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	Après les soins initiaux, applique d'autres onguents jusqu'à ce que la plaie guérisse, et le patient doit rester alité quarante jours jusqu'à ce que la blessure soit complètement cicatrisée.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	Il convient que son alimentation soit satisfaisante et prolongée afin qu'il puisse sortir de son lit sans trop s'affaiblir lorsqu'il sera prêt à aller dans une autre chambre.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise up, provide him with a well-made bandage, and wear it for another forty days.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	And he should have good rest, not overexert himself, avoid excessive drinking or eating, and refrain from shouting loudly.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	When he follows this instruction, he will be entirely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will now say the treatment for amputation within its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Of abdominal rupture.
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When sores appear in other body parts and are known to be infected, if they do not grow larger, apply a caustic [substance] as a cautery according to its quantity, and let the third part of the heart be burnt.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	After the treatment, proceed with care as we have mentioned before.
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	and some of the ancients have said it should be cauterized with the three-angled cautery according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But first mark the place of incision and make a line across the width above the rupture, and another below it, then hold your hand in the middle to secure the iron tool throughout its use.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first set of cauterizations should be lighter and less severe.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and medical treatment is ineffective, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called 'point', and the cautery should be applied according to the length of the limb, its smallness, weakness, strength, and location of torsion, as well as the intensity of the pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	if it is burned by the first cautery, that's good;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	and if it does not bleed from the first one, start another cautery on top of that one, for such a custom is that it should change to the member that is nearest, which means you must perform cauteries until the patient bleeds.
de meselerie	of the mastectomy
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The months are aided sometimes by cauterization with great relief, especially illnesses that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	When you see it being cauterized, pay attention if the patient is at an early stage of illness, and if they are cured according to what we have said in the division, and there is no descent or remaining [symptoms], but you doubt that corruption may spread throughout the entire body, then do five cauteries on their head.
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	I place one [hand] under my head, and the other towards the forehead at the end of my hair.
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	And two above the two temples, and one behind on the nape.
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	And leave your hand there until the cauterization reaches down to the bone, and [leave it] so that scabs form such that vapors from thick fluids can escape.
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	And cauterize [the wound] on the muscle according to its depth.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the injury is spread across multiple places.
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	And if it clearly becomes worse, then you must treat [the injury] with these cauterizations that we have mentioned for the head, and one cautery at the nape of the neck, two cauteries on the spine in the back, six cauteries on the spinal column, one large one on the lower back and another beside it, and two on each shoulder.
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	et II sur les côtes, et II sur les tendons du pied, et I sur chaque joint des mains et des pieds, et sur les creux des mains;
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	et prends garde aux nerfs qui sont au-dessus du talon en marchant, pour ne pas les brûler ;
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	et une fois fais un cautère sur l'os du poignet, et un autre sur l'os de l'estomac, et un autre sur le foie.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	Et saches qu'autant tu en fais de cautères, autant tu apportes de l'aide, et il y a un bienfait ;
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	Et saches que les malades ne ressentent pas la douleur du cautère comme un corps sain la sentirait, car leur corps est déjà corrompu ;
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cautery be large or small depending on the limbs and joints, according to what you find appropriate for each type of iron tool.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After the operation, dress the wound with flour paste mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medications, oils, and plasters, but it does not heal, then make cauterizations on the limb according to its size.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	and let the cauterization be slightly deeper into the thickness of the heart.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And sometimes one makes a cauterization on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, in this way removing the swelling.
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	but in any case, do not attempt this if you are not knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of nerves that move the body.
de albaras	For skin disease.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the illness known as 'albaras' has subsided, and medical remedies are of no use, then cauterize it with a perfect cautery, according to the depth of the heart's species, until the whiteness is removed, and its color changes.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	Then treat it with a cure made of flour from vetch and lentils, with rosehip oil and plantain leaves, along with partridge blood and pigeon blood, each in equal parts;
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Mix everything together well, bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the affected area until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of cancer by cauterization.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When cancer appears at its beginning, and you want to stop it from spreading, cauterize it with a circular-shaped cautery, all around the edge of the cancerous area.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	Additionally, the wise ones say that one should also apply cautery to the center of the cancerous growth;
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	and yet it does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen this happen once before;
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	and a more effective approach is to cauterize around it with the circular cautery, as we have mentioned extensively on cauterization techniques.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of swelling that cannot die.
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When someone has an illness called "adubelati", and their death is delayed either due to the excess waste it produces or due to the patient's condition when they are decrepit (meaning very old) with little blood, or because of the season;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you want to hasten their death:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	then cauterize around it with many small cauteries, being careful not to overheat.
aprés le laisse ensi.	After leaving it like this.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing through at all the cauterization points, heat the cauterization tool that is shaped like this:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	Place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" until the cauterization tool has pierced the heart, and let the cauterization be such that the patient feels it externally in a way that slows the course of the rot.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment, wait until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The fire cure with iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	There is another kind of illness called "corrodens", which is nothing other than the wasting away of limbs, for it consumes the limbs just as fire consumes dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this illness in a place that can endure the fire cautery, then heat up both small and large cauterizing claws according to what is suitable for the area where the disease is located;
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	After that, cauterize thoroughly from all sides until you eradicate all the decay, leaving no trace of it behind, so that everything which is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then leave it for three days, and apply to the cauterized areas a soft paste made with oil until the scalds from the fire are removed, along with all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	Afterwards treat it with ointments that generate flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if you see no healthy scab forming after three days, it is good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if not, restart the cauterization on whatever remains in the corrupted areas.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this illness was sometimes treated with wet compresses instead of fire cauterization;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	But nevertheless, the fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already mentioned the treatment of a fever in this section.
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the swellings that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often it happens that on the feet, due to some external injury, a disease arises which we call "claws", and this is a faulty growth that wounds the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And there are two ways of performing cautery for this disease.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Fire cautery is when you heat a red-hot iron like the feather of an owl, and it should be made of good iron with the right measurements so that it can grip the nail from all sides, and have fine edges.
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	After that, place it very hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches its base.
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	Leave it like this for three days until it starts to discharge pus.
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Then make an ointment of wild mallows crushed with salt, and leave the ointment on overnight; the nail will come out and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are converted by force in the body, and often occur on hands and feet, then you must apply a hot water cautery to them.
et est en teil maniere:	and it is done this way:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	Take a copper or iron rod, or a goose feather quill, and place it on the nail and wart, that is, for warts;
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	Place the rod on it so that it touches all around, then add a drop of hot water, and hold your hand firmly, pressing your hand in such a way that the edge of the rod comes to the root of the nail, allowing the hot water to penetrate deep into the root.
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	and let the patient endure the biting of hot water for an hour.
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	then leave them be, and they will uproot themselves at their roots entirely.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another until you eradicate all those that are in the body, then treat them with ointments that generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	The doctor of shaking.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When some tremble with coldness of nerves, or from quartan fever or another, you must make four cauterizations or four on their spine, one between each vertebra.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and one cauterization on the foot, and one on the stomach with an olive-oil cautery.
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	let them tremble, and hasten their recovery from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	Pustules that stink.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	At times when the body breaks out in baths or stinking pustules, this comes from gross corrupted matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	at first, when they appear, one must cauterize each head of the pimple.
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	A subtle cautery with myrtle wood, of which the tip is taken by fire, or with a long root of aristoloche, or with the lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And sometimes they cauterize them at the beginning when they appear, according to this method, and it prevents their growth from then on, but breaks the excess which causes them, and heals them.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	But it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	There are often great bleedings from the artery which is cut at the wound that appears on the outside, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cauterization of a limb, and similar things.
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	It is a very serious thing to stop (the bleeding).
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And nonetheless, when this happens to someone, hasten to place your index finger on the wound's injury, and press firmly until the blood stops flowing beneath your finger, with no more drops emerging.
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	Then apply to the fire several small and large olive oil cauteries until they are all red.
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Afterward, take either the large or small one depending on the wound and the location of the artery, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, keeping the cautery there until the bleeding stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if sparks fly when you lift your finger from the wound, and the cauteries are extinguished, quickly take another one of the cauteries that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not cease doing one after another until the blood is staunched.
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	and make sure you do not burn the nerve nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient.
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	and know that when blood escapes from the artery, it cannot be properly stanched especially if the artery is large, unless through one of the four methods we have mentioned:
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	either by cauterization, or by extracting it if it is not treated, or by strongly binding with thread, or by applying medications that have the power to stanch blood.
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	and bind it tightly so.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever introduces bandaging with tight linen strips or applying hot compresses, or other similar methods, will not benefit much from it.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to someone and they have no mirror or medicine available, one must put their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it well until it is stanched over the wound and over the vein.
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	And do not move the arm, but often wet it with cold water, very cold so that the blood is frozen and thickened and reduced in volume.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And make incisions beforehand on those who need cauterization and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book on treating hernias.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have told you in the first chapter about all ailments requiring fire cauterization or burning medicines, and their effects, causes, instruments, and forms of cauterization.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	And I have placed this chapter about the head down to the feet; I will go through this same path in this chapter so that what is sought may be found more easily.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so as I begin this work, my dear son, you must learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the previous one on cauterization, and thus it requires even greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For there is doubt and fear, and death comes to many.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to attempt folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For people come for treatment in many different ways.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	If such patients die quickly upon seeing their condition and the severity of their illness, they perish due to despair.
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And this we ought to fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	Of these there are those who give you their meaning, and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am healed";
et li maladie est despitouse.	But the illness is deceitful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	It is not right to agree with those who come to you in this manner, but place greater emphasis on your honour than on your greed, and do not act foolishly but wisely regarding what you are sure of and can achieve.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	And make use of prognosis and diagnosis in treating your patients, for their salvation depends on it.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And this will help you gain a good reputation, glory, and a memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, may our Lord give you good understanding and righteousness, and may he will to inspire you with the holy inspiration of his hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter in a way that divides it into sections, according to how it is presented before the chapter on cauterization, which I explained to you from head to toe, so that you can find more easily what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Water-filled head.
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Know that this illness often comes to children during birth, when the midwife grips the child's head too tightly.
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	And sometimes it happens due to an unknown cause that is not known.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this illness occur in anyone but children, and death came swiftly to all that I witnessed.
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And for this reason, it seems best to abandon the work of such treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw a child whose shoulder was full of water, and his head grew larger each day until he could no longer bear it.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and the moisture increased so much that he died, and this fluid had gathered beneath the bone above the shoulder-blade, between the heart and the bone.
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and the treatment is such if the moisture is between the heart and bone, and the abscesses are small, that you should make a wide incision in the head.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture drains out.
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and observe here the shape of the spatula.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess larger, make two incisions in the form of a cross, according to this shape:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see that the sutures of the head are open on all sides, and water spurts out when you press it with your hand inside, but it does not respond to you:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	So you must divide the head into three incisions, like this.
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision extract all moisture quickly.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	Then bind the incisions with cloth strips and powders, apply wine and oil, and leave it like this for five days.
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Then untie the bindings, treat the wound with tenting and ointments, keep the head bound evenly, and feed the patient dry meat without moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another method of incision is to observe where the abscess seems largest, and where fluid has gathered.
car aucune fois est elle devant;	because sometimes it appears there first.
aucune fois derrier;	sometimes at the back.
aucune fois en destre;	Some times to the right side;
et aucune fois en senestre.	and some times to the left side.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Cut therefore the place where the abscess appears, and drain the pus, and make an incision according to your ability;
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and take care not to cut the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and if the vein starts to bleed, so that the patient dies due to loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of rheumatism
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When someone has a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or throat, and the illness is chronic, and medical treatment is ineffective, then the final remedy is cauterization along with the cutting of two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	It is necessary, therefore, when you cut the veins, that the patient should turn his head backwards;
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	Afterwards, rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then stretch the patient's neck back with all your strength.
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	Then look where the vein beats, and the eyes of both are after the ears, and they are almost closed.
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then mark the eyes of anchovy, then cut both with a sharp spatulate knife in two parts, so that the incision reaches down to the bone, and it should be done across the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see it, push the spatula under the artery and cover it above, cutting as deep as necessary across it.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut open, blood spouts upwards continuously outwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not open to the touch, you must measure the space of three fingers, then mark and cut until reaching the bone.
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	And the amount of blood to be let out is six ounces, and perhaps a little more or less, depending on how much the patient can endure, and the fullness of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	Look at the wound next.
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If it remains over the bone without a splint, cut to prevent hot abscesses from forming; open up the wound and bind it closed, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	Of migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient migraine comes with acute catarrh due to moisture of tears and warmth in the temples, along with old and persistent madness and similar things, and it is treated with various medical cures but nothing helps, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the method of arrow extraction is as follows: have the patient grasp their own hair at the temples and feel for the artery that pulses there, as it is quite prominent due to its beating, although in some men who are very cold this may not be apparent;
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	If it is retracted, have the patient constrict their neck with some cloth, then rub the area with a coarse cloth and bathe it in hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible.
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	then take the spatula which is shaped like this:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then draw it upwards with pincers, and carefully remove the membranes that are beneath on each side.
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	and if the artery is thin, turn it to the point of the lancet, then cut that part according to the size of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, the blood cannot flow out completely everywhere.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	and draw out blood from six cupfuls down to three.
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	and if the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk, so that nothing may come before the healing of the wound and blood may flow freely.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	Then remove the excess flesh that is between the two ligaments at the same time, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a knife-like tool until the bone is exposed so that the head is cut.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	It is a delicate operation if the patient has no fever and has a warm constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For cauterization helps to dry up moisture.
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	It is especially useful for dealing with moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	When extracting arteries, one must fill the space with old cotton and place well-made bandages over it;
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when one removes the bandages, ensure that they are covered with dry medicinal substances that promote flesh growth and bandages until it is healed.
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if you see blood flowing from the artery as you work, hasten to cut with cautery, or apply to the place of injury vitriol and hold it in your hand until the bleeding ceases.
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	And if you don't have that available, place your hand over the wound until the blood is coagulated, and pour cold water onto the area until the bleeding stops, holding it firmly as required.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	What is easier and lighter in the extraction of an artery is to cauterize the wound with this sharp cautery cut into two parts, but ensure that the cuts are deep enough to retain their heat for longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too thin, they hold less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	There should be a thumb's width between the two knives, and once you have joined together the two ends, place the heated iron on top until it reaches the bone, then cut the wound into two parts.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	and they are separated between the two joints for it is not fully healed from this cauterization.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears from the eyes flow down the veins that are on top of the head, and no treatment with medicine helps, and you see the patient's face turn red, and they feel itching or tingling on their forehead;
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and if their skin is tense and moist so that the hair of the eyelids falls out, and the eyelids are burned and peeled from the heat of the tears, then this treatment is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And the ancients called it "contusive cure," and you must make the patient with this disease grow hair on their forehead, then make three incisions equally spaced on the forehead along its length.
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	and let one of the incisions be just like that two fingers across your forehead downwards to the nose, and others from these two to the ribs above the nipples, and take care not to cut into any arteries which are on either side above the nipples.
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	keep your hand away from the extension of the two jaws, and let each wound be the size of three fingers in width across.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	have ready a piece of sponge with plenty of fine linen to wipe away the blood, then insert the sharp-pointed probe which is divided into two parts; this is its shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	from the first incision over the temple down to the second incision.
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	scrape out all the brain which lies between these two incisions down to the bone itself; do likewise from the middle incision down to the other second one and then withdraw this probe.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you insert into the first incision the instrument called 'scalpel', which is very sharp on one side and soft, not sharp, on the other, this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the cutting edge towards the flesh near the heart, and the soft edge towards the bone, insert it until it reaches the middle incision.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to what appears of the heart, and then make another similar incision up to the other side.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	then extract the blood evenly, and press the area for the extracted blood.
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	after that, place in each incision a tent made of old cotton, and put on moist bandages with wine, oil, and egg white, taking care not to let any abscesses develop.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	on the third day, remove the binding, and apply a great deal of warm water, then treat it with an ointment made from basilicon and rose oil, and other treatments used for wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	The realm of eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When someone is afflicted with acute catarrh repeatedly, and you see their eyes turned and small, weakening the sight, and the eyelids burnt;
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	the hairs fall out, and in the head they produce sharp pain, and the patient sneezes;
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	then you should know that these symptoms and this catarrh come from many blocked passages, and the best treatment is as follows:
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And so instruct the patient to clear their forehead, then make a wide incision in the middle of the forehead, and another from ear to ear.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	Begin with an incision from the left temple to the right temple, and let it reach the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that control chewing;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is exposed, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, and then separate between the two lips of the incision and place old cotton and linen cloth there;
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	Then place damp cloths soaked in wine and oil above it, and beware of hot abscesses.
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	Once it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat it with drying agents that promote flesh growth.
En teil maniere:	In this way:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	Take two parts wheat flower, and four parts colophony, and make an ointment.
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	Apply it to these wounds to promote flesh growth everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stuffing of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	Everything that falls into the ear is one of four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	Or grains, or insects, or rock from underground or similar thing like iron;
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	Where seed, such as beans, peas, and chickpeas;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Or things flowing like water and fluids and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When a stone or other object that does not fit or grow in the ear falls into it, place the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the stone, drip some purple oil or olive oil into it, then proceed with the extraction;
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	Make him sneeze with powder, and plug his nostrils as the sneeze comes on, and put woollen cloths around his ears;
et estent l’oreille au desus.	And stretch out the ear upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Often it happens that there is bleeding during this treatment;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	And if there is no bleeding, proceed with the extraction using fine pincers, which are shaped like this:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If she can endure pincers, it is good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	if not, then administer the gentle onion knife for removal;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	and if she cannot bear this, then make a brass tube and insert the head of the tube into the ear canal with force, blocking what surrounds the tube with soft wax so that no air can enter alongside it.
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	then treat her forcefully, for it often becomes necessary as we have said.
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	and if she does not heal with such methods, then take bird lime and put an instrument that serves this purpose inside it, wrapping some cotton around.
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	Then press the wound on the stone or whatever it is, and draw hard.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if it cannot be done with all these things that we have said, then hasten to open the ear rather than an abscess before heat and spasm come.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	the method of the incision is that you first empty the patient's head of blood, and extract according to the measure of its strength, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn their ear upwards, and cut a small incision in the root of the ear at the fat where it depends.
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and let the incision be like a moon, so that you reach the stone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck it quickly into your mouth.
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if there is an abscess that has formed and it swells, administer the procedure for its removal.
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it cannot be extracted, use the spatula, very thin according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not attempt this if you think the abscess is moist due to ear moisture, until you have made many incisions.
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	Then extract it with fine pincers and by sucking, as we have said, so that the extraction is eased.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	Therefore, in the case of water falling into the ear, the patient should first use sneezing as a remedy, and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let them lie on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If this should work, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	If not, take many stones according to the length of your thumb, thin and light, and heat them a little in the fire.
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and place the patient with a hole in his ear, and let it protrude from one of his feet on the other side, and pierce another stone above the stone that is in the ear.
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and do not stop making stones from stone until the water comes out completely, and thus let it come out completely.
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	and if you see this, take a reed and push one end into the ear, and ignite the other end with fire until the tip of the reed burns.
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	then remake another with other reeds until the water comes out completely, as we have said about stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the extraction of the beast, if it has a small body like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the section on division.
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if she is of great body such that one can feel her, so arrange to extract pincers;
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and it is the lightest thing that can be removed from within the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the extraction of worms embedded in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the section on distillations and its treatment does not help, then one must look at the ear in the sun:
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	if no worms appear, so catch them with fine pincers, and if none show up, take a cane shaped like this one:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it is narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And insert the finest head into the ear according to the severity of the patient's suffering, then suck hard on all parts of the cane;
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey to come out, stuff cotton around the stem as I have said for stones.
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	and if they do not come out as we have said, then administer the distillations that ancient doctors have tested for worm occlusion, and you will find it in the treatise on distillations.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	and distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, of which the form is as you see here:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And be it of silver or copper, narrow below to the small openings, and overhang above for distillation;
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	and to compress the distillation into the instrument of well-made copper for this purpose, and if you wish take the razor and envelope around the point with cotton accordingly;
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	Then I pour your oil or your juice, and whatever medicine you desire in the cane, and let the cane be placed into the ear.
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	Then push in the razor with all the cotton, and press your hand firmly until the oil is completely drained from the ear.
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	The patient should smell the oil within, and let it be that the distillation is slightly warm from the fire, unless you are to distill it into the ear.
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	Be careful that it is not too cold, as the medicine would not be so effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stuffing of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born without openings in their ears.
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	And this same thing happens to men due to a wound or wax buildup within the ear, and these blockages sometimes become so deep in the ear that one cannot see them.
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	and sometimes there is a protrusion of the hole, and one can see it clearly.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	Therefore, when it is not visible and there are several conditions for a rapid cure, you should place the patient's ear in the sun.
et regarde dedens:	and look inside.
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	if you see the dark spot appear, operate with this small spatula as follows:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	Make sure it is sharp and flat both in front and behind so as not to wound the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	if the dark spot is in the earwax or the body of the ear, hold it with fine tweezers and extract it gently until all the wax is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the earwax is completely blocking the ear, take a thin and light scraper, heat it slightly over a flame, then insert it into the ear canal.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you detect an impaction that causes the patient earache, pierce gently, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear.
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	Then place in the ear a tent according to the size of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do this for as long as it takes until the wound is healed, on that day you take a tent and moisten it with rose water, then powder it with ground vitriol.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And if you see the ear swollen, it is necessary that you treat the tent and remove another one moistened in a wax made of rose oil and beeswax, until the swelling is gone.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and small cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and employ other treatments that stop the flow of blood as described in the section on distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the paper flesh
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	This eyelid remedy that comes in paper when they are moist and dry out, you must extend with tweezers and small pincers, then scrape with a spatule made from its roots.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Then place ground vitriol on it quickly.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if it peels off, gently cauterize with a subtle lenticular cautery, and the cauterizer after incision is better.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	and they often return when any remains of their root stays behind.
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	Of the hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times there come to the eyes certain things that appear like hail in form and hardness, and for this reason this illness is called "glaucoma," and it is an accumulation of moisture thick upon the paper above and below.
li ovraiges est telz:	The works are such as these:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	Take note if the glaucoma moves from one side to another, for this is a minor thing to know;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Make it therefore wide, then lightly scrape each side, take the pincers to it and scoop it out.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	If you cannot remove it without piercing the paper slightly, this does not harm the patient much;
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	And if the wound is large, sew it together with stitches, and treat it until it is healed.
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If the wound is small, apply no pressure or force, for ointments will restore it quickly and promote flesh growth.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	If the blood is descending into the ear towards the upper part, then turn it upside down and catch the blood with some absorbent paper. Press and squeeze gently from both sides.
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	And if the blood-soaked paper is far away due to an incision made, it does not matter.
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	Once the blood is extracted, rinse the eye with salty water and treat it with an ointment that promotes flesh growth until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	from the fat around the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinach is a grease that forms on the paper-like membranes above [the eyes], and this happens more often in children than adults, causing great discomfort to their eyes. They experience catarrh in the mornings, and cannot bear to look at the sunlight because tears rush to their eyes;
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	And so they lie on their faces afterward, sleeping above [the dislocation], and the paper-like membranes beneath their eyebrows become moistened by a flower's appearance or covering of exinach that appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the place with your fingers and feel the bone between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	The procedure is carried out as follows: with the patient's head placed in your lap;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	You then take a linen cloth and prepare a tent-like structure in the shape of a circle according to the amount needed to contain the exinach from each part, placing it over [the patient];
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and press with your two hands from either side so that the extraneous matter is gathered within the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	then make in the middle of the moisture with the sharp spatule a slit no wider than the wound made when opening a vein;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and make the skin perfect until you reach the extraneous matter;
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	and in many cases, extraneous matter comes out of the slit, resembling a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Extract it, therefore, all at once with a piece of lint cloth between your two hands outside the wound, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed.
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	And make sure you do not insert it into the incision, lest you reach the entire spinal cord up to the eye and injure it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the bone does not appear at the beginning of the incision, then slightly enlarge the incision gently until it becomes visible.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	Then extract it as we have described, then wet some cloth in vinegar and water, and place it on the site, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And for such men who grind salt and put it on to corrupt that moisture which has remained.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat [it] until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the place of an abscess with heat, treat [it] with soothing emollients until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	Of the hairs on papules.
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When hairs grow on the eyelids contrary to nature and are not plucked out, they harm the eyes, causing various ailments such as habitual tearing and softening of the lids, ultimately leading to blindness.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	and the treatment is performed according to four methods:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	by means of cauterization with fire, or by medicinal treatment depending on what has been presented in the chapter on cauterization, and it is done either through incision and stitching, or by canes, as I shall explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	You must place the patient's head on your lap, then turn their left eye toward your left hand;
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	if it turns [toward your hand], that is good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	if not, insert a needle into the corner of it [the eye] along with some thread;
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and let this be near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs grow next to these hairs, and pull the thread above all the eyelid, and turn it back [toward you];
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	Then make an incision under that part of the skin, beneath the hairs close by, cutting all the patella along its breadth, from the large hollow down to the small one.
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	Then extract the thread and place beneath the skin a small tent made of cotton and linen, then make an incision in the skin shaped like an anchor, just as the myrtle leaf is, but it ought to be proportionate according to how much you wish to raise the skin that has been divided all over.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if the one who requires it needs to cut away a large quantity of skin according as the skin is softened;
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	Then make an incision along the entire patella following the two lines you have marked, beginning at the large hollow and going down to the small one.
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	and be one of the incisions near natural hairs with a thickness of a root, then insert the uncinus into one of the two angles of the heart, and then strip all of it.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	then join the two lips with a seam using a needle and any fine wool thread, wipe away the blood, remove excess threads above both eyebrows and any sticky substances if you wish to do this.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	and if not, have no care for it, then leave the seam and threads for three or four days.
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	then treat the wound without a seam using drying and binding substances, for paper becomes loose during the healing of the wound and its reunion, but the seam is harmful (as the ancients said), and this work is free from fear.
et si a une autre maniere:	and if you do so in another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and take a piece of paper that is shaped like the leaf of myrtle, as we have said, three ounces separated according to the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cut what is above with small scissors evenly according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you cannot hold the forceps, and the thing is not even, then take a needle with one thread, and place it in the middle of the shape;
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and place another thread by the large border, and the second thread by the small one, and join between your two fingers the threads evenly;
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then raise your hand evenly, and lift all the skin that you have cut, as we have said, then join the two lips of the wound by stitching, and treat it until it is healed;
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if an abscess arises at your incision site, soothe it with cautery and similar soothing ointments.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	And sometimes the hair on the paper turns white:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	Then it is necessary that you follow what we have said about incision;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	But the suture on one side or the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment of ulcers follows this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	And it is that you turn the paper over and cut within according to what I have said, then make two ulcers per side, and also two subtle threads as long as the paper's width and the thickness of a spatula.
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	et hold the two heads of two parts where you hold the tendons;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then bring together one and the other carefully on that which is above the cornea of the eye, and remove the two chains from the two parts thus formed;
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and leave it thus for a few days, and the skin which has been stretched will die and turn black and rot until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it takes too long, cut it with some force, then treat until it is healed;
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	and once the wound has healed, if the cornea is raised, and hairs will no longer prick there;
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	and this is the form of the two chains which you will make according to this figure, and with these quantities in length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	The works are such that you take a subtle needle, and insert into it soft and subtle silk thread;
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	Then bring together the heads and tie each one subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm's length.
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	Then place in the wound another thin silk thread briefly, and tie the ends of the threads together.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	Then put the patient's head on your lap.
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	And let it be near the sun so that the work is illuminated, for this is delicate and precise work, then insert the needle into the entire wound at the root of the adjacent hair, and pierce through to the other side until you extract it from above the natural hair.
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	Then extract the hair up to the shaft, and push it into the shaft if there is one or two or three or more.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Then extract your hand until the hairs come towards you fully into the paper with their natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the shaft is treated and the hair does not come towards you with it, then treat the shaft from below along all of the thread that you have arranged there, until the shaft comes forward through the hole above and you see it by eye.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	Then treat the shaft and thread like this, close the eye, and leave it closed for two or three days until the hair dries in its place and flesh grows over.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hairs are small, accompany a long hair with natural horsehair, and raise it with that one or leave it alone until it is elongated, then pull it out.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the decay of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or inflammation comes into the eye, it has two manners.
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	One natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly due to a wound, or from a surgeon's knife, or from cauterization, and through similar means.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the way to treat it is to open that suture, and separate its lips, and place linen threads inside, and bind it until it is healed.
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And you must not use anything that dries out or constricts in its treatment.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before;
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but I use softening substances, like fenugreek;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and the decoction of water or wine and flax seed are cooked, with melted diaklon ointment in any oil, wrap it in a cloth, and treat accordingly.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the key to your treatment is that you must be careful not to join it back together in its previous form;
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And these treatments we have mentioned are not strong enough to prevent this disease from returning in its previous form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh which comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This illness, which is dislocated and truly called 'axacrati', is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	The complications arise from wounds, cuts, cauterization, and similar procedures;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	and the way of working is such that you take a needle with two threads on it, and insert it into the flesh, piercing from left armpit to right so that the thread comes out at both shoulders of the body;
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	then lift up all the flesh above the needle, and cut with a wide spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	and if the shape of the paper returns according to what is needed, it is good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	if not, take a razor and place it in the gap, turn the paper, and make two cuts along its edge within the paper;
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	and let the edges of the two cuts be at the two corners of the incision you have made, and make these corners so that when they are assembled, the shape is like that of a letter called 'Greek';
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	Then remove that flesh, according to the amount that its sides are extended below, from what follows the paper, then adjust the two separated parts, and sew them with a thread of wool.
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it with what we have said about softening medicines and bandages, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the illness comes from a rupture or suture or cauterization, you must make an incision directly below the hairs of the papers, and according to what is written above;
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	Then separate between the two lips of a bandage, as I have said;
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	And one must perform the operation according to the form of the illness, as it is very diverse in shape, and wise surgeons devise instruments with all their power on how to restore the figure to its natural form;
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And the patient themselves, according to what they need for treatment and tools, it is necessary to have several arrangements.
dou soudement de la papiere	suddenly from the skin paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this welding occurs in young men, so that the iris is welded to the white part of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, it is necessary for you to insert the tip of a razor blade under the iris and lift it upwards.
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	And stretch it with pincers until you cut what is hard with the fine spatula, which should not be too sharp or cutting so that the patient can bear it and the sharp spatula does not hurt their eye.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	And make your incision, from which you remove the assembly, lightly so that the iris returns to its natural shape.
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	And the whole assembly is healed, and sometimes they use salted water on the eye, and raise it with warm water, and with collars.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	Then place between the eye and paper a tent of linen, and put on the eye wool moistened in egg white.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	After three days, use collars and hot compresses until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the fingernail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	Know that the nail grows in two ways:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	One is nervous and resembles hard skin, and the other is not nervous but looks like white frozen moisture, which cannot be pierced by iron or scraped off with pincers when touched.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	And both these appearances begin towards the large tear duct, and grow little by little until they cover all of the view, all of the light, and all of the eye's movement.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the manner of incision is such that the patient must place their head on a sound pillow, then open their eyes for you.
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	hold the paper to your hand, then curl your nail into tiny pincers, and stretch it above [the incision].
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	then take a needle, and put into it either horse hair or cow hair or ox hair and strong thread;
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and bend the tip of the needle slightly and insert it into your nail with the hair-side facing the underside of the nail. Pierce all the way through the nail with the needle, tie off the needle from one side of the nail to the other with thread, stretch it above [the incision], pluck out every hair on either side of the nail that might touch the eyelid or lash and the surrounding area, then cut away what remains at the root of the tear duct with a very sharp knife and small forceps. Leave the natural flesh around the tear duct intact so that bodily fluids may still flow as usual through the incision;
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	and sometimes they extend to the nail bed with just the file or needle as we have said.
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	then scrape away all of the skin until you reach the patella, which is shaped like this:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And be careful not to touch or tear the fleshy membrane with the patella, and ensure that the cartilage is not pierced.
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	After the incision, apply a pinch of ground silk into the eye and make a collar from litharge. Leave it on until the next day.
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat him for whatever he needs until he is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, and the file cannot enter, often this type of condition is treated with medicine.
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and are born as I have described in the division, and if you see it cut, operate on the patient's eye, and take a light spatula with a sharp edge according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And lift the eyelid gently, and if you see that it does not diminish and the reason for this is urgent, then pour into the eye a collar made of litharge and red lead powder, both ground with salt, and pack the eye until the next day;
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	then resume the other procedure according to this same method until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing opposes you in the eye, like a warm abscess, then lance it, and treat first the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh in the eyelid harms the eye severely, then suspend it with an unguis, and cut away a portion but not all, so that no corpus of tears comes out;
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	Then instill red collar ointment into the eye, which is made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	Of the flesh that grows on the cornea.
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	Some men's eyes are born with a red spot, which covers the pupil and extends onto the sclera, resembling a red rose petal.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	And the work is that the patient should place their head on your hand, then you open the eyes and turn all of this flesh with suitable hooks and hold it firmly.
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	Then cut the first flesh, and continue cutting with a razor until you reach the end, being careful not to injure the eye in your work.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	And let the incision be made with the spatula we mentioned when cutting the nail and using small forceps to remove it, as illustrated in this chapter.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	When the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, apply ground linseed oil or distill red collarwort and similar corrosive medicines onto it. Place cotton wool mixed with egg white over the eye to ensure the hot abscess is secured.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	If nothing remains, and hot blood rises to the surface, and you suspect a hot abscess, leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with soothing medications for hot abscesses.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Then return to your work once it is healed, and thus do likewise when flesh has adjusted in the eye through this process.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	However, it is necessary that you alleviate the treatment for each weak eye through natural methods;
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and accidental injury with iron instruments;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	nor should you insert your hand into any of these procedures until you see that this limb is tolerant to the operation.
des voines des eulz	eyelid veins
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Beneath the eyelids are red veins that cover the eye, obstructing its function and weakening vision over time.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	It is necessary for you to first examine the eye in which the injury appears, whether it is sound or not and has no other disease except that of soundness.
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	then treat it as follows:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	instruct the patient to lay their head in your lap, and then bind those veins as much as is appropriate according to your knowledge; let the binding be twice as strong on these parts.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two ounces by degrees in I body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	then treat the areas around those veins with force, wiping away blood after an hour until you see a removal of the soundness from the eye.
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	And make sure you do not injure the eye with the points of spatules, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, being very diligent in your task so that you only cut those veins.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	And when you have done this, then distill into the eye green and red collirio to corrupt that which remains of the humors.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you cannot collect all of these things at that hour, then make a plaster over the eye with soothing substances to alleviate the pain, and leave it there for some days until the pain is soothed and you are certain of warm abscesses, then begin again according to this method until it is healed.
et c’est li forme des forces:	And this is the form of treatment:
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the eye fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The physician named it "arrissati" a fistula:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	when you treat it with cauterization and medicine for a burning abscess as I have mentioned before, and it is not healed, if there is puss inside that you must cut above the abscess, where it should die, and remove all moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the decay and blackness, take all the instruments that are shaped like this one;
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	and it is called an "aspre chief", and should be made of iron with a point at one end, and sharpened like a file as shown in the present illustration;
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And place it on the location of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers and press with your hand a little until you feel that the decay has been removed;
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and do this sometimes, then restore the place with drying medications.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	if the place is welded together, and scar tissue forms there, and the body of the wound is joined, and remains so for forty days without reopening or becoming infected, and no ill accidents happen, then know that it has healed.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	but if not, there is another procedure to draw the fistula back through the navel hole according to this method:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	and that you uncover the bone again with iron instruments and sharp medicines. When it is uncovered thus take one drill according to this form where the head of the iron has three angles, and the shaft tapers down to a point as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	Then place it above the bone near the armpit, and move your hand away from their eye one inch. Then turn with all of the auger until it pierces the bone, feeling the patient as you do so because wind will go inside them if they keep their hand on their knee;
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	And then restore the place with dry medicine as I have taught you. And when the flesh rises and hardens the places, so does the matter come to the knee;
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	It is something lighter for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eye opens fully without any disturbance to the kidney or weakening, then you must bind the patient.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	Then cleanse it, then apply cupping without iron to suck, then put on the eye I a poultice made of acacia and aloe and incense and saraccolle. Then bind up the eye with plasters on bandages and cloth.
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	and the manner of the dressings is such that you take soft enough cloths, and fold each into four, then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eyes need.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	then strain it above with a hard bandage, and repeat the cups to suck without wounding;
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	then remove the cups and leave the eye strained day and night, and if the bandage loosens, you must tighten it greatly.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	then remove the bandage after the day and night, and if you see the eye improving, it is good.
se ce non;	if not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it starts again, apply the poultice, the dressings, the bandage, and the cups until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Of tearing of tough membrane
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When ruptures occur in the black membrane, it then opens up, and comes out like paper-thin pieces resembling grains of resin, and is terrible to behold;
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	then if you see it cut, the procedure is such that you insert a needle into the root of the lower part until reaching the upper part, then insert another needle where there is a double thread of the arm;
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and make it pierce through, leaving the first needle in place according to its position;
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then cut the place of the double thread and tie a part of the membrane around it, securing it tightly, then remove the needle and apply wet linen moistened with egg white;
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	And let it remain until the son of a dog whelps with its litter, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed.
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And sometimes the wound is covered with an egg on all sides by a circle of cloth until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the eye gives great appearance of trouble, pierce it with a subtle spatule that comes out through the eye, and remove the white moisture, lowering the eye immediately;
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then extract it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the eye's bowels
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease which is called 'alcunnati' is nothing but the bowels that are assembled in the eye, appearing as descending water, but it is not water.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	and the way of appearance for this work is that you make the patient sit on an equipped and straight chair, then take their head between your two hands, and move it until you see the bow coming above your eyes;
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	then be careful, and do not lower or cover the light, and let the patient see things as they usually would;
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if it does not descend downwards, know that it is acute, and if the bending movement is not equipped as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	make the patient sit between your hands, then take a thin spatula and make an incision on the corneal tissue with one stroke along the line of the conjunctiva to the corneal tissue and the cornea until the bow is exposed.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and when it has come out, instill warm water mixed with honey into the eye, or water boiled with fennel and honey, then treat it further until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	Eye waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have seen the likenesses of waters in their divisions, and what is required to pierce them;
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	so act according to what is healthy.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	You must make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from light so that the sun does not shine in their eye, and bind their healthy eye tightly shut.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	Then place the paper from your left hand to their eye if it is their left eye that is affected, or from your right hand if it is their right eye.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	Then take into your right hand, if the eye is left-sided, the instrument called "almagda," or in your left hand, if the eye is right-sided;
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Then place the tip of the instrument near the cornea in alignment with the thickness of a line on that white part of the eye towards the lower tear duct, then push the instrument called "almagda" skillfully, and turn your hand so it pierces into the white of the eye, feeling as if "almagda" comes to an empty space.
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	And it is necessary that the path of "almagda" be exactly equal to the space from the pupil to the end of the black part.
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	and this is the crown of the eye;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	you will see the bone in that paper due to the clarity of the cornea, and you may put the instrument until it reaches where the water is, then express it underneath one voice after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the swelling subsides now, the patient sees it before them and the instrument in their eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	after put it back in place gently, and if the water rises again through the second path, apply force with the instrument until it is fixed and no longer moves upwards, then slowly extract the almogda by turning your hand to and fro;
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	then put some salt gem water into it again, and remove this from the eye inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then apply to the eye dressings or moist wool in rose oil and egg white, binding it with a healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, apply ground cumin with plenty of egg white on top.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, as there are some men with very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called 'alberit', of which this is the shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	and then pierce the conjunctiva alone, do not go too deep but make it subtle, and then insert the almogda as we have said;
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	And upon completion of the work, prepare for the patient a comfortable bed where they may lie on their back in a dark place;
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	Be free from all movement, eat light foods, do not move your head either to the right or left, and remain bound according to their condition for three days;
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	Then unbind them in the same dark room, test their vision, and make them look at certain things. Afterwards, rebind them until the seventh day;
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And you must not do this during or after the incision of the wound right now, for it is necessary to keep them calm due to the quick rising of fluid.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	If an abscess becomes hot, you must open it before seven days have passed, and treat it with a remedy for abscesses.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	And when it has calmed down, you must open the eyelid and apply a small bandage to cover it for one day, and remain in that dark room afterward.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	Then go out of the house often and often, and convert into those cases.
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And you should know that no disciple should interfere in these matters.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And there came to us someone from Iraq, who told us that in his country they make pierced amulets for which water is extracted, but I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients.
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the appearances of the forms of almagda, for those who do not know them will see them;
et soient d’arain proprement:	and they are properly made of brass:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And the top part of this should also be made from the same subtle material, while the bottom end is three-sided in shape.
de la char sor le neis	From the flesh above the nose.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	Sometimes there arise joined together various cars, of which some appear as scorpions with many feet;
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	And if there are such ones with chariot embellished by swift colours, and if it has soft body of good colour.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In this one then of these chariots which is soft, and not embellished, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and work his nostrils, and apply the unguent to those parts, and treat them forcibly.
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	hold what you can support with the fine-pointed spatula from one side, so that you know this flesh is entirely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if there remains anything that cannot be cut, open it with all the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing is left.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and if it overwhelms you without warning, with an abscess so fierce, then cauterize it as is necessary.
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	and if they are malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize them until the blood is extinguished and all flesh is removed, then apply very fresh and sharp wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If it does not work, and moisture reaches up to the palate, know that it is healed.
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	And if the moisture does not perforate as it should, know that there is cartilage in the bone above, to which the instruments do not reach for cutting.
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	Then you must insert a piece of flax thread slightly thicker than usual, knotted by hand, with about one finger's width between each knot.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	Have the patient grasp the end of the thread in their fist and pull it with all their might until it comes out through the nostril into the mouth.
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	Children at school often do this, and it is an easy thing for those who wish to try it.
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	Then hold the head that comes out through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes out through the mouth with the other hand, and pull each after the other being careful not to damage the cord.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this so that you know the night has corrupted that flesh, then draw out the child, wipe away the blood, and wet the cord with Egyptian ointment, and return it to the nose as before.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Do this for three days or more, until the ointments have completely eroded all that remains of the flesh;
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	Then place in the nose a plug of flax for some days until it is healed, and if necessary, use drying medications.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	And this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, for which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And it is made of silver or copper, resembling an open lamp, just like a tube, and it leads in the same way.
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	and if you see, make a closed tube, and let the instrument be full to purge the head;
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and have one handle at the head to hold it when heating oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	From the flesh above the nose.
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times there arises in the head of the nose an illness which is called 'telul', and it grows and becomes large afterwards, to such a degree that it is an ugly sight to behold;
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	and for this you must cut it at the beginning, and remove all flesh, then place a hot cautery or burning medicine on it.
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	and if you delay cutting it until it becomes large, take note if it is hard, of dark colour, and lacks feeling.
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	do not touch it with iron, for it is an aggravated abscess, because when you cut it once, great harm comes to the patient.
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	and if the abscess is soft to the touch, not dark in colour, and you see that it can be completely cut away, then evacuate the patient and cut it without fear, and treat the area with drying and constricting substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when bone-joint treatments come to one of these cartilage works, it profits little, except in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	It is necessary then, when this happens to anyone, to consider if the wound is fresh with all its blood.
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then align the two lips [of the wound] for suturing, then treat it until it is healed.
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	And if the lips [of the wound] are already separated on both sides, it is necessary that you excise all parts of their core until they bleed, then bring together the two lips for suturing, and compress them, apply a powder composed of dragon's blood and powdered incense.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Place a piece of strong plaster or another adhesive poultice on top of the powders and leave it until it sticks by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The way of sewing (a wound) is such that you bring together the edges.
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or with needles, as we have said in the sewing of the belly (wound).
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or by thread, as I have made you aware.
des apostemes des levres	From abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	Within the lips, abscesses form by hand, resembling small grains or bumps of various sizes.
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	Then it is necessary to turn back the lips of the wound, incise each boil or bump, grasp them with forceps and squeeze out their contents.
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	Next apply ground glass or fine powder after the incision to stop any bleeding that may occur.
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then leave it easily, and treat the area with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	The flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Often there appears on the gums hardened matter that the ancients call "albulus";
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	So it is necessary to hold it with tongs, cut it at its root, and let the bowel or blood flow out.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	Then put on the area ground vitriol or other restraining and drying powders.
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	And if that matter returns after the incision, which often happens, cut it a second time and cauterize it.
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	If it does not return after the cautery.
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	And these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	of wounds
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Sometimes hard and rough shells are gathered in the head of teeth within the mouth between gums, which is unsightly.
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	And sometimes the teeth become black and yellow and green until decay reaches the gums, making them foul-smelling.
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	You should make the patient sit between your hands with their head in yours and extract the teeth or shells that appear until there is nothing left.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	And thus do the same for blackness, greenness, yellowness, and other stains until they are cleaned.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	And if you remove that which is at the root cause, it is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	If not, start again from the beginning on the second day and the third, until you have everything back in place;
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	And know that teeth require various shapes of tools to remove, depending on what the work requires, as the rasp used to clean outside the teeth has a different shape than those used between the teeth;
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	And these shapes and others should be prepared for you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	When treating tooth pain, one should delay extraction for as long as possible, as it should be avoided if at all possible.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	As it is very valuable, one should only extract teeth when there is no other option.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is compelled to extract (the tooth), you must be certain about which tooth is causing pain.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the pain deceives the patient, and they think it is in a healthy tooth, so they have the good tooth drawn.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	and yet the pain does not leave them for this reason, as the bad tooth remains, for we have already seen it in these people.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	and when you are certain which tooth is causing pain, it is necessary to scrape all around the tooth with a spatula. Use force to protect the gums from all sides.
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then loosen it with your fingers or the delicate pincers with gentle pricks and pricks until it is well loosened, then firmly close the pincers.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and let the patient's head be in your lap between your knees, holding it steady so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it cannot be removed, then take one of these instruments and gently insert it into each side, moving it around like you did previously.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if the tooth is pierced and worn down, you must fill it with threads where the holes are;
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and if you carefully extract it with tongs, do not break when extracting it;
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	and one must work very diligently around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	Be careful not to break it, leaving a piece behind, for then the patient will return with even greater pain from the root.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And beware not to act like the ignorant surgeon who, due to their haste and boldness, sometimes breaks something in the jaw, and fails to treat what we have explained.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but they cause severe illness through the hole due to the roots that remain or the jaw that is broken, as we have often seen.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	and when the tooth is drawn, wash the place with wine or vinegar and salt;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and if there is bleeding from the tooth, which often happens, pack the place with powdered green vitriol.
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	and if that doesn't work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The shapes of the instruments, with which one moves teeth first, should have long points and thick handles so that they do not bend when you are drawing the tooth.
et ce sont les formes:	and these are their forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should have large handles so that they do not bend when you extract it, and they should be well-made iron with teeth to hold [the tooth].
de la racine des dens	From the root of the teeth.
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains when drawing [the tooth], you must place moist cotton mixed with butter on the site for one or two days until the tissue softens, then insert the tongs which are called "algefri", making the mouth resemble a bird's beak.
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	and let them be made inside as well like a file, which is its form.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with these pincers, then you must uncover all the flesh around the root, and place there an instrument which is called 'althali', that is to say, a saw, of this form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	and let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps because of this, it is good.
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	if not, help yourself with all the instruments, from which the shapes come hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps with this instrument which has two edges, of which the form is thus:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron instruments which are placed in front of the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large pincers, of which the form is thus:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	and let this instrument be strong so that it cannot break, and know that there are many dental instruments.
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also other instruments which are not listed here.
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and skilled master physicians find their own instruments by themselves according to what their work and the illness show them, because there are so many illnesses for which the ancients did not teach an instrument for its diversity of use; if a bone is broken or any other bones could be, look for the appropriate instruments I told you about, and help with gestures, this is how they are formed:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And [the bandages] are thick and hold well to keep the bone in place so that it doesn't slip out but can be held and removed.
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	Then restore the place with medicine suitable for this purpose, and if there is any decay in the bone that is small, then use all these instruments:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the tooth appears unlike natural teeth and its form is ugly, especially in young women, you must know if the tooth was born after other teeth, and it isn't in the right place; such a tooth cannot be treated or filed.
adonques lou raie;	Therefore remove it.
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	And if it is hollow with the tooth still attached, take this instrument that has the form of a small sharp beak and is made of iron.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And strike it several times with a hammer for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move other teeth. If it is apparent that it can be filed down, use this tool shaped like the one described here to file it:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	And it is like a file from which needles are made;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	And with the file we polish teeth gently from time to time, so that they do not move until they heal.
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	Then the whole surface in the end to all raspers, and if the tooth is too sharp and it wounds the tongue, one must file its roughness until it is even so that it does not wound the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	When teeth loosen
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the front teeth are loose due to impact or a fall, and the patient cannot bite down on them without them falling out, and you have treated them with constrictive medicines, but it is not effective;
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	They must be secured with gold wire, for silver wire turns green and rots, but gold never changes.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	and let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the size of the space between the teeth.
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	and if you wish to straighten the teeth, take the thread and double it between two healthy teeth, then place the ends of the thread over the misplaced tooth or teeth so that you can pull it gently until it aligns with a healthy tooth on the other side.
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	then begin the process of covering it again up to the part where you started, and extract your hand gently and carefully so that nothing moves.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	and let the thread be tied at the root of the tooth so it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then cut the ends of the thread with some small scissors, and gather them together, then place it back between the healthy teeth so that it does not hurt the tongue.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	and then leave it tight as much as it can stay, and if it loosens, or the thread breaks, hold it with another thread;
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	if it stays put and serves thus for its entire time, and this is the shape of teeth and the arrangement of two healthy teeth, and two misaligned ones, as you can see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when the tooth falls out, it is placed back in its place, fresh after fresh, as we have said;
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and do not let anyone who is not skilled and careful get involved, and sometimes a tooth is made from cow bone, and it is placed in the spot where there is a missing one, and it is held as we have said, and it stays put and serves thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cut loose the tongue's bond
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Sometimes this ligament comes from below the tongue naturally, which is how one is born.
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or by an accidental wound that has healed over;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the treatment is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and have their head in your hand, lifting the tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	then cut the nerve of the tongue, so that it is separated from its place, and if there is hardness or swelling, and it is due to a sudden wound, then insert a hook and cut widely into this ligament;
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and be careful that the incision is not too deep, to avoid damaging the artery beneath;
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	and when you have done this, lift the place with rosewater and oil, or cold water, then place a linen cloth underneath the tongue.
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and let the patient be bathed each night so that the wounds do not close up.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	and if bleeding occurs, apply crushed vitriol onto the wound;
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	and if blood loss persists, cauterize with the light-colored cautery, which is beneficial in such cases;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	then treat it with another remedy until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	and if you see it become discolored or turn black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	And if it declines towards blanching, and there is moisture present, throw an ointment on it, make a slit with a small spatula, and release it from one side to the other.
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	And if the blood rushes to your work, apply crushed vitriol until it stops, then return to your task and treat everything thoroughly.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then lift the place with ease and silk, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	From abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	Sometimes lumps arise in the throat called "godaths", properly known as the two tonsils. When you treat them as we have said before, and they are not healed, take heed:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	If this abscess is hard with little sensation and a pale colour, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red and the root is swollen, do not touch it with iron, also due to the discharge of blood;
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	But leave it until it is ripe, and then you will remove it, or it may break itself.
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is of white colour and the root is subtle, prepare the instrument to cut, but first check if the abscess rests warm and is calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then have the patient sit facing the sun, with their head in your lap, and open their mouth while you hold the instrument between your hands, pressing the tongue down so that it is out of the way.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	and let it be of silver or fine brass like a knife;
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	can you press the tongue with all these instruments, and when you see an abscess take the hook and insert it into the almond, then pull hard upwards as much as you can;
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and pull out any matter with it from the wound, then cover the instrument with a cloth which is the same shape and looks like tongs;
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	and however the head is bent, and one side to another, and it is very sharp, and made of iron or steel;
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you don't have this instrument ready, use the tongs instead, which are shaped like this:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And be sharpened on one side, and left blunt on the other side;
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and when you have treated one almond, treat the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and water mixed with honey, and if there is bleeding, then gargle the patient with only water, or with boiled pomegranate rind, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops;
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it until it is healed;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	and sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two tonsils, so treat them just as you would the two tonsils equally.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman for an abscess that had formed inside her throat, namely a small one;
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	and had almost completely closed her throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passageway, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained like that for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	The abscess had risen so much that we had to insert two tubes through the two nostrils.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I quickly rushed forward, and stuck an ounce-weighted arrow into one [of the stones], then drew it out, and a large portion of bowel came with it.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	then I inserted [an arrow] again on the other side of the nose, then opened his mouth for him and pressed on his tongue.
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	after that I stuck the arrow-weighted [tool] into his abscesses, and cut a part of it away, but only a little blood flowed out.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	And so were the windpipes of her throat removed, and now she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting this abscess for a long time.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	And the abscess would return, filling the place I had emptied until it became very large again.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	Then I instructed her and cauterized within the throat.
ensi demora sens croistre;	It remained without growing further.
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I left these areas, relying on God for what happened next.
de l’uve	Of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When the kingdom descends into the grave, and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular".
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	And if it is below [the eye] and large and round, it is called a "bag".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, and you see that the surrounding abscesses are calmed, and it is delicate, then you must cut it.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and this one which is round, gathered [together], and not long;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and it is bloody or of false colour or black, then you must avoid cutting into it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner I have described, of its whiteness and length, you must make the patient sit facing the sun, and press their tongue with the instrument that we mentioned before.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Then insert the lancet into the cavity, draw it downwards and cut with the first of the two instruments that I mentioned for incising the testicles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And you must not cut any flesh beyond what is superfluous outside the natural limits
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	For if you cut more, it harms the voice and speech
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And after the incision, follow what we have said about incising the testicles, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient is afraid of cutting, then it is necessary to use an instrument for cauterization to alleviate their fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is hot, very sharp, and penetrating.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And the patient should place their head in your lap, then press their tongue with an instrument that we mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, moisten it with hot water, neither too thick nor too thin.
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and apply this completion of the instrument to it; thus is its form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And place on the head some hair whereon one places the medicine, just like with the hairs of a spoon, and place this instrument over all the medicine onto the eye.
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	and let the patient lie on their side so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth with the medicine within it, lest it descend into the throat, damaging him.
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour, until you see it darken and the stinging of the medicine subsides.
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	and if you can see again, take some cotton and roll it over an instrument, then dip the cotton in the medicine and place the instrument with all the cotton on top of the eyelid until the cotton adheres to the eye.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	And do this often, so that the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and fall off after four or five days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you need to restart the medical cautery, then restart it, and after the cauterization wipe around the wound with cotton soaked in butter, and clean what is around the affected area.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be rinsed with cold water, or cured with gargles until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This treatment is safer than the incision, not the cauterization;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	If it is treated with fumigation in this way, take chamomile and hyssop and oregano and rue and marigold and similar herbs, mix all or some of them into a pot, add vinegar, and boil.
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and the pot is well glued with strong clay, and inside the pot place one instrument shaped like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	and it is made of silver or brass, and one end of the instrument should be inserted into the patient's mouth so that the vapour rises up to the eye through the nose, until the eye is withered.
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	after you repeat this often, until the eye dries out, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the onset of the hot abscess, as many things can happen.
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and do not attempt this unless on the decline of the hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not available, take a nose and insert within the head a fragment of egg shell, so that the patient's mouth does not become too hot.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	For egg white does not let vapors harm the mouth, and it is a good treatment together with health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Often there is something stuck in the throat, like a bone or fish spine, or some other object.
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	So you must therefore extract whatever is visible, pressing the tongue against the front of the mouth with an instrument so that you can see and move the object.
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	And for that which is not visible and remains in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is fully digested.
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	Hopefully, this will cause the object to be expelled through vomiting.
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	Or the patient has swallowed a piece of sponge, or a piece of bread crumb, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread.
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	Et tie to the sponge a thread, and then swallow it.
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	And when it reaches its place, it will untie itself, and then you will pull out the thread.
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	And if it does not come out by what we have said, then take a plumb instrument of this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And let the instrument be bent at the head so that it may more easily enter into the throat, and keep the head raised upwards.
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	And take care not to touch the epiglottis, for if you do, he will choke and push the bone inward.
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	And it is better that the patient pushes in the instrument, so he knows where things are.
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	If the swelling goes down, or it is drawn out by force with all instruments equally, until it is fully extracted.
de la sansue de la gorge	Of the blood of the throat.
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	No remedy in medicine is without side effects, just as I mentioned earlier regarding the treatment with medications.
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	And when the remedy does not work, then look into the patient's throat in sunlight and press their tongue with an instrument as I have instructed you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the leech, draw it out with a very small hook, or use delicate pincers suitable for the task.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, take a hair plait and insert it into the patient's throat; then attach the end of the hair to a heated iron, and do this frequently.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is afflicted by water every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	Then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, pour it in so they swallow, and move their hand frequently.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	And as soon as the remedy feels the water, remove it.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it does not fall out as we have said, then smoke the patient with asafetida using an instrument as I mentioned in the procedure for fumigating the eye.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	Do this many times, for it will fall without injury.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the method of fumigation is that you take a pot with live coals, and cover it with a perforated lid in the middle, and insert the head of the instrument into this opening.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	Then pour your fumigation into it, and have the patient place the end of the tube in their mouth, closing it so that no smoke escapes but instead goes right up to the tonsils.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	And now the tonsil will fall out, and if it does not, then repeat the fumigation many times over again.
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	And let the patient suffer thirst, eating salty things and similar items, but not drinking water.
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And then she would need to go through this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the instrument used to remove the leech is like curved pliers so that they can be inserted into the throat.
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	and it resembles the beak of a stork, with the roughness of a file, such that whatever it grasps, it cannot release.
et vez ci la forme:	And here you see the form [of this instrument]:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters of abscesses.
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	Many kinds of abscesses there are, as the following passages in this book about one and another suggest, they vary in their perforations and incisions.
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and it is in two ways, one of which is similar in its appearance, and what holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for their locations where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	Because abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and abscesses in fleshy places differ from those that appear in joints, each requiring its own judgment when treating them.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if abscesses must not be pierced until the bowels are dead according to their completion.
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if these ones must be pierced when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, as abscesses that are near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses occur near joints, and they are left until the surrounding area is rotten, perhaps the ligaments and nerves of the joint have been corrupted, which causes contractions in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	Where the abscess is near the main member, and if you delay the perforation until it dies, then it will harm the main member.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	When it is near the foundation, pierce it before it dies.
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	And it is not necessary to pierce ripe abscesses without completed digestion unless the one near the foundation which would rot completely and lengthen within and a fistula will form.
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And cannot heal within a long period of time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And it is necessary that you know the stage of the abscess's perforation which is ripe according to its development, and this occurs when the pain subsides, the fever breaks, swelling diminishes, redness fades, softening and pointing occurs at the apex of the abscess, and other such signs appear;
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	and you must allow the abscess to develop where it has opened up, or is most prone to open, and where pus appears.
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	whether the abscess is located in a fleshy part of the body or on the hands and feet, at joints, nerves, arteries, or any place equally accessible where there are no folds.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those that bend, according to this member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in the fleshy place, it is better that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed with complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce it before this, then the body of the poison from him would be elongated, and it is full of much filth.
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and by chance harden the lips and its deepest part.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And for any abscess that is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And you must treat small abscesses with small punctures.
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	in large abscesses, make large punctures, and many incisions according to the likeness of the size of the abscess.
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if at such an abscess where it is necessary to cut out its heart, and excise.
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	when it has become like leather, and is dead, then you must do the same as with bubbles:
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	And there are some that are split into three angles, and there are others where you cut like the leaf of myrtle, as with abscesses in gangrene.
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And there are some where you make a round incision, and other incisions and similar cuttings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those without a head, like soft superficial abscesses, you must pierce fully through;
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	And when the abscess is large, and it has developed a thick core, and you pierce it, do not extract all of the core at once, but remove only part of it;
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	Then pack the abscess with wool until the next day, then extract the remainder promptly;
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	Do this many times from one end to another until the bowels are completely empty.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or elderly people in poor health.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For spirits sometimes convulse with bowel movement, which may cause the patient's death, and you will not perceive it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Examine this chapter carefully with great caution, and once you have pierced the abscess, then dry the wound, and check if the abscess wound is small.
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	And if it is a full-blown fistula, then apply tents of linen or old cotton.
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	And if it is a large abscess with many openings, then you must insert a tent into each one so that they come up against one another.
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	And if you have cut into the abscess and removed a piece of skin, then you must fill it with old cotton or shredded linen cloth without moisture, and bind it until the third day.
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then remove the binding, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs during your work, bring cold water and apply it gently, dampen the cloths, and place them over the bleeding site repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the discharge of blood persists, provide treatment and ointment, and the powders I mentioned in various places throughout this book, and if it is during winter, and the wound or abscess is very raw, then you must apply moistened tents and cloths with warm oil and wine.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if it is in the summer, and the wound is fleshy, then you must apply cloths moistened with water and oil, or cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then unbind the abscess, wipe it clean, and treat it as necessary until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	For this one must universally understand in the treatment of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	Now I have told you how one must proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where small abscesses come from on the head and are like threads, just as the yolk of an egg is, and there are many similar cases.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some that are fatty and soft where there is also moisture like pus;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	And if you find ones that are hard and stony when cut open, and there is no doubt if the arteries do not act contrary to this.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of cutting into stones is such that you should test all instruments which are called an "entromissoire", from whence its form comes after, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, they do so above the long bone.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is drained, scrape away any remaining skin containing this moisture, for it will return if you leave anything behind.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	Then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	If not, dip it in water and salt, apply to the wound, and leave it until the next day;
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And this will correct what remained from the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And you can repeat the process with cotton, as before, on the second day and again on the third, until you know that nothing remains from overnight.
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if abscess has become filled with pus, open it lengthwise in this manner:
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	And I remove your fingers, and scrape away all skin, and pay close attention to draw out the fluid where it lies;
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the artery opposes you, do as I have told you afterward.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do this for the abscess if it is malignant, and about cutting and treating as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the incision on the malignant abscess and the moist area is lighter, for they contain little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if there is no moisture in some of these abscesses or at the top where there is none for an old woman's head;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and found the abscess just like a hard stone, rough and white, that could not be broken;
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if one had made an incision there, it would have been just as painful as a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses coming to the head, especially those that come to a child's head and at the base of their ears, open them always as low down as possible so as to remove the pus.
et les cure si com il covient.	and treat them as necessary.
des scrophules	Des scrophules
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Maintes fois viennent ces abcès dans le cou, et sous les aisselles, et dans la poitrine, et parfois ils apparaissent ailleurs sur le corps, et il y en a beaucoup, et ils sont interconnectés les uns avec les autres.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each scrofula is properly within its own area, just like the nodules and abscesses of the head, as we have said;
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and there are many similarities between these scrofulas.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are others which are malignant and do not want to obey the rules of health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	in those where you see good positioning to touch, and it resembles the color of the body, and it moves from each side without being exposed to the veins of the neck or the artery or the windpipe, and it is not deep;
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	you must cut it from above and peel off each part, extending the two lips of the wound with scissors if you need to, just as we have said for abscesses of the head;
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	And strike repeatedly with the spatula, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or vein, and let the spatula's edge not be sharp nor cutting, so that the hand does not escape, and do not aim too far ahead, lest you cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not stop bleeding, apply crushed vitriol to the wound, or some powders that staunch blood, and bind up the wound tightly.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And let it be until the abscess is healed, and the wound softens, and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the blood is staunched, return to your work until it is complete.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	Then look with your index finger to see if there are any small scrofulae remaining; remove them and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is a large wound at the root of the scrofula, you should not cut that scrofula at its root but bind it with a strong double thread and let it fall off by itself without causing harm.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	Then clean the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut out the entire scrofula, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound, sewing them now since there is no extra space due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	It is necessary for you to understand that it involves cutting the root of it and pulling out its hair, then sewing as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	For scrofulae that persist with superfluidity, make an incision where it seems to die out.
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	And pierce it in the same way as previously mentioned, below it, and introduce tenting with ointment and similar things so that it drains away what remains of the corruption.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the wound is well cleaned, treat it with ointment to promote flesh growth until it heals.
de squinance	For eczema
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancients spoke of the operation on the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	But I have never seen anyone in our land do it, and this is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those with difficulty breathing, it is necessary that the cleft of the throat, which is called the epiglottis, be cleared.
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	And if no help is given through this method, it is because all the veins and passages of the patient are affected by the abscesses hot in the mouth, or in the throat or on the tonsils.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the channel of the passage, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to avoid the danger that comes from suffocation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is necessary then, when we wish to split the epiglottis, that we split it below three circles or four with a small transverse slit between two circles or according to the amount of the slit of the superficial cartilage, not in the cartilaginous part.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And these two are suitable for the section of the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessels are long enough.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is afraid, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat on all sides, then splits the heart until it reaches the windpipe;
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And purge the blood vessels, if you see anything, then cut the superficial cartilage as we have said;
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	And it is demonstrated by the obstruction of the windpipe that comes from its place which is broken, and by the failure of the voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open for a moment.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour has passed in which strangulation is suspected, bring together the two lips of the wound from the heart, and stitch it all up without touching the cartilage.
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then administer medicines that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says one should not do this until the throat is entirely stuffed up and the patient is judged to be dying, when all hope of breath has been lost.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Thereupon cauterize the epiglottis for patients who cannot breathe and are breathing through their wound, thus saving them from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	and for this reason the ancients recommended leaving the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three or four days. Then they would command to close the wound and treat it until it is healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a damsel took a knife, and thrust it into her throat, cutting part of the windpipe;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	And I was called to treat her, but found her as good as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found blood pouring from it, I knew she had not cut a vein or pierced her throat, and air was escaping through the injury.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, sewed up the wound, and treated her until she was healed.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	And all the damsel had was a hoarse voice, and she soon recovered fully.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	Because of this, I say that one need not fear incisions to the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	On swelling of the throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called 'throat hernia', and it is a large abscess in the colour of jaundice, and it often occurs in women.
et est selonc II manieres:	et it is according to two manners:
naturez, et accidens;	natural, and accidental;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	or natural has no engine.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental is according to two manners, of which one resembles fat near us, and the other manner resembles an abscess that comes from our artery;
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is fear, and it is not advisable to operate with fire except in the small one, and prove and search all the surroundings:
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it as our natural fat, and cannot reach any vein, cauterize it as we cauterize the nose, and treat all its surface if there is no incision;
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And cauterize quickly, treating it as required until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	From us.
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways of doing this, all of which I will describe in detail;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And here it is appropriate for me to explain the distinction between our method and theirs.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that theirs is one of heat and fever until the boils pass, and the pus is complete;
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	And then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	Our method has neither heat nor fever nor pain, but involves a swelling which is its own sack and takes the colour of the body, starting like a scab and growing larger;
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	And they are of two types, either dry or moist, with much variation in color as I have mentioned earlier.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to our treatment, it is necessary that you first examine and inquire about all the instrument called "entromissoire", according to its form as described in the following chapter.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	The method of inquiring about the abscess is to take the moistest part that you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers back and forth until you feel that the instrument has pierced the core, then do so according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then remove the instrument, taking care not to pull it out abruptly.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the discharging moisture is running short, whatever its color may be, treat it as I have said for other abscesses.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And if after removing the instrument there is no moisture, know that it is greasy, so treat it in a cross-like manner, take the pincers and lightly strip away the skin on each side, and remove the scurf where it lies until you draw out healthy tissue with the nut.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot draw it out whole, then draw it piece by piece until nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything is left behind, the wound will return many times.
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if even a little remains and the blood bothers you, then fill the wound with some sharp corrosive powders, bind up the wound, and apply warm abscess-soothing things, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if the wound is large, then cut the two lips of the wound, and treat it with something that encourages flesh to grow.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	And if the striking vein is contrary to you or otherwise troublesome, then hasten and apply crushed vitriol, leaving it on for two or three days until the wound festers, and halting the boiling of blood.
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	Then return to cut off what has remained of the night.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	Look here at the shapes of the insertion instruments, and they are of three types:
grans et moien et petit;	Large and medium and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	And there are three squares which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and they are of three types:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Large, medium, and small, to probe abscesses and fistulas;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	And they are like the needles with which we sew up wounds, and they are of brass, or iron, or silver, but those that are yellow are more valuable, and they are especially useful for probing dark-coloured fistulas;
et sont de III manieres:	And they are of three kinds:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The shapes of the "oncines" (a term for an unknown object) are very similar, as you see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	large, medium, and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	And if there be "oncines" which have two curvatures of three kinds also;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	And if there be "oncines" which have three curvatures, and they are also of three kinds;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	And if there be "oncines" which have two curvatures, and those with one curvature only, and they are of three kinds;
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The heads of these have what one does with them are sharp, and there are some that only cut from one side, which peels off the veins because it doesn't cut into the vein or nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And these introducer are the levers that respond in many ways so that the patient does not perceive them when opening abscesses.
et sont de III manieres:	And they are of three kinds:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	Large, small, and medium, as you see it.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	And one should not use them except in fleshy places such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar areas.
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	And sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling the bark of fig trees, according to this form, with which one stops the blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is sometimes placed where healing occurs through the closing of veins and arteries, and other times according to this larger form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so that they resemble the breasts of women;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	And they remain ugly and swollen, and for those who wish to cure them, one must proceed according to this form along the following lines: b. up to g..
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then scrape away the fat, fill the wound with flesh-healing medicine, then bring together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	And if the breast hangs down, having become soft due to its size like in women, open it into two parts above with two similar incisions.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	where one end is attached to the other at the very end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to line .g.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then scrape the skin between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply what we have mentioned about sutures and powders, and provide whatever is necessary for healing until it is cured.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healed or the incision is not complete due to the patient's reluctance to rest or blood loss, you must fill the wound with moist cotton soaked in a corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	leave it until the remaining flesh and fat contract, then treat it until it is fully healed.
des apostemes des asselles	From abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from under the armpits are like hard scrofula with sides, and if there is one containing moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore, those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the entire mass within the abscess is emptied, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton and treat it with ointment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is like a scrofula, treat it as we have said for scrofula slits; and if the wound contains mass, apply cauterization as mentioned earlier.
de la routure de l’artere	Of an artery's rupture
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is ruptured, and the skin above it is sealed together, there often arise abscesses, and likewise when the vein becomes swollen and infected.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if you recognize it as such, when the abscess is long in appearance due to an artery injury...
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	...and when you feel it with your hands, there is a tightness or constriction.
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	...if the swelling is on the vein, you will see raised red spots appear.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	...it is foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it lies beneath the axillae and shoulders or on the neck in many places, and is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is necessary, therefore, to avoid the treatment of iron, and for those who are at the head, it should also be avoided. In the case of swelling caused by an arterial rupture through the skin along its length,
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then operate on the hip with scissors, carefully separating the artery from its membrane until it is fully exposed;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	Then push a needle from one side through to the other and secure the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have taught you for extracting the two arteries located at the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then puncture the area between the two ligatures with a probe until the blood there is released and the abscess is drained;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then apply the treatment that stimulates healing, until the binding falls off.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat those with swelling next to it, until they are healed.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	And if the abscess is due to the size of the vein, you must hold with your hand what you can of the abscess and all its skin, then push the needle underneath the place that you are holding in your hand, make it pierce through, and have a double thread so that you can pull it out from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	Then bind the abscess, as I have told you, with a bandage from one side of two parts to the other shoulder.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	And if you doubt that the thread will not hold, push another needle through all of the thread underneath the abscess to the incision of the first needle, and tighten both threads in four places.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then cut the abscess until all surplus matter comes out of it, then excise any redundant heart tissue and leave that which is attached.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply moistened bandages with wine and oil, then treat it with tenting and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	Of abscesses from nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Likewise abscesses occur in arteries and veins, abscesses form on nerves when they are injured or through excessive hard work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this occurs more often in the shoulders and hands, where there are joints, and it is a grievous abscess, its colour like that of the body, and it causes pain in various states.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when it is tightly constricted, the patient feels pain, and it is not in a perfect part of the body but beneath the heart.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	And it moves well in all directions, neither forward nor backward, downward nor upward; and that which is in the joints should not be cut with an iron instrument.
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	Perchance there would be constriction.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And that which is at the head or forehead, make an incision with the spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, hold it with some tongs and cut its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is large, suspend it with the hook and peel its skin, then remove it and sew up the wound, treating it until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	Large boils hanging down.
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	Occasionally there is an eruption on bellies and nowhere else like pimples, and it is a disease called "fungus" due to its resemblance to mushrooms, with subtle roots and large heads.
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	And there are some small and very large ones;
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	And I saw a man who had two on his belly which were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, they were white, and had fine roots, and were light green split open, and moisture came out of them immediately.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I cut them and found that one weighed eighteen ounces, and the other six pounds, and the work in this incision is such that you consider if the patient is moist, and the color of the substance is white and moist with a delicate root;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	If you cut it with a broad spatula, let the fire cautery be in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For when cutting it often causes too much blood to flow, and if the blood defeats you, then hurry up and cauterize.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made linen thread, and bind it to the wrist as we have said, leaving it for two days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	then restrain them, and do not cease tightening the linen thread until it reaches the wrist, and each time by its motion.
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	and if the roots are thick, there is fear of cutting them especially in the belly, but you may well cut half, then cauterize it so that it does not grow back.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then treat the wound, and make sure you do not cut the tendon which is of a light colour and poor texture like milk.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess aggravated, and I will come to the treatment of cancer thereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	when it breaks open at once.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of swelling arises from a cauterization for a wound or incision on an abscess, and it is on the belly and some of the bowels are involved, as occurs in other injuries, due to blood flowing from veins or arteries according to what has been mentioned before, or because of windiness
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it is due to the rupture of an abscess and discharge from the bowel, then the colour of the abscess resembles that of flesh, and it presents as a mild condition without pain, appearing with various discharges.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to an outbreak of the intestine, then it becomes more diverse, and when you press it with your fingers it will retract, but come back, or possibly it would be tightened, and greatly enlarged at the entrance of the bath after strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it is due to moisture, it presents as a minor issue, which becomes evident when you press it with your hand but does not require restriction.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to blood, it presents with these signs: large, hard abscesses, and it manifests in a particular quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the work [treatment] consists of determining whether it appears related to arterial blood, venous blood, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	You should leave the treatment alone.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For he has doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if it appears related to the intestines or stomach, you must instruct the patient to hold their breath and lie completely straight, then bleed them around the navel entirely.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then have them lie frequently between your hands, then go around the marked place with all your fingers, then extend half of the abscess above to just before the big toe.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then bind it around with a strong thread or a sturdy silk cord firmly, and let the knot be on top.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then operate on half of the abscess extended along the tendon, insert your index finger, and search for the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it trapped by the tendon, untie it and push the intestine outside of the belly.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find the mouth, grab it with tweezers and cut off any excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery or vein opposes you, go carefully around it, then return to your work and take two needles, insert two lengths of thread, and thread the two needles through what you have pierced.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then draw the abscess four fingers-breadth above the needles, and if you see fit, remove the needles, leave the place until it rots, and cut away the dead flesh as needed.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	Where you cut it when it is thin and rotten, then treat what needs to be treated, and remove the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And drain the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the area as required, and weld the place.
dou chancre	From chancre
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have spoken about the similarities of cancer in the division, and how one must operate with medicines, and how one should avoid iron-based treatments;
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	And we say that cancer engrained in the breast and requires great caution when treating it. The ancients said that when cancers are found where they can be scraped off like cancer of the mammary glands or on the thighs, and similar areas, one must remove all of them at their onset.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	and when it is large and old, you must not approach it, for I have never been able to cure anyone of it.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	no one has ever healed from it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And the work, when it is in place or can be removed, as we have said, is to purge the patient once with black bile;
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	then make him bleed if there is evident congestion, then prepare the patient in a good place to perform the operation;
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	then remove your tumors or cancerous growths, shave his head completely, and take it away entirely without leaving anything behind.
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	allow the blood to flow freely and ensure you have thoroughly cleaned the place with your hand or an object, if the direction of blood flow opposes that of incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the bleeding stops.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat with another treatment until it is healed.
de ydropisie	From dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have mentioned in the division the similarities of dropsy, and how the collection of water is formed, and the signs of each resemblance, and the treatment that is done with medication, and those that are treated with iron:
si est eclites soulement;	Thus it is written only.
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	And one should not use iron in these two resemblances:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	That is to say, tympanites and yposarche, for they are mortal affairs;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	Therefore, when you treat this type of dropsy called "eclites" with medication, and the treatment is not effective, consider if the patient is weak or if they have another illness besides dropsy, such as diarrhea and stomach disorders, and similar conditions.
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	If you touch iron, for there is doubt.
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	And if you see the patient of strong constitution, and he has no other illness but solely dropsy, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you must operate like this:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	Lift the patient directly above your hands, and have an assistant press on the belly by pushing water to the lowest part of the abdomen; then take the sharp-pointed spatula in this manner:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And divide [it] into two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	With the pointed end, yet it must not be so sharp that it can reach the intestine when inserted, and might cause injury.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	Then examine whether the dropsy is caused by fluid around the intestines.
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	So you must cut above the bump three fingers directly above the wrist.
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	and if the dropsy is caused by liver disease, let your incision be to the left of the bump three fingers.
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	and if it is due to wetness, let the incision be on the right side, and it is not suitable for the patient to lie over the wound so that excess fluid does not run into that weak spot.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	Then pierce through the skin with an instrument, push it in, and lift your hand up along the spatium bile between the skin and the fascia just like when you are skinning something to the depth of a fingernail or so.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Next, pierce the fascia until you reach an empty space; this is where water gathers. Then draw it out forcefully and insert this instrument into that spot, which should be shaped like this:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it is similar to a slender silver tube, and made of light brass or copper, with a small hole at the bottom part.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and on one side three holes;
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and two on the other side, and one more.
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	and the head is carved like a feather, which is similar to how scribes cut their quill pens.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	at its top is the handle, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it now lowers onto the tool.
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	empty it half or a third of the way because if you empty any more than necessary at that time, perhaps the patient will die due to loss of spirit from the blood let out, or they faint, or they near death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but empty it according to its quantity of virtue, and according to what the patient's constitution signifies about his virtue, and his pulses.
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	then draw out the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now for the heart which blocks the orifice that I mentioned, when you pierce it in this manner;
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	then use the instrument again the next day, if you see the patient suffer thus, and draw out a small quantity of water;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	do this each day, and take care not to draw out too much water at once but only a little bit of it.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	and if you are in doubt about the patient, and leave too much water inside them, it will overheat their burial shroud or hot sand, and through excessive sweating or bathing and under the sun, and prohibit from drinking;
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And treat with drying medicines until healed, then cauterize over the stomach and on the liver and spleen after extracting the water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Of the stopping of the penis.
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born who do not have an opening in their penis, or the opening is very small, or it is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	It must be pierced as soon as possible with a very thin spatula, following this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	Then apply a small, fine tube to the bladder opening, and bind it, keeping it in place for three or four days. When he wishes to urinate, remove the tube, let him urinate, and then replace it.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	And perhaps this is not necessary, for the urine that comes out will not leave the tube closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the orifice is small then this (i.e., the lead plug) has been medicated as we have said; it will enlarge.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the tube in its proper place are harmed, as none are born with a tube at the tip of their penis, which is why they cannot urinate without lifting their penis upwards.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	And they cannot conceive because the matter cannot reach the marrow, and this is a severe illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the method of treatment is that the patient lies on their back, then stretch out the head with a rod and the leg as well, like the length of a feather, so that the hole opens in the middle, just as it should be.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And take care to prevent the loss of blood which often happens, and if it occurs, stop it with something that stops bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	Pimples on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	This inflammation often occurs in the leg, and it appears as an ugly sore.
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	And there are both malignant and non-malignant ones.
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	You must take them with a thin lancet, cut and clean them all, then apply moistened cotton with Egyptian ointment.
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it with refined ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the cancer is malignant, of a foul colour and stinking, you must treat it with cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have cut it, and if the inflammation is on top of the shaft, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, then you must first remove the inflammation that is inside.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	And when it is sealed, treat it from the outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you treat them together, the head of the shaft is not secure and may be pierced, causing blackening and decay in the head of the shaft and glans.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	You must cut away all that is black and corrupt, then bind it with a plaster made of honey and flour which is made from pomegranate bark and figwort, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, apply the lunar cautery as follows:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	Cauterization assists the two positions together:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	That is to say, in draining blood and corruption;
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	And if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, you must insert a plumb-line into the penis and urinate the patient out.
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And when the skin is stuck to the head of the penis which happens in those who have not been circumcised, or there is a wound or an abscess, then you must therefore remove the skin with a sharp instrument, so that the tie is loosened and the glans of the penis is freed from all sides.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	and if this is an important thing to discuss, then you must flay it with a spatula at any pock on the head of the penis and the skin.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	then carefully separate it between two [fingers], and put one thin damp linen cloth in cold water, so that it does not dry again.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision.
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	circumcision is not like the separation of continuity as with other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	nevertheless when we do this work of our own will, and especially with children, it is necessary that we perform the best work, and the most gentle for their well-being.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision on their children, for it was not used in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I have seen the majority of masters and elders who performed circumcisions around one day, with forceps, and with all [their] instruments.
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	If the heart were pierced by two wounds, and perhaps one of them is closed while the other remains open.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	Now it must be cauterized again, and the pain doubles, and during treatment the point of the member is not securely held;
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	And during the treatment of the nail, perhaps the iron escapes and ruins the operation, and often they need no further treatment, and I say so.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the cleaning that is done with threads, I have found goodness in this experiment, for the threads cut as cleanly above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand with equal force on all sides, you cut cleanly straight through it;
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	But let the string be tightly wound around the skin;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	And let the manner of this first treatment be such that you make the child believe, if he is alert, that you are not going to force him to anything more than bind the string around his penis, and then you can have him sit in all the ways you wish;
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	Then make him stand between your hands straight, and shield the instruments from his view by covering them with your hands or placing them below your feet.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	Then press your hand against the penis and blow into its core, drawing it upwards until the head of the penis is encased within you.
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	Clean it well of the dirt that has accumulated there, then bind its base with a thick thread, and secure this beneath another bond.
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Hold it at two points by the second and third fingers, and grasp between the two bonds, then lift the core upwards gently and draw out the head of the penis.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	Allow blood to flow freely from it, for this is its medicine.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and apply powder on top and over the powder a cloth glued with a cooked egg yolk tempered with rose water, mixed with good and fresh rosemary oil, leave it on until the next day, and treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The form of the force for the cleansing is as follows:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	the two blades should be turned and sharpened, and the blades should also be as long as the handles evenly:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	the mistake of the cleansing is when the heart within escapes through the incision;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	therefore you must extend it to your nail, otherwise the flesh will become abscessed;
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	And cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, then hold it with pliers, and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if it exceeds three days, and that which is below the rod is swollen, let it be until the hot abscess is soothed, and gently peel off the skin.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	then cut it as much as you can manage, and be careful not to damage the part of the rod, this will cause no harm.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Treat the place of fresh wounds with powder, as we have said in the treatise on powders, and if it is cut from the heart too much, and goes above it, it will cause no harm.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	treatment of urine retention
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is caused by the obstruction of stones, or frozen blood, or a tumor, or flesh born anew, or similar things as we have mentioned in the classification.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	And if the urine is not released and you see that the retention is caused by stones in the bladder or its neck, then it is necessary for the patient to lean forward on their knees.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	And his feet should be placed on his back, stretching out his abdomen from the upper part of his back, and hold the patient's arm as much as you can.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And thus the neck of the bladder is forced to express the stone above it, which then releases the urine.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must perform an extraction with all the instruments called 'syringe', of which this is the form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it should be made of fine, light silver, like the feathers of a bird;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and it should have a handle one palm long, and be delicate at the top.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	The method of urine extraction is that you take a double thread, and tie at its end a small bag made from wool or cotton, then push the other end of the thread into the syringe.
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	cut away any excess wool and push it all the way up to the end of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter mixed with egg white, and have the patient sit on a seat. Oil their bladder and penis with moist oil, olive oil and warm water;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	Then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the scrotum.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	Then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient feel its passage until the action is complete, but this method isn't ideal as the instrument guiding it into place is bent.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then stretch the thread through all the wool, back and forth, and the urine will follow along the wool, then remove it quickly, and make the urine flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	Repeat the process with the syringe until the bladder is empty, and ease the patient's discomfort.
des maladies de la vessie	Of bladder diseases
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scalds or blood enter the bladder, and putrefaction gathers there, if you wish to distill water and medicine into it, use an instrument called a "clepsydra," which is shaped like this:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed, and has three openings.
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	II on one side, and I on the other, as you see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	and the white hairs by which the doctor cuts may be such that they stop well the vein without addition, so that one can draw out the moisture, and sew when necessary;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	and when you see your medicines fall into the bladder, place the head of the vessel in the moisture, and draw out what is inside while draining it;
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	you will draw out the moisture with the vessel, and then sew up strongly the opening within;
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	so the moisture will enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	and this is the way of the subtle enema by which we enema the bladder;
si est ci:	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And it is made of silver or iron, and the head is higher up.
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	it drops to the side where the ligament falls;
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	then take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture you wish to use for enemas, then tie it between the two breasts with a good thick thread, and heat the pot containing this moisture over the fire;
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	then insert the head of the syringe into the urethra, then squeeze your hand over the bladder with all its moisture gently until you feel that this moisture has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	and if you don't have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment paper, make it into a circle and pierce it roundly all around.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	Then push the thread strongly into these holes, then assemble the circle as one would a thimble, and put inside whatever you want of oil, moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And do as you did with the bladder, pressing it with your hand until moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have already spoken of the types of stones in the division, and their extraction along with medical treatments;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	And I have explained the distinction between gallstones caused by bile, and all their symptoms, and in which stones one must operate with cutting;
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	And for bladder stones, and those in the urethra;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	And I shall tell you plainly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone which is engendered in the bladder occurs more often in children, and it is a sign that the water flows from the bladder resembling water in its subtlety;
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and it appears rough, and the patient feels grit in his penis, and he urinates many times, and then becomes blocked;
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and often these cause the foundations to fail;
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and the healing is light for children up to four years old, and it is very difficult in the elderly, and it is moderate for those who are young adults, for those between youth and old age;
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	And the treatment is easier for those with large stones than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to draw out all the bile that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For sometimes it hinders the removal of the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the feet, lift them up, and move them downward, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it may come out on its own.
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	Have the patient sit between your prepared hands, with their hands placed below their thighs, so that the bladder is fully relaxed and extended downwards.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	Then search for it and feel inside (the bladder).
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	If you feel the stone in your grasp, then hurry now to cut into the stone (to extract it).
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not fall out upon touching, then moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand if the patient is an infant, or with your middle finger if they are a young adult.
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	and push it into its base, seek out the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, apply pressure at the neck of the bladder;
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	then press down with your finger, and push it outward from where you intend to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And instruct the assistant to press on the bladder with their hand, and tell them to stretch the testicles upwards with their right hand, and with their left hand remove the skin that is beneath the testicles in the area where the cut will be made;
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	then insert the spatoula, cutting with it, which is shaped like this:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And make an incision between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the perineum;
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	and be straight on the stone, and your fingers should be nearby at the foundation, and let the handle [of the tool] go across so that it is wide from above and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	perhaps if the press hits your fingers which are at the foundation it might be without work [i.e., useless];
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and know that there is such stone which has angles and margins [i.e., sides]:
si est griés a issir;	it should be ground to come out [i.e, removed].
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and if there is some which is below, similar to an acorn, round, with only a small outlet.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	To that one then which has angles and margins [sides], make the handle larger.
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	and if she does not jump [out], then you must extract it with pliers which are like a file on the head, to squeeze and extract the stone so that it does not escape;
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	or you push underneath [the instrument] an agile tool curved towards the head;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you cannot manipulate it in this way, then enlarge the hole with a lancet, and if blood flows [from it], extract it with vitriol;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	and if there is more than one stone, push the largest first into the neck of the bladder, then cut above it, then pull hard, and the smaller ones after that if there are many.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, you must take care of it, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	where he dies, or the urine flows back through the opening where the bone cannot fuse;
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but still, try to extract it by pulling or chiseling with pincers until you remove it in fragments;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	and once you have completed your work, fill the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, compress it, and apply a moist cloth soaked in oil and wine or oil, rosewater, and cold water to soothe the hot abscess;
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	then have the patient rest on his collarbone, and do not loosen the binding until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you untie it, thoroughly wash the place with oil and water, then treat it with ointment of daffodil and basilicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if hot abscesses develop in the wound with corrosion and blood clots in the bladder, retaining urine that is released together with it:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	Push your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will inflame the bladder and cause infection.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then cleanse the wound with warm water and salt, and treat it in every way you know until it is healed.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And ensure that during every treatment you bind his thighs together, applying the remedies directly to the affected area.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small, situated in the urethra, impeding urination, insert it there and lodge it within.
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	Should the treatment I describe fail to work, providing grounds for cutting it out entirely, you may do so multiple times according to this procedure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proven this thus.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	If you forge an iron tool according to this form, let it have three sharp edges like a spike:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	Take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot go back into the bladder;
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	Then push the probe gently into the penis until it reaches the stone;
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	Turn the probe with your hand within the stone gently, until you can pierce through it from one side to another;
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Urine will come out immediately, then press your hand on what remains of the stone inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	If it breaks immediately, and comes out with urine, then the patient is cured;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie a thread below the stone and another above it, then slit the penis at the level of the stone between both threads, then extract it forcefully, and untie the thread, and clean the frozen blood from the wound;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat them until they are healed.
de la piere des femmes	From a woman's stone.
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	Soon it happens that stones form in women, and if it occurs sometimes, then the treatment is severe, and it is prohibited for three reasons:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	One reason is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	The second reason is that one cannot find a woman who is knowledgeable enough to examine herself internally, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	The third reason is that perhaps one cannot find a woman who is skilled enough in this surgical art.
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	And the fourth reason is that the stones of women are deeper than those of men, which requires a more profound incision, and there is great fear. If necessity arises for this, then you must take an experienced midwife, and at once find her if she exists nearby, and if not found, do not seek out a chaste subtle midwife;
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	and present her with a wise midwife for female diseases, or a woman who knows part of the art, and instruct her to do what you command regarding the examination of stones;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and look very carefully if the woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then it is necessary to insert your finger into her anus and retrieve the stone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she finds it, make her push the stone out from under your finger, and instruct her to insert her finger into the patient's vagina, then reach and press firmly with her left hand on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	If she finds it, she must gently guide the stone from the bladder's entrance to under it, until it reaches the root of the thigh.
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	Then strike upon the stone at the root of the thigh towards the middle of the anus where it is felt, and feel for the stone in that part.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and do not move your finger above or below the stone, and let the incision be small at first.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then insert the tube into the incision; if you feel the stone, enlarge the wound until the stone can be extracted, and know that there are many types of stones:
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	to wit, small and large ones, rough and soft, long and round ones, and those that have veins.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you know the symptoms, then you will understand the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if you feel faint from the blood loss, quickly apply crushed vitriol to it, and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops.
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	Then return to your work, until the stone is out, and have the tools I told you about for extracting stones from men so they can help with your work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	And if you faint from blood loss, and it's an artery that is cut, put the powder on the wound along with tent and banneret extract, and do not start again on this one, leave the stone alone and don't touch it, for fear of causing death to the patient.
puis cure la plaie.	Then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed down, and healing takes place, return to your work until the kidney stone comes out.
de hernie carnouse	Of hernia cruris.
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Ramus aqueous is nothing other than the assembly of moisture or white of egg which lies below the heart of calves and contained within the egg.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	And is called "albumen", and at times it properly lies in the membrane of the egg, which makes one think that there are two eggs.
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	and this is the skin of the scrotum between the white part we have mentioned.
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	but that does not happen if you apply poultices.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramus is due to weakness that comes from cows, and this matter is spread.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And sometimes it comes from blows to the testicles, and this moisture has many colours:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	where it is discoloured towards yellow, or it is red-less, or black, or white and watery, and this happens more often.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to recognise this condition, for if it is on the white part we mentioned, then the abscess is round like an egg, and does not open up the testicles, because they are covered in moisture all around them.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if it is wet within its own covering, the abscess forms with part of the egg (pus), and thus one thinks that this is another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	and if the moisture is between the skin of the buttocks and the white part (flesh), one senses it well.
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	therefore when you want to ascertain the colour of the moisture (pus), test it at every part within, from which its shape is described above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what follows this test, judge by what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we treat it with iron (surgery), one must ensure the patient is healthy enough according to their strength and the fullness of their body.
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	place them on their back, on something slightly elevated, and put much cloth underneath.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	Then sit on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on the right side, then extend the rod to one of the two ribs below the heart of the testicles;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the small spatula, and cut the skin of the testicles from their base to the wrist, making your incision straight as you separate the scrotal skin until you reach the white membrane, then carefully peel back the skin according to your ability.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	Then pierce the white membrane with a water-filled syringe through the wide opening, and extract all of the water, then put in your hooks, and stretch the membrane upwards.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	And do not puncture the heart of the testicles, only the white membrane.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Cope it all or by pieces especially its delicate side, for if you do not cut it properly and wisely, the water will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	And if the egg should happen to be at your work, put it back in its place once you have completed the operation of the sieve.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then join the two books of the heart of cows with a seam, then treat it like other wounds until they are healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary to bind the suspending vessels, taking care of the discharge of blood.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	Then cut the cow with all its suspending parts, and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if the bone is broken into two parts together, know that these are two pieces.
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	cut the other part just like you did with the first one evenly, then wipe off the blood, and place into the wound damp wool soaked in oil.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and place over it other wool dampened in wine and oil, and put this on both sides, then cover with doubled linen cloths, and bind everything above with a bandage like so.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two linen cloths, and fill them with wool batting made to look like this and join them by sewing at the waist of the breeches, and one piece should be placed under the buttocks down to the back, and the other over the arm pit.
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	And the other two straps on top of the two angles, and let all the restraints be assembled in the buckle of the belt.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And sometimes this caustic remedy is used instead of iron cutting tools, and you must take a fine lancet cautery, slice the skin of the testicles, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white tissue containing liquid is exposed.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that white tissue with curved tools, flaying it with this hot fine cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And slice it in all ways you can, until everything is scraped out.
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	Be careful that the fire does not touch the testicle.
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	And know that this work is safer;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and take care to avoid blood loss, and remember that surgical work is delicate;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if anything opposes you, or an abscess appears, or bleeding occurs, or any other issue arises, then treat what is causing the opposition as per what has been previously stated.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is afraid and does not want to undergo this work due to its terribleness, then proceed with cauterization as I have told you, and when you are certain through the signs we have mentioned that the water has drained away, make the patient sit on a raised seat.
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	then pierce the abscess below in the part of the flesh that is widest, and make the incision as long as the body.
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	And let the holes be wide enough so that all the water may flow freely.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then place cotton on the spot, bind it up, and let the remaining water drain out. Afterwards, treat the wound until it is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	And if the white cloth does not allow the water to escape through the mouth of the wound, you must insert a feather or an instrument like that used to draw off water from dropsical patients, which is shaped as described before.
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	Widen the pouch of the wound and know that the water will return. It is assembled after six months or thereabouts, and when it is assembled as before, thus shall the patient pass his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of abscesses on buttocks.
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that when cutting this branch, there is fear in many situations, which is why I think it's better to leave it be;
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I will tell you about the work and similarities of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I say that many abscesses come from the body, especially at the buttocks;
et c’est par mout de cas.	And it happens frequently.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This is caused by excess acidity and bile that has spread to the buttocks or due to impact.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	And its colour matches the colour of the body.
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	It does not cause pain, but is instead a deep abscess.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And perhaps there is a large abscess that is frightening, stony, and dark in colour; sometimes it comes from an artery or vein swelling.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from an artery, it is recognized by the warm abscess's condition when you press it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	And do not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	One that comes from swelling of the vein is recognized by its condition on touch, and one can successfully cut it open in this manner as well as other cases.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	And one must remove the heart of the vein, then extend it upwards and cut away any white matter inside, freeing all parts of the egg from its contents.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already hard with these newly born chicks, then you must therefore treat the egg, and remove its contents.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is hollow in the shell or what is inside the vessels, you must deliver all that waste and roundly break the shell.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is behind, you must cut it all away, and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	When your work is completed, fill the wound with wet wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other cures until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of abscesses on buttocks.
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess wrapped in a membrane similar to that of the brain, with softening agents for the tendons, and the patient suffers greatly when moving.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And the treatment of this illness is equally as fearful as the one before, yet we will tell you its work according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	You must have the patient sit on an elevated seat, then place the tendon suspension below your two fingers, to all vessels near the wound, and hold them firmly, stretching them strongly.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	Then cut across the vessels with a sharp spathumile knife, making it wide enough to uncover them, and then peel back the skin on either side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then insert a needle with a doubled thread into it, and tie it to the first place where the bone has come out, then tie it again to the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then cut them in half straight down the middle, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound like others where sinew is involved, so that no vessel should bleed out one of the knobs.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	For this does not cause harm, and if all the vessels become blocked, then it is necessary to drain the knobs for all the vessels.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	So that the wound does not lose its direction due to the incision of the vessels, they dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the fracture of the cheekbone
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The events of this mishap are due to the rupture that occurs or the tearing open, or the expansion in the abdominal area near the groin, which is why the intestines descend from that rupture towards one of the testicles.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	And this rupture is either from the tear or its extension, and these two types of injury happen for many reasons:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	Or from impact, or jumping, or lifting heavy loads, and through similar actions;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	And the signs when it's an expansion in the groin area are that there is a progressive onset over a long period and it does not come on suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And abscesses are equal to the surface, for it accelerates the intestine's progress towards them.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are that when it is caused by a section of the cheekbone, it leads to sudden pain at first, and abscesses appear in various places under the skin close to the surface, which is due to the intestine protruding from behind the cheekbone.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the muscles descend with the intestine, getting stuck there and causing great pain to the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments with fear, it is necessary to escape from them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the method of treatment is that you instruct the patient to gather their intestines in their hand and put them back into the wound if they can.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	Then support his neck with your hands, lift up his thighs between your hands.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	Then extend the heart above it, and remove all of the skin from the lower part of the belly to the thighs.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then push in the hooks of the pincers according to your need for opening the wound and arrange it so that the rectum can come out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then scrape off the white superficial skin that is beneath the leather of the calves until it is completely exposed on all sides.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	Insert your index finger into what follows the calf, which is between the white superficial skin beneath the leather of the egg and the second layer of skin, taking care to avoid what comes after the egg and separating it from the second layer.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	With your right hand, move within the heart of the calves and stretch the white superficial skin upwards with your left hand while lifting the egg to expose all sides of the second layer.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	Instruct your assistant to lift the egg upwards while releasing what is held back by the binding.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and seek with your hands if there is an intestinal hernia or white hard cicatrix, and if you find anything, push it back into the abdomen below;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	then take a needle with thick thread made of six strands, and push it through the back part of the cicatrix, which is behind the skin of the belly.
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	after sizing it, cut the ends of the threads that appear, until there are four strands left.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	then join them one over the other in the form of a cross, and tie the cicatrix, which we said was beneath the skin of the belly, with a strong two-part knot.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	then wrap the ends of the threads and tie them in a double knot, so that none of the vessels that nourish it can enter there, lest an abscess form.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and place the new rope according to the first long rope two lengths of that one, and after these two ropes leave a space below the heart of the animals as wide as a thumb.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and after all the others according to the roundness that the egg provides;
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	then cut in the part below the skin of the animals until blood and bowel flow as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then bring damp wool in oil and put it on the wound, then bring the rope we have mentioned before.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes, the white surface is cauterized as we mentioned earlier, after incision, due to fear of blood loss.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this happens often, and leave the rope until it breaks by itself.
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it takes time to fall off, irrigate with warm water, then put on what we have said before until it breaks.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then treat the wound with another treatment until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	Of hernia cruris.
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to treat it with iron instruments.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it is done like a vine branch which grows together with a willow tree, in such a way that you bind the vessels after cutting them slightly below.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	Then cut into me, and treat the abscess of those who work on it, until the vessels fall out.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	Sometimes rupture occurs in the neck, as we have said, and the wound opens up.
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	And none of the intestines fall into the cavity, but if they do, it is an emergency, and repair them every hour.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and yet if it stays too long at this point, the wound or fistula grows so that the intestines descend;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens due to the extension of the fistula which is in the anus, as we have said, for it is extended, then it softens and swells the joint and opens.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	and the treatment is by cauterization, as we have said before;
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	and the patient often lies on their back between your hands, then cut the place of the rupture swollen from side to side according to the size of three fingers;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extract the fistula which is underneath the skin that covers it, then take a red-hot iron and place it on the exposed area of the fistula;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	et press it at the bottom of the belly, then cut the two visible places on the skin above the head of the vein, and cut one after another.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then extract the head of the vein, and do not cut the skin nor stretch out the egg or any other thing, as I have made you aware in the treatment of intestinal rupture.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	then treat it with the treatment for wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the boys' hair, clean it up and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The knife is forced in without breaking the surface, and cauterization is better suited here for healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of softening the skin of the calves
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	The skin of the testicles often becomes softened in some men because the flesh within is softened, and it can be seen.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	And it is necessary, when one wishes to treat it, that the patient be made to lie on their back, and cut the softened skin over the natural skin.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	Then assemble the two lips at one seam, and if you see it first soften the excess of leather with three seams or four firmly.
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Then trim between the seams, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, then remove the thread.
dou chastrement	Chastisement.
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Know that amputations are forbidden in our law, and so I would prefer not to speak of them in this book;
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and they are only necessary for two types [of injuries]:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	one is when the physician knows how to respond when asked, and he knows the treatment;
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	the other is because we often need to amputate certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say therefore that punishments are done according to two manners:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	or by attraction, or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In this manner that we do by attraction, we make the animal sit in warm water until the tendons are softened and relaxed;
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	then take them with your hand until they are reset and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	Of the punishment of castration:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	You should hold the animal and press on the skin of the tendons with your left hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and cut each testicle with one stroke once you have properly skinned them;
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and leave a small wound and subtle ointment that is on the vessels.
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	and this method of castration is better than that which is done by traction because in traction some part of the testicles may remain, causing the animal to still have lust.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Ce sont des animaux qui ont les deux coions et les deux oefs, ou qui portent de chescuns une partie; et par le droit de nature est que li males n'aient pas les vases de la femele en eu cors, ne les females les vases de li males.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermaphrodite occurs in two ways among humans:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	one is that between the two testicles there appears a natural structure like that of a woman's, with hair, and sometimes it secretes urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And another type occurs in women, situated on the forearm like a rod and two knobs.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment for men and women is that you separate all joined parts, and treat them like other wounds.
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	In the second manner, for men whose urine spurts through their scrotum, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	Of the swelling.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	A tumor is flesh attached to the natural body part, making it too ugly to look at.
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	And some women have them as large as a hand; this is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	You must hold the excess of the tumor in your hand or with pincers, and cut it lightly.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do not go too deep, lest the blood flow out, then treat other treatments until it is healed.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	And for another flesh that arises at the mouth of the anus, and swells up, and perhaps bursts open, and it looks like a cow's udder, thus the ancients called it "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	You must cut it off, as we have said for a growth caused by itching, and treat it until it is clean.
de erratique	Of wandering.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	Erratic it is when the woman's nature is not pierced, or the opening is small;
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	and it is natural by birth, or an accident caused by illness that has arisen there;
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	whether it is through a wound inflicted by sharp or subtle instrument, and it is done perfectly in the center, on the side, below, or wherever it may be;
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	and they prevent conception, childbirth, and perhaps even the flowers to bear;
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	and one's knowledge of such is through observation of the womb.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the obstructions appear nearby, then they will reach your fingers or rod [instrument].
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is an instrument that is subtle, and it is close to the two cubits, then hasten and round it thus:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	Put your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread.
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	Then stretch the two lips wide apart until the soft tissue is exposed and over the gums.
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	Then take wool, soak it in oil, and place it on the spot, having the woman lie at home each day so that it cannot heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the tissue is hard and thick, you must cut it with a spatula similar to myrtle leaves.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the gums are of new flesh, suspend them with thread and cover it.
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	And have on hand hemostatic medicines in case of bleeding, such as dragons' blood, incense, mixed with egg white.
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	Then apply a wide copper rod so that the wound cannot heal.
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	And thus let it remain for a long time, and bring him a dry linen tent.
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then be cured with other treatments until you are healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when a new flesh grows in the wound, it should be cut according to this method, unless there are embedded abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an embedded abscess in the wound, one must not attempt to cut it open.
des emorroides	Of haemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that usually bleed, and when hemorrhoids are old they become tumors.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	And I have previously mentioned in the classification their similarities and signs; here I will describe those that can be cured.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that haemorrhoids and thick growths, when they are completely inside the anus, and cannot be felt, should not be treated with a cauterising iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the swamp, where one can feel, are those whom one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	You must therefore put the woman in a cold house, then extend the tumor with tongs and cut it at its root, then apply powder made of blood-coagulating medicine such as dragon's blood and frankincense, along with similar substances.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	Then press her feet against the wall for an hour, then place them in cold water.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	And if there is discharge of blood, have her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel with galls and similar things, then take barley flour, mix it with honey and egg white, and make an ointment to apply on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If not, have her air out cupping glasses on her back and breasts without causing injury.
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	Then take linen, dampen it in juice of plantain or hawthorn with old wine, and apply to the affected area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess heals, treat the site of injury until it is completely healed.
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles an acrid head, it must be cut like the thelul as I said.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then treat until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	Abscesses of the marrow.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	There are many types of abscess that can occur in the marrow, such as cancer, stone abscess, herpes, tumors, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscess, and several other diseases that I have mentioned in the classification.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	I should therefore say in this treatise about the hot abscess that comes on the nose, which is not one of the abscesses that require bowels;
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	and if you want to know about the work of iron, look at whether the abscess is acute when it first appears, and full of heat and fever, and whether it turns red as you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Then do not hasten to pierce it, but let it die until the pain is eased;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	and then have the patient sit on a seat, and place two small stools for them to lean back against, supporting their back and bringing their feet together below the leg;
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	let their thighs be extended, and place their arms underneath their knees, binding them well with a good bandage;
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	then turn them onto their right side, and bring the instrument for opening the marrow to it, of which afterwards comes the form;
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	and it is necessary that when you bring this instrument to bear, you first insert a rod to gauge the depth of the marrow, so that what enters the patient from the instrument does not go too deep and harm them;
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	and if the instrument is larger, it should be covered with layers of cloth to protect [the wound] from its harm.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	he must place the end of the instrument on top and hold the instrument steady.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	and when the abscess opens, it must be lanced with a soft hand, either with the lancet or the spatula.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	and when the boil is empty, you must place in the wound moistened bandages soaked in rose oil or dry green oil.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	place the bandage outside of the wound over the depth of the abscess, and on top of the abscess and around the wrist place clean moist woolen cloth soaked in water or steeped in mallows.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then the cure after two days of treatment coming to this, until it is healed;
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and sometimes we lift the swelling and wound with a cleansing enema of water and honey, and then with water or cooked roots of iris and long aristoloche;
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then return to the treatment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is swollen with pus, you must avoid treating it with hot iron; instead, treat it as we have described in the section on [wound treatment].
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth.
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	It is necessary for the midwife to know the natural process of childbirth and its signs; when you see the woman hastening downwards, and wishing to smell it.
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	then the child is eager to come out.
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	thus you know that these births follow the natural pattern, and the child comes out headfirst, and the midwife assists him.
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	and when you see these signs, gently apply pressure to their abdomen so that the child comes out soon.
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	because when they descend onto the head, the midwife should assist them, and the husband should be prepared for any excesses through proper care.
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	and one who comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For sometimes it comes out onto the feet, and emerges either from the body or the head, and the hands, or it comes out of the abdomen, often turned accidentally towards the neck, and in other bad positions.
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	So it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skilled in these matters, and avoid error and deception, and I will show you all the positions and how she must assist.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the child is born on its head by natural means, and the woman gives birth with great difficulty, and her strength is weak, then have her sit on a saddle or be held by other women.
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	And prepare her some oil of almonds or fenugreek that is cooked, then put between her fingers the small spatula which has this form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	And split open the perineum, and scrape away at her fingernail until the moisture that collects there flows out.
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	And press the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must administer an enema of fenugreek mixed with sesame oil to the woman.
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	Then make her inhale snuffs of ground cumin, and hold your hand over her mouth and nose for an hour.
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	Draw out the child now.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if both hands stick out [are dislocated], you must reset them gently back and forth.
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot be put back in [their socket], place the woman on a chair, and lift her feet up high.
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	then raise the chair from the ground, holding the woman so she does not fall when it is lifted;
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and if the hands cannot be put back in [the socket], and the child is dead, then cut off the hands with a knife as described before, extract the child, and reset evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the birth of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child stands up on their feet, you must push them upwards.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it over and over until it is even;
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then take one leg and stretch it little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	If it reaches the thighs, instruct him to jump up until he sneezes violently.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if jumping occurs, may God want it so.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not fever as we have said, then turn him on his side and side again until he is in his natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then he will be lightly dislocated.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it does not work as we have done before, then take some mullein from the roof, and oil of cassia, and molten gum, and grind everything in a mortar.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and put this ointment on the skin of the woman's body both inside and outside, then make her sit in warm water up to below the ribs.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when it is moistened underneath, make him a collar of myrrh for it, and place it beneath, and leave it there for an hour.
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then have her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and take her gently by the stomach, for now the child jumps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the birth of the child upon their knees.
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this manner, have the midwife put her hands to it thus and thus.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then let someone support her under the neck, and have her feet hanging down, and let her lie on the bed.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and bend her hands like this and thus, then press her hands on the belly, and remove the pillows from beneath, until she is properly arranged below.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	And if the child does not jump, take his feet and move them vigorously, then massage his belly upward, finally place your hands on him.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	And hit the child repeatedly.
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	Instruct the woman to take hold of herself until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the birth of the child, which comes from the wide part with one hand hanging.
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	I must devise a means of bringing back the hand.
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If you cannot bring it back, have the woman get up and move around.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot walk, make her lie down on the bed, and vigorously raise her legs.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	Then bring the massage oil I have described.
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	And if she does not give birth, make her sit on a seat, then help to return the hand.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	Then deliver the child according to its natural position, make her sneeze, and instruct her to hold herself until the baby is out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the exit of the child onto its neck, and has spread out his hands, and his face turned towards the back of his mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It's necessary for the midwife to hold her hand, then turn it gently back and forth, and deliver lightly.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when it is equalized, put on the natural dressing of alum and oil as we said before, then instruct her to move gently back and forth.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	And when you have done this, make her sit on the seat again, and instruct her to hold herself.
et la fai esternuer.	And make them sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same way for every midwife
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes up in this way at every heartbeat, cut the flesh between your fingers with your nail, so that the moisture is drained.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if the child has it on their face and neck, cut off the skin from their forehead so that it is not restrained, then kill the child.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then push the child inside so that you place it correctly, as it should be, and instruct the woman not to move.
adonques si istra legierement.	so gently lift them out.
de l’issue des gemelz	Of the dislocation of the wrists
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes even three or four are born together;
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	And this is not a strange thing, but it happens often.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	They have two strange things that do not allow them to live if they happen at the same time.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they multiply and are divided by the knife that separates them, which is related to anger.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	And sometimes they occur naturally like any other thing under the sun, as we have said before.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they occur severely, then treat it as we have said before, and let the surgeon be skilled, and act quickly and lightly.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And do so for his best chance of survival.
de plusors enfans	Of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	Some are formed in the womb at I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII months of age, and they may form fully as a child by the measurement of their glorious wisdom, and it is fitting that the nurse knows all this, for perhaps similar things will happen to them.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Do as you ought.
de l’enfant mort	Of the dead child.
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat the woman for a dead child in her belly, as I've said in the section on obstetrics, and it doesn't turn out well, and you are forced to use manual instruments.
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	It is necessary that you know if the woman has no moral vices, and does not suffer any accidents or fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	The woman should be positioned on her back with her head inclined downward, and her legs raised;
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	And the minister gives her two portions, or she is tied to the bed so that she cannot be treated for the child's descent.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then rub the wife's mouth with moist oils along with a mixture of althea, fenugreek, and flaxseed, then anoint her palms with these oils and mixtures.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	Then gently push her to one side, then move her to a place where she pushes the feet so that they are accessible for this, and take care if the child is equipped that it descends onto its head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	If the feet are stuck in its eyes or neck or mouth or palate or below the chin or in the throat or near the ribs, and if the descent is on its feet, then either prick it or pinch it in the softer parts.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and he must hold the hook with his right hand, and place the curve between his two fingers of the left hand, and push all his hand lightly, and fix the hook in one of these places that we have said until it reaches the empty space.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the form of the hook:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then fix another hook opposite it, or the third if you need them, so that the extractions are equal.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then extend them equally by moving from one side to the other, to extract it, and let the hooks be serrated to hold it, just as this is the form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if any part remains, then anoint the wound with some of his fingers' oil and push those into that part, and pull out the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if any remains there, place this splint or higher, and do so until it comes out entirely forward.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes forward of the other, and he cannot reset it due to tightness, then you must wrap it with a cloth until it fully extends.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	Then bind it at the wrist where the palm meets the heel or with a cord, and so you must do for the other hand and both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the child's head is large and it is stuck during delivery, or there is an acute presentation of the head, then you must insert your spatulate finger between your two fingers, split open the head, and extract the presenting part.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	Where you grind it with the instrument called "almidach," from which its shape is formed, using the instruments or chapters that follow this one.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	And do likewise if the child has an unusually large head naturally;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	Then pull out the bones with pliers, and if the head pops out and is caught by forceps, let it be split open until the moisture that accumulates there flows out.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	And if it cannot come out, cut it up into pieces as much as you can manage.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, you must pierce it until the moisture flows out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is standing on its feet, then there is slight traction, and the guidance to the mouth of the womb is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is tight in the belly or breast, you must extract it with cloth wrapped around the hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and open the abdomen or chest, let the moisture which is there flow out;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if the other limb is removed but the head remains, push your hand deep into the socket and pull it down to the mouth of the socket;
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	then insert one or two fingers and draw it out forcefully;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the mouth of the socket is narrowed due to hot abscesses that have formed there, you should not try to force it open, but rather apply moist and greasy substances;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and apply plasters to him, and wrap them with moist, softening, and soothing cloths.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is lying on their side, and you can make them lie flat, then apply what we have said for a live child;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	if there is no other option, then pull it apart piece by piece, leaving nothing of the afterbirth behind.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And once you have done this, apply what we have said for hot abscesses that appear in the buttocks;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if bleeding occurs, apply cold compresses to restrain it, and provide further treatment.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly a child had been dead then another was born on top of it, and the other died too.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came on her neck, and swelled so much that it opened up, and began to emit a foul smell.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat him, and I thought long, but could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong attracting plaster, and an bone came out, followed by others after several days.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly surprised, for the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it might be the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I treated the wound, extracting visible bones, until the woman was in a better condition;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	And the woman lived a long time like this, and there was still a little piece of bowels in its place.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	And I have recorded this chapter only for those who, when the masters find an odd thing, know how to offer assistance.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To bring the marrow back to its place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Hereafter comes the form of the compress, for which you have the books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	And turn to II for II shoulders.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Nevertheless, the horns should be more slender than the restrainer, and they should be made of ebony or boxwood.
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	And the mouth of the trunk should be two fingers wide, and the edge of the wood one finger, and in length a palm and a half.
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and between these two joints are two attachments of this same piece of wood, which are fixed to each other and about half a palm or slightly more in length.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	and these two attachments are inserted into the mouth of the socket to open it when you turn both horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more refined and lighter in its resemblance to this one, can be made from ebony or boxwood, like the shape of pliers.
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and it has two attachments at each end, you see, one palm in length, with two sides of equal width.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you see that the socket needs to be opened with all of these instruments, have the woman sit on a bed, with her feet hanging down and her legs open wide. Then insert both attachments into the socket, keeping the head of the instrument below between her thighs.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then work your hand with all the instrument, just as you did with equal pliers, according to the amount you want to open the mouth of the wound, so that it yields what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	These instruments are all well-equipped, and their appearances are diverse;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	And when you see them prepared, the work is more urgent, and it is of greater benefit to men for their well-being.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not despair of the instrument at your disposal, as their need is inexcusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath and then make her sneeze forcefully, while holding your hands over her mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she can do this, it is beneficial.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, take a pot and make a hole in the lid, then add herbs that can open the pores of the skin such as sage, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia bark, and marjoram.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	All these herbs or some of them must be boiled in water inside the pot on the fire.
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	Then put a funnel or opening from the pot into one nostril of the patient's nose and hold it so that the vapours enter inside.
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	Then make them sneeze as we have said before.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the secondary injury occurs.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	If it remains after this treatment and does not work, tell the nurse to wet her left hand in sesame oil or mule fat ointment then rub it inside. Finally look for a midwife.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and when she has found it, take hold of it and stretch it little by little straightaway, so that the patient is not troubled during extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	but you must move it gently right and left, and then pull.
si venra et se desaerdra.	then it will come out and become dislodged.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the patient's mouth is narrow, we have mentioned the treatment of coughing and herbal fumigation;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if none of what we have said works, take care not to be reckless when pulling.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but you must tie what is at the patient's mouth to the woman's thigh, then give her an enema of tetrapharmakon.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	If it festers and returns, it will come again.
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	However, when it festers and causes foul odour in the stomach and head, it injures the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	Therefore, one must apply suitable fumigations accordingly:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	None of the ancients have tried fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to stop her flowering and menses is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	It is like seeing the reflection of a dog, with a subtle head in nature, and wide eyes over the fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And let the fumigation be over the coals, and the moth until it is wasted, then begin another.
de percier lou fondement	to perforate the fundament
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born without their anus being pierced, but instead it is blocked by some subtle membrane.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	Therefore, it is necessary for the surgeon to pierce this membrane with his finger, and not with a sharp spatula, taking care that the incision does not touch any other part.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply soft wool moistened in wine and oil, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not heal, insert a piece of lead wire into the hole, and leave it there for several days; remove it when the child wishes to go outdoors.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And sometimes this blockage occurs suddenly in a wound or abscess.
si covient coper celui soudement:	It is necessary to cut open this sudden blockage.
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	Thus it should be treated, as we have said about the anus of a pig.
de la fistule dou fondement	From an anal fistula.
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	And when this ancient dislocation occurs, it creates, and even more so in a moist environment, white or subtle boils, and sometimes these are fistulas that have burst.
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And they are recognized by those who have experienced it or witnessed it through defecation or flatulence when the patient excretes, and sometimes a worm may jump out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if the fistulas penetrate all the way to the bladder, and even halfway up the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and reach as far as the hip joint, and even to the bone of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one recognizes a bursting fistula in the anus, and one that is not bursting.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and it is that you insert your index finger or thumb, and insert a fine needle made of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there is tortuosity, insert a slender tent made of lead or horsehair until you feel the tent or hair with your finger.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge of matter or wind coming from the opening as we have mentioned:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	know that it has not perforated.
si te haste dou curer.	then hasten to treat it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula pierces through to the bladder or the urine duct, it leaks urine, and cannot be healed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is perforated up to the hip joint, then the tent has come through to that place.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	If there is no distortion and the source of pain is obvious, it is best to go directly to surgery, and ointment provides no immediate cure.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And in the case of persistent fistulas, there is no cure other than operation, and it is the foolish vanity of doctors that interferes.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In those cases where it is not persistent and not an old injury either, there is hope of healing with iron [instruments], as I have experienced, and the patient lies prone on their back between your hands.
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	Lift the legs up to the hips, and incline the hips towards the stomach.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then insert an iron probe, or bronze if there is distortion, until you find the location of the fistula.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels it around their anus, you should insert your index finger there, feeling if it has pierced the tendon.
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	And when you feel it between your finger and the skin or flesh, then know that it has pierced through.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	Do not strain yourself if you cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	It is said that some can be healed well, but this happens rarely.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	The aid one provides is to heat the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as mentioned earlier.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	And insert it all heated into the fistula until it reaches towards the anus.
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	And do this twice or three times until you know that these chards are burned, which resemble a bird's feather;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	Then treat the wet tents with butter until that chard falls off, then cure it with ointment, sealing and binding.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus cured, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If this cannot be healed in any other way;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	And if the wound is internal, and does not pierce all the way to the bone that lies at its base, and between your finger and the wound there is thick chard or scab, and you see an opening in this that leads to the heart of the injury;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	Cut at the beginning of the fistula, pushing back to before the wound, then cauterize afterwards until you reach the head of the wound.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	And the swelling will be relieved, and it shall fall.
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	Then mend those faulty sores that seem like a bird's feather, leaving nothing behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the blood defeats you and escapes between your finger and the work, cauterize it with fire or astringent medication.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cautery combines two things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	That is to say, the burning of these adjoining sores, and the stemming of blood and drying of moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	Then treat moist swellings with butter or ground substances until the skin turns pale, and remove burnt sores from the pale flesh.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then treat open wounds with hardening ointments for hard tissue, and use dry medications.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is cured and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula extends to the anus, and is away from the body, put your finger in the anus, and inquire there.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the tumor and find that it has reached the skin or subcutaneous tissue, or is close to breaking through, but there are no signs of certainty or hope except for a path seen through one of these three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut deep into it, or if you can create a new wound and treat it like the initial one.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too deep as to cut the tissue that holds the base, and cause evacuation from there unwillingly.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then treat it as we have said before.
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	if by chance it is discharging, then remove the covering and clean after cutting near the base, either through incision or another sharp instrument.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	Then challenge this evil fault which is in the wound, as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	Then study to restore the wound, and stop the fistula outside of the foundation;
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If it were a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And sometimes fistulas occur in this manner:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And it is when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it is beside the foundation near the skin above, take a perforated tent with a pointed end in this shape:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And here you insert the wire bent at right angles in such a way that it enters through one hole and exits from another; then you advance the probe along the entire length of the wire into the fistula until it reaches its end.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is pierced in the margin of the foundation inside, then withdraw the thread from that perforation, just as you would insert your finger into the foundation;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and pull the head of the thread through, joining the two heads together, holding one to the other, and leave it for one or two days.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and do not loosen it at any time, until the thread touches these parts which are between them, and they fall away.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then treat the wound until it is sealed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not rupture, make it perforate by all means possible unless it is too deeply embedded.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not suitable to operate on the wound if it is too deeply embedded and then treat it as we have said until it heals.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spatula with spines that we use to make the fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and not sharp on the other side for this reason that you do not cut what must not be cut; as you can see here.
des emorroydes	From the hemorrhoids.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Hemorrhoids occur in two ways.
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	Where they are inside the fundament, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and around them is blood, and there may be one or more, and they protrude from the fundament and at the head of the fundament.
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	But those that protrude have little moisture, and around them is either a bit of yellow water or a bit of blood, and they have the colour of the body.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	And the treatment for those who have them inside the fundament is that you instruct the patient to strain themselves to go to the toilet, until the fundament is outside and the son appears.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you hurry, grab it with tongs or hold it with your nail, then cut it at its root.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if its hooks cannot hold due to moisture, it grabs [the wound] with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamois.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	it extracts them with your two hands, then cuts and applies some hot powders in place of cautery.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you cauterize them as described in the chapter on cautery, or treat with other methods until they are healed.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundation cannot come out, then administer a harsh enema to cleanse what is in the fundament so that it can be expelled fully.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	when the patient feels better, and if the thread is drawn out of the fundament without resistance, then the treatment is light.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And it is that you grasp them with your nail or with pincers, then clip and clean them as we have said, until they are healed, and fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	It is fitting that you arrange the suture in this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take a twisted thread, insert it into a needle, and then draw the thread through, make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, so that it is wide.
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	Tighten the thread firmly, then knot the thread and remove the needle, do this for all of them except leave one open to allow excess blood to flow.
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then place on the base a moistened cloth with rose oil or wax, and put it on the base, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Leave it on until it softens, and once it has softened, treat it with ointment and other remedies until it is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	To dry up the phlegm or feces from the bowels
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often there is drying up of feces in the intestine, due to the constraint of nature and when the illness is old or medicine has no effect.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	Make sure to scrape the bark off with a spatule or your fingernail so that it does not stay wet.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	Then treat it until it is healed as it should be.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	And if it cannot heal, start the scraping again more vigorously than before until it bleeds and is scraped raw.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat until it is healed.
dou fremit	cooling down
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Ants are a small fault in the appearance of the body, and they go very deep inside.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And sometimes the cold finds them, one feels them trembling like death, they are found all over the body and most of all in the hands.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	The treatment is to take a quill from a goose feather or the strong wing of a vulture and place this quill on the trembling spot until the purple circle around it disappears.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand around the entire quill until you cover all around the trembling spot and put it deep inside, uprooting the tremor from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you wish, make one from a cane of brass or iron according to this form, and let it be hollow below and solid above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	Do not pierce [it], to keep it attached to the finger, and press it.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see that, cauterize the swelling, just as it is described in the chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	Of the form of the clyster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Sometimes we use silver, quicksilver, or melted and hammered bronze for a clyster.
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	And sometimes we use these instruments in small and large sizes according to what they are designed for.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those which are fitted for the treatment of children and those who are weak and suffer pain are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the clyster large or small is broad above where the bellies are tied thus:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	And if there is an issue with the intestines being tied up, as you see, and the intestine has been pierced...
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and it has two holes on one side, and one on the other.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and let the belly or place where you put the medicines be made of a beast's bladder or parchment, and pierce it all around with small holes, and leave an inch between each hole, then push into these holes a strong thread of twisted flax in the shape of an X or tie them together, and assemble the belly like a goat;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then administer as an enema;
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and this is its form like a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head of the enema with oil or egg white, or something similar, then gently insert it;
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	Then the minister should squeeze the patient's two hands together until it is completely visible, then withdraw the clyster, and lift the patient's legs to the wall, and if the medic wants him/her to go out, hold them as much as possible.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if he/she sleeps one night on it, this is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you enema him with a stomach illness of obstruction, and the medicine wants to exit prematurely, then restart it until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids or abscesses are in the anus, let the clyster be as gentle as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And this is the shape of the gentle clyster with which leather should be withdrawn:
des plaies	Of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have already spoken about treating wounds in this chapter.
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	For we shall tell you the treatments of hands and medicines, according to their fulfillment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and where the wounds are located, as well as what caused them.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	Things by which wounds are made are through striking with a stone, and cutting with a sword or knife, or from a lance, stick, arrow, or similar objects.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	Or they are made according to the locations of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, head, foot, stomach, liver, and similar parts.
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	And we shall tell you the treatment for each wound, beginning with simple head wounds since memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and the bone is not broken, take heed if it's from striking with a stone or similar objects, and the skin is still torn and the wound is large, and you slightly suspect of an impending abscess.
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	If you must do so, then bleed from the cephalic vein especially if little blood comes from the wound, and make sure to bleed on the opposite side of the injured part.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	And let the patient rid themselves of fullness from wine and fatty meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if they do not wish to be bled, let their meat intake be reduced, and they should neither drink wine nor eat flesh.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	And place on the wound cotton moistened in rose oil alone, or in astringent wine, if hot abscesses form there.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	And if there is no hot abscess, place on the wound powder which I shall name shortly, should it be fresh with all its blood and not moved by air.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound has moved, apply some ointments until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together with sutures, then bring them together with stitching, as I will explain for wounds of the abdomen, regarding the stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is exposed to the bone, deep, and holds only by a little bit of skin, cut it off.
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	Then treat the wound with medication and restore hard flesh in place of leather, instruct the patient to eat coarse meats like beef and pork, as well as chicken and similar foods.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find the leather is corrupted but it does not reach to the bone, cut out all of the corruption and throw it away, then treat it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if there is an artery in the wound or vein that does not stop bleeding and cannot be stopped with medicine, tie off the artery and if you find it has slipped, bind it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if this does not benefit him, then cauterize him.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, so is the treatment light.
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And you must put this powder on it as soon as the rust has been removed.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the way of making the powder is as follows:
pren encens une partie;	Take one part incense;
sanc de dragon II parties;	Dragon's blood, two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	Galangal root, three parts, and finely powder it, then apply to the wound, pressing firmly, until it dries well and joins with all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	and then bind it well, leaving it unbound, if it does not swell.
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	for one must remove the medicine only when it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes only the alum is used when there is no incense or dragon's blood available, but the cold has moved from the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the burn has killed the wound, especially deep ones, do not put any of this powder on it;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply some soothing ointments, or a poultice of barley flour made with water and honey, until it flows freely.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, extract it with delicate pincers.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And I will tell you about fractures of the head afterward.
de la plaie dou col	Of the neck wound.
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck and it is straightforward, there is no significant difference between this and a head wound; however, if the windpipe or artery in the neck is severed...
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the nose, there is no other remedy except to leave it alone and not put anything constricting on it, for this harms the nose and makes it retreat.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	And do not apply anything cold to the wound, for the nature of the nose is cold, and its proximity extends to the brain, which is the most vital organ.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	But let the medicine be soothing, as warm water washed in soft oil, and mixed with cucumber also washed in sweet water, and other stones of salt according to this method, and moist salves.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, cut it and bind with bandages, then let it heal until it is completely closed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and have fur and pus in them, pierce it or make an incision below this point.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut, and bleeding occurs, then open it up, and suture it, and cauterize it if necessary;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	and if the spinal cord in the throat is cut, or the heart and vessels are damaged, take care that flesh does not go into it. Cut the heart's conduit upon the neck of the throat, but do not damage the throat itself when you reset it according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	then hold it carefully in place for a few days, then treat it with draining ointments until it is healed.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has penetrated to the bone, examine it closely.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and if there are fragments of bone in it, then remove them forcefully where you can, and for those you cannot retrieve, leave them to fester until the wound suppurates. Alleviate the pain and ease the discharge from the sore.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle it with the powder I mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has formed a fistula, treat it as I have explained in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	Of wounds from lances or knives.
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a blow from a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, examine whether air escapes from the wound when the patient walks around.
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	Know then that the wound is mortal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	And if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood intact, do not apply the powder immediately nor bind it to prevent the blood from flowing out freely, as it returns to the heart, and this can kill the patient.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	But apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	and if you do not have ointment, put old cotton into the wound to absorb moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days or four days or longer.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	there will not be any spasm, nor evil heart tremors or shortness of breath
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see the good condition of the bones, then you know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Treat it with tents and other remedies until it is completely cured.
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	and if it cannot heal, and there is some work done on it again, then you should know that there is a fistula there.
si la cure si com on doit.	then treat it as one ought to.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is an incision from a sword or knife, whether it be on the chest or back, treat what is in front first.
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	If it is large, stitch it.
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	And if it is small, use powder. If the wound is deep and has pierced the bone, splitting into pieces, clean the wound thoroughly, and realign the broken bones if they are displaced.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	And if the bones are not displaced, leave the wound to fester so that it drains itself.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And for other wounds on different body parts, the treatment is as we have stated before.
dou derrompement dou ventre	Abdominal hernia.
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	Ruptures of the abdomen are large, medium, and small.
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	Of a large wound sometimes the intestines or their nerves will protrude, which allows for air entry.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	And the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one, because you must be extra careful to push the intestines back in without tearing them.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	Because the intestines swell and become sensitive to cold, they are harder to push back in without damaging them further; thus, it is better to treat the smaller wound first so that you can carefully guide the intestine back into place before treating the other injuries.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	Know that there are four types of abdominal ruptures:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	The two common ruptures occur in the abdominal wall suture, and the sutures of other wounds on the body are the same as for other injuries.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and yet they are more suitable with the stitching of the abdomen; I will speak about each one individually and clarify them.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and something of the intestine comes out, and it is necessary to put it back in, this can be done through one of two methods.
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	either due to the small size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, warm it in this way:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	moisten a sponge or soft cloth in warm water only, which you have boiled in hot water with vinegar and spice, and apply it to the intestine until the swelling is reduced.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And sometimes this constraining wine is made sour to reduce swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the swelling subside, moisten the intestines with water or other infusions and let the mallows be cooked because this alleviates the entry of too much.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if nothing enters it, then make an opening in the wound with an instrument used to cut hemorrhoids.
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	and the first treatment is to ensure that we do not cut unless there is great need for it.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and these are the instruments used to make an incision:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	when it cuts inside in an arc shape and not outwards, observe here its form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines have fallen out, you must replace them back inside according to their natural form in its proper place, if you are able, for this is better.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is wide, and it is located below the belly, you must lay the patient on their back, with their legs elevated above their head.
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	And if the wound is below the belly, place the head and chest higher than the lower parts; likewise, if the rupture in the abdomen occurs in one of its two halves, position them so that the injured part is higher than the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	Thus, it is necessary to manage as I say for large and medium-sized wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	For small wounds, use the equipment provided to you, then take it in your hands and apply a gentle substance that covers the entire rupture with your palm, bringing together its lips.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	and pierce the two sides of the leather with the two sides of the syphon, which is beneath the leather inside, so that you make it pierced from this part, and gather the two heads of the siphon together in four parts.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	then draw out a double thread around the needle in two parts, then gather together the two sides of the wound appropriately, and then leave two fingers' width, and insert another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	then tie the thread with a knot as you did with the first needle, and do not cease to continue in this way according to your need of needles until the entire wound is closed.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	and let the needles be medium-sized, between fine and thick, for fine needles cut all the flesh, and those that are too thick cannot enter well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	For this reason they must be moderate;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and it is not suitable to push the needles too far beyond the flesh and skin, so that they do not cut and open the wound before it heals;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	then cut the heads of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient when they move, and place tents or small cloths over the needle heads to keep them in place, leaving them there until the wound is healed;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	and this manner of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, as it requires only one or two needles.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second type of suture is common, and it involves bringing together the two sides of the skin and the two sides of the subcutaneous tissue with an needle or thick moderate thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	and when you have pierced these four heads together, return the needle to the part where you started, in the manner one sews cloth.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and leave some space between each suture as thick as two fingers.
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	these sutures are useful for the man; I sewed a wound on someone's stomach, which was cut by a knife, and the wound was larger than a palm, with the intestines protruding two palms in size, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned his intestine after it had been outside for twenty-four hours, and the wound healed in fifteen days; I treated him and he was cured.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the doctor had judged that he would die, but this was a miracle.
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not treat him with ointment because I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And apply old cotton on top of the wound twice a day, and wash it with water and honey until it is healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	One shall say two proper ways of stitching/suturing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle, and insert it from outside to inside part.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	Once it has pierced through the skin from right to right, leave the head of the siphon or incision where you inserted the needle, and make it pierce on the other side from inside to outside.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And the understanding of this suture is that you should sew it just like furriers make furs, leaving one side of the siphon untied and taking it up on the other, until the whole suture is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second method of suturing, as Galen accurately describes it, is done in this way: One joins the two parts together naturally and aligns one end of the wound with the other, like so...
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Insert a needle at the wound's edge nearest to the navel, piercing just that spot, and leave both ends of the wound untouched.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	Then turn the needle around and pierce through from outside to inside, passing it between both ends of the wound.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Next, pierce both ends from outside to inside in two other places of the wound that are on the opposite side.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And this is Galen's second method for suturing, which is also the most common one.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Galiens said these words, and some bear witness, that one must sew the belly with two needles, each having thread.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one must push one needle from one side, and the other from the other side, in a manner like those who sew leather straps;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	and understand that when the rupture is within the belly, the suture is more grievous than other places on the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, rather than moved by the burning [coals], then return the intestine and the cut.
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	Then put on top of it some powder made from burnt animal fat, and if the burn has moved away from the ointment, then apply a different ointment that is ready to hand until the wound heals.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	And tie it up with thread, and seal it with hot wax.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat the wound like any other until it is healed.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	And if you have no medicine, then apply old cotton wool as soon as it begins to heal, and move it around twice a day until the wound is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you will need no other medicine in many treatments where the wounds are simple.
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	And if you doubt that the wound will poison vital body parts, then it is necessary to soak a light linen cloth in tepid oil or rosehip oil and place it around the affected area and under the armpit.
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	and if he feels pain or swelling in his bowels, which often happens, then administer a clyster of tepid black wine, especially if the inflammation has reached the intestine.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	pierce it from within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is lighter to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines, which are called "jeun," cannot heal when injured due to the layout of their veins and the delicate nature of the entire body, as well as its proximity to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	and if the belly bursts from the wound, put it back in place just like with the intestine while it is still fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	and if it is old and has turned worms or black, you must bind the place that has turned black so no blood flows from there, for there are veins and arteries.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	then cut what is between the binding and hang both heads from the lower part of the wound until outside to ease extraction when the belly falls, and the wound opens.
de la routure dou boueil	From a broken jaw.
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestines are round and the wound is small, it can be restored in some men, for I saw a man pierced in the belly by a lance.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, from which issued waste matter and flatulence.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I treated it according to my ability, and I did not cease from cauterizing until he was healed, and the flesh had fused together.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw it fused, I suspected that the patient might have pain in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he had no discomfort there, but remained in good health, eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and certain experts say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be bound in this way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	take large pieces of meat, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the meat has opened its mouth, place it on both lips so that it tightens its mouth on top.
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then cut the head of the meat and keep it so that it cannot be untied, then place another piece of meat afterwards in the same way as before, until the wound is completely covered.
et cout la plaie.	cut the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	These meats heal in the intestine, and there is no harm to the patient, and if one wants to sew the intestine with a fine thread which can be cut from the intestine of an animal, it should be done this way.
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Take the end of this thread of intestine, which should be very clean, and then tie to the end of this thread a fine linen thread twisted together, then insert the thread into the needle, and pass it through the intestine, and draw it back up through the rupture.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	And this manner of sewing together is not false but according to the way of trust and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the delicate intestines, there is no remedy nor cure but skill and expertise.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it heals, is universally called a "fistula", especially when it is complete and turns inward.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	A fistula is truly an erroneous hard white knotting, where there is no pain felt, and it also looks like the feather of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes clear bowels, and other times dense.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes little, and other times enough.
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed and lacks flesh, this is only due to one of nine reasons:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	that is to say, due to the scarcity of blood or flesh;
ou por sa malice;	or because of its wickedness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or due to the hard flesh within it, and on the lips, which does not allow new flesh to grow;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or there is too much bowel;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	Where the flesh is swollen, and the substance is of poor quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	where the medicine is not effective in treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	where due to this, the corruption is like a form of pestilence;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	where due to the properties of the region, digestion is slow, health restoration is delayed, and it is swollen by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are wounds or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, the signs, and the treatments with medicine in this section.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now you must let me inform you of the treatment for a fistula, which is performed by manual operation.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that fistulas occur in any part of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	For there are fistulas that come to the large veins, and to the arteries, and to the nerves, or to the hip, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it reaches such that comes to the main member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are of this manner are of grievous healing, and there is only hard work and ignorance involved;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if there is any fistula that does not reach the place I mentioned, and you have faith in its treatment, and you know how to identify it, then take a tent of linen or iron, if the fistula is straight, insert it;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	and if the fistula is twisted, search for it with a subtle thread of flax, because the flaxen thread bends to follow the twists and turns.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	and if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot locate it precisely with threads, then cleanse and irrigate it through one of the apertures, for moisture travels from one aperture to another, cleaning and purging.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	then examine it carefully to the best of your ability, determine if there are any bones or nerves present, and check if it is completely healed over, ask the patient about any pain they feel when you apply pressure with your hand, as well as its location.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and once you have accurately located its position, whether it is near a joint, nerve, artery or vein, or in any of the areas I mentioned earlier, treat it according to what I said, and remove any pus or corrupted flesh that may be inside.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	and then treat it until it is healed, and if the fistula is indeed deep in the right spot, you must remove it perfectly as much as possible. Then insert moist bandages soaked in healing medicines and push them inside the fistula so that the medicine corrodes any remaining superfluous matter at its base
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then apply healing ointments that promote healthy flesh until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if it does not heal with this treatment, cauterize as we have explained earlier; and should the bone be affected by the fistula, remove it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	Should neither vein nor nerve constrict your principal limb as we have said earlier;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackening, leave it until all corruption is removed, then treat secondary infections with ointments until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	And if it is not healed, and sinks back as before, know that you have not reached the bottom of it.
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	If you uncover it and dig until you reach the depth, remove all corruption, then replace it in its place.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if it is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach it.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	If there is another tool left by nature.
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there is a small corrupted bone inside, and you can extract it with forceps, remove it using an appropriate instrument for this purpose; and if there are many bones, extract all of them, do not leave even one.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	and if the moisture causes resistance, and there is no error or fear, cut through the moisture, flesh, and bone, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, apply something that encourages putrefaction to the wound, and leave it until the flesh is rotten all around the bones, then they will be easier to extract.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	and if it is a large bone, like from the leg or thigh, wash away the putrefaction until all the blackness is gone, then restore the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if a large part is corrupted, and it reaches down to the bone marrow;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	you must saw it and cut it all away until you reach the corrupted part, and then treat it until it is healed;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you may take example and aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	There was a young man around thirty years old, who had pain in his leg due to an internal issue, causing matter to gather and form an abscess, which swelled greatly but had no external cause for incision.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	But the surgeons, in their foolishness, worked on it so much that they opened the abscess and removed a great deal of matter, which turned into a fistula, and many holes formed, all expelling foul-smelling moisture from the body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and many doctors tried to cure him for two years, and there was no wise man in the art of hands, until I was called upon, and I saw his leg and the treatments he was undergoing, and what was passing through the large abscesses.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and his body would turn red, with a yellowish complexion.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I set up a tent in one of these holes, and then I searched all the holes, and found that each came toward the other from every part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I hurried and cut into one of the abscesses until I exposed part of the bone, and found it corrupted and perforated, with decay reaching deep inside.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I removed what appeared to be the corrupted bone, hoping there was no further decay beyond what I extracted.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and I began to restore the wound with moistened medicines over a long time, but it could not heal.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and then I began again, and exposed the bone as before, and found that the decay had spread into the bone and its marrow, and then I removed it, and tried to close the wound.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	but I could not do so before cutting around one palm's width of the bone, and its marrow was completely decayed, then I restored it with medicine.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and it healed and closed quickly, and there was no need to begin the work again except for the patient's weakness, who could not bear it, and my fear of his death.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation, he often bled excessively, but he was completely healed, and in place of the bone, hard tissue grew, which was well-formed, caused no harm whatsoever, and did not hinder him at all, either going or coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, one must treat it in this way:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	Take the ligament, and pull it to the head of the protruding bone, and instruct someone to lift it upwards.
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	Attach another piece of linen thread that is thicker than the first ligament, and bind it over the flesh above the bone, stretch out the head, such that you draw the corrupted flesh downwards, and uncover the flesh on the spot where you wish to operate, so that the knife does not cut into the flesh.
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	Place hot iron or a board beneath the bone to press against the corrupted flesh in order to cut it away.
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	One must treat as much as one is able to see and feel the corruption, and then treat again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, uncover all the flesh.
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	Then place the hot iron underneath, and then cover it from one part to the other over the corruption, and let the poultice be as long as the length of the corruption with the iron, as we have said.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	And if the corruption is in the joint, then cut out the corrupted joint, and cover the bone on one side to the other.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	And if the corruption is in the space between two joints, there is nothing else to cut out but this.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	And if the corruption is in the wrist of the hand or the ankle of the foot, it is very difficult, but nevertheless you must inquire about this corrosion and how it opens for you.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and clean it in every way you can, but let neither vein nor nerve oppose you.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	know that there are many cutting instruments and threads to cut these bones, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and delicacy, and their size and smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for this it is necessary to adapt each similar piece of work with its tool.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	know that the work will show you the tool you need, according to your understanding of this art and the signs of different illnesses.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	therefore choose the tool you need according to what is required.
dou feu	Of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The joints can dislocate either internally or externally;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	And when you have treated that inflammation with medicine through the treatment of wounds, and it does not improve, then you must cut off that limb up to the place where the corrosion begins so that the patient escapes death or the evil, which is greater, of losing a limb.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	And the sign is that the limb turns black as if it has been burned by fire, and afterward it may turn purple, for this corrosion of a limb can spread from member to member and take over the whole body.
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	So do not delay in cutting it off, and if the corrosion is caused by the poison of certain venomous creatures such as the scorpion fish, snake, or similar, and it has started at the top of the arm, cut it there and do not give any space for it to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it reaches the hand, treat the joint so that the decay does not reach the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	and if it reaches the arm, treat it with a knife;
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and if it passes the knife, it is death, and there are no strong remedies except for those that match its power;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	and do the same when decay appears in the foot:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	if it reaches the first joint, treat it after the other joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it appears in the foot, treat the entire foot;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it rises to the leg, treat at the knee joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	And if it [the dislocation] comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to let the patient die.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	And the way to cut or sever the limb is that you bind it above and below, and have some ministers hold one binding down, and other ministers hold the other binding up, and you separate the flesh between the two bindings with a wide-bladed chisel, until the bone is exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	Then cut or sever it, and place a linen cloth on either side so that the wound does not touch healthy flesh, and prevent further injury and hot abscesses from forming in the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if there is bleeding when you operate, cauterize the place immediately, or apply some clotting powders.
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	And I shall tell you what happened to a man in his sleep:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	He had a dark patch that resembled a burn from fire, and this corrosion started first in his big toe, spreading until it covered the entire foot.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	When the man saw the corrosion, he immediately decided to amputate his foot, and was healed.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	Long after, the corrosion returned to his finger on his hand, and he came to me. I applied resonant substances to it after cleansing his body, but the corruptions could not be stopped.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	And he saw that I cut off his hand, and I would not, for I had hope of curing the disease;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	And I also feared that if I cut his hand, he would die, for the strength of man was weak;
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	And he became desperate, returned to his land, took up an axe to cut off his hand, and was healed;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And I have not concealed it from you except so that one might do otherwise if need be.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Sometimes an abscess forms in the flesh and remains so long that it causes a great accumulation of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	Then it swells up and bursts open, ejecting the pus which leaves the place bare like a hollow vessel;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and the skin above is as delicate as thin fabric, and it does not extend to the bone or the nerve; such an illness is called a "shin," and it is not called a "fistula.
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so elongated that it reaches the bone completely, then it is called a "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the skin is such that you must cut around this skin, especially when it is delicate, like a thin piece of fabric;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and do not fear its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you are concerned that the skin will rot, and the corruption is not deep, and the skin is thick with flesh, treat it thus with a clyster:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	Look if the breast is large, and the bowels emit a foul odour, then administer an Egyptian medicated enema made as follows:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	Take alum, oil, and litharge in equal parts, put them to cook in a vessel over the fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	Then take the amount you need of this medicine, mix it with water and honey, and administer an enema to the breast, holding the orifice closed.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	Leave the medicine inside for two hours, then extract it by smelling.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Repeat this procedure as many times as necessary until the breast is healed and the pus removed.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	and sometimes it is cleansed with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and you take the ash from wood of vine, pour water over it, then let it drip through, and cleanse with it, as long as you know that the breast is well cleaned.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	and if the patient cannot endure it, neither Egyptian medicine nor water of ashes, then cleanse them with water and honey where they have a little powdered litharge;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	or you cleanse them with honey and mixed wine, as the honey has properties to clean and wash, and the wine makes the blood rise.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and when you have done this, and you are certain that the breast is well cleansed, then cleanse it with something that makes flesh grow in it, and it is that you take definitive ointment, and make it with rose oil and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	Where you can apply some medicine and ointments to it, of which I have already spoken about their properties in the chapter on ointments.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	And if the hole in the breast is small and the nozzle of the clyster cannot enter, then you should widen it a little with an iron instrument, and insert either a piece of Egyptian cloth or Basilicum ointment until it has been enlarged.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if the wound is too wide, you should cut it and leave only a place where the clyster can enter; and if the hole that leaks is above, then cover it with something or put something in a lower position than it.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bowel is intact, nothing should be allowed to enter it.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	and if you cannot cut the vein as you wish, devise a way for the bowels to descend to their lowest point, because when the bowels are full, they prevent the entry of food; and if you cannot cut the vein as you wish, then devise it in such a manner...
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	that the bowels gently move downwards, and do not leave any of the bowels there.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take consolidating medicines to place on the wound, and stretch them over a linen cloth that covers the entire wound.
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	then cut as deeply as necessary at the spot of the vein, making a hole wider than the first one, then spread soft ointment on another piece of linen according to the size of the wound, and place it over the wound to alleviate the bowels, and do not remove the large outer bandage for several days.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and he who is on the breast wound often removes it to remove the bowels, and examines that which flows from the bowels, whether it be poison or pus or something else, or if it is digestible or not.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	and take note if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in such a way that you see nature rising above the breast wound, then know that the breast already scars, and approach the recovery.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	and then release it in the morning or on the third day, and when you free the wound, change to another cloth, and renew the dressing.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast discharges undigested food after many days, know that the breast is not healing.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if the subtle poison slowly diminishes over a long time, do not despair of recovery, for healing is near.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are men whose wounds heal slowly, and those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if an indigest substance comes out of the breast after many days, know that the breast is not healed.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if the breast heals slowly and is remote, apply drying medicines which are moist in substance but dry in virtue, such as definite ointment, for it contains a great part of vitriol, and this is the final medicine.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take definite ointment, and make it with rose oil, and mix in equal parts of old wine.
puis le confit et en use;	then melt it and apply it.
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	and this same treatment works better when thickened and cooked, if definite ointment is not available, or take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind it, and sprinkle the powder over honey while it's still on the fire.
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	Then glue I a pad, and extend it over the breast, and sometimes administer a long astragalus root, and roots of celestial lily, which is like flour made from vetch and centaury.
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	and I use simple or compound medicines
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	grind them, and make powder out of it, and put on the honey I mentioned before, then apply it.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and if the wound is elongated and does not heal with this treatment, know that the corruption has reached perfection, and it has penetrated into the bone or hard tissues.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	treat the wound as if it were a fistula, like we mentioned before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of the abscess under the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Panarice is an abscess that arises underneath the fingernail of the hand, or the toenail, and sometimes appears in other places.
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	And when it becomes inflamed and is not treated promptly, an abscess develops, spreading pus that erodes the nail bed until it reaches the root of the nail, and sometimes even removing the entire nail.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	It causes bone corrosion, leading to painful decay, the joint of the finger becomes wide and loose, and the flesh turns a bad colour.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment is not beneficial, then you must cut away all that remains of the nail with an iron tool, then cauterise the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	Cauterization is very effective treatment when the bone is healthy and the nail undamaged.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	But if the nail presses against the flesh and begins to prick it, piercing and wounding it, you should place a probe underneath the nail at the point where it pierces the flesh, lift up the injured area of flesh gently, and remove any remaining tissue with sharp, corrosive medicines.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, remove it, and treat with force, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you see the finger corrupted, cut it off just below the first knuckle as described earlier, then treat until it is healed.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	And if it is pierced, and swells up, causing great pain, you must treat the wound first.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	Then cut the nail with a sharp spoon-shaped tool, cutting across it, and be careful not to reach the flesh beneath the nail, as the patient would feel too much pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if it happens, put something on it to soothe it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of the wrist joint from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	Some men have very fleshy index fingers that may contain bone and sometimes even a nail; they can be born with growths at the root of their knuckles or anywhere on their fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	Those who are born on the right side of their head never move [their eyes], but those who are born at the junction of the eye may move it;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The stature of one who is fleshy is slight, in this way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Operate on him at the base of his spine with a wide spatule.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	One who is born at the root of the jaw is difficult to cure:
si te tien dou coper.	So you must operate with care.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For those born on the inside of the fingertip, you must first cut away the surrounding flesh down to the bone and then amputate the bone with a fine saw; treat the wound until it heals.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The injuries that cause two bones to come together can occur through birth, or by sudden wounding, burning from fire, or similar causes.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	You should then operate on that suture so that the teeth are replaced according to their natural shapes;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two tents or moistened cloth with rose oil, so they do not stick together.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Or place between two soft planks until the colors are fused, as is necessary.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If a person has sutures in their palm, cut this suture as appropriate.
des vils	Of the wrist.
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Veins are large open vessels filled with melancholy humours that arise in various parts of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And they occur more frequently in the legs of those who walk on foot and work, carrying loads, more so than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	You must therefore administer purging of bile to them at times, and then treat with basilicum.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The iron treatment is according to two methods:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	One is where they cauterize, draining the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And the other method is that you lift the vein and draw all of its contents out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The cutting [or surgery] goes as follows:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	Raise the first leg with very hot water until the large veins become thin and subtle. Then stretch out the patient's leg from above the thigh down to just below the knee joint.
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then cut the vein in an I-shape, or II-shape, or III-shape with a wide incision. Draw out and squeeze the dark blood into your hand, from one end to another until such time that sufficient blood has been evacuated according to the patient's needs.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	And then bind it [the wound], and instruct the patient to abstain from meat for a while, eating black pudding instead.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And repeat the evacuation [of blood] and cauterization when the veins become full again, causing harm to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The healing of wounds follows this method:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Trim the hair from the patient's leg if it is hairy, then place them in a bath, and bathe their leg with warm water until the skin turns red, and the veins swell.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you do not have access to a bath, heat it over the fire, and then rub directly onto the vein from below the knee down to the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then work the skin with an unciner, and peel back the vein from either side until it is exposed where you can feel it.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	And when the vein appears red and black, and as it enters the flesh, it looks like a white cord.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	Then push the vein underneath until it is raised above the skin, and then draw it to the small knife, then cut it in another place further up by three fingers.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then scrape the skin above the vein until it appears, then lift it with the small knife like you have done before, and draw it to another small knife, just as you did initially.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	Then make another cut, or more if you need them, then lift the skin and cut it with the toe of your foot, then draw and lift it until you reach the second small knife.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then extract it from cut to cut until it is completely outside, then make the final cut.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And if you cannot draw and lift it out, then insert a needle with a strong doubled thread through it, tie the ends together, insert it under the vein, turn your hand one way and other until it comes away.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And make sure it does not break, for if it breaks, one cannot pull or lift it, which is harmful to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	and when you have treated it entirely, place on the wound site damp wool soaked in wine and rose oil.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	treat it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the bone is contracted and twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it unevenly, but do not break it.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and pull it as we mentioned before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron with which one breaks the bone is curved, and does not cut, so that it does not damage the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it is a large curved blade because if it were slender, it would rupture the vein but being thick as we have said and here is its form:
de la voinne civile	From the civilized vein.
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is situated in the legs, in warm parts where no grass or tree grows and on land that has no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	and at times it appears in other parts apart from the legs and this happens due to gangrene that develops under the skin just as serpents and worms develop inside the body, embedded between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the sign of the beginning of this vein is that a great inflammation comes into the leg, then its color changes, and the vein starts to protrude outwardly, just like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the wound opens, you must wrap around it a piece of cloth that is 3.5 to 7 inches long, tie it and leave the cloth hanging from the leg, and every time it comes off, rewrap it with the cloth and retie it.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	And if it is too long, cut off a part of it, wrap the remaining hair around, and do not cut it at its root, so that it grows back completely.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cut it, it will enter the flesh, causing abscesses and rot in that place, resulting in a severe illness;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	so that is why it must be treated quickly and completely, leaving nothing on the body;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	and sometimes this wound can be as long as five palms or more, and a man came to me with a wound that was ten palms in length. When you cut it open, push one finger into the opening, and pierce it all the way through so everything comes out.
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And empty the matter that is inside, and bring healing medicines to prevent rot one day, then treat it like abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And sometimes this wound is minor, especially when it appears at the ankle or foot joints where there is a lot of perforation and must be kept dry.
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Treat it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Worms that are born between skin and flesh.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called "ox disease" in our land because it often affects oxen, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, moving throughout the body up and down, and one can feel its movement from limb to limb until it tears the skin where it was and falls out.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and they are caused by a corruption of certain humours, just as maggots, worms, and intestinal parasites come into being in the belly.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and there is doubt about its nature, for when it moves through the body and ascends to the head, and reaches the eye, perhaps enters, and destroys the eye.
et ceu avient maintes fois.	and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it being treated and drained, there is no way to prevent its spread except when it moves.
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	so it is necessary then that you bind the place above and below with a strong and tight bandage, then cut over it and drain it forcefully, and if the maggot has penetrated perfectly into the flesh, and you do not find it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm it causes is when it runs into the eye, as we have said.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming towards the head near the eye, firmly restrain your eyebrow underneath, then push up and pull it away.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and the patient should use cleansing body treatments with dissolving medicinal solutions to remove bad humours and rotten flesh.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	From pain due to windiness.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This illness is called "vakirir" in our land, it's a pain that comes to certain limbs and can move from limb to limb.
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I saw what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to see an ill woman, who uncovered her arm for me revealing a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and then soon after, you see it rise up like a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything else, just like quicksilver when it falls from above.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	the pain departs from that place and lodges in the shoulder, then a little while later spreads throughout the body until it reaches the other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then she told me that it would circle back around the body, just as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly amazed by how it moved from limb to limb because I had never seen this illness behave in such a way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	However, I had heard often that pain could move from one place to another, but I never believed it until I saw it in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	And I thought that it was because the woman had a thin body and her veins were exposed, and so this wind-like force appeared to be constrained.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	And they do not follow this reasoning for those who are delicate, with moist bodies and open wounds.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	When you treat this illness and the patient experiences such pain, if it presents as we have described, bind it above and below firmly, then cut into it until that windiness is forced back to its place.
et cauterize le leu;	And cauterise the area.
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	If you do not see it with your own eyes, treat it for what causes windiness, as bitter pills, and pills of serpent's flesh, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and the parts of the body they pierce.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	Their variations are such that some have large spikes, others small, some hairy, others smooth.
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	And for those with two edges, and those with tongues, and for those which have parts.
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and that which falls on any member does so in two ways:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or it falls on principal members such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidney, intestines, bladder, and similar organs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls then on any place within these organs, and the sign of death that I will tell you about follows:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	you must take care with the extraction of this arrow, for death comes after in many cases;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this evil sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then draw it out, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of a brain injury when an arrow falls and pierces the bone, and lifts the covering membrane above the brain, is when there are scotomata (blind spots) and sudden pain in the eyes, and swelling and redness of the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and impaired reasoning, and vomiting bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and perhaps it is without breath from the nostrils or ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps he loses speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and white moisture oozes from the wound resembling pulsation, and there also comes out something like burnt flesh;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if these signs appear to you, then attend to the cure, and extract the arrow if it is there.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of an arrow when it hits the heart are: that it is near the left nipple, and feels as if lodged in a hard object, not empty.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and perhaps the arrow moves with each pulse, and black blood flows out, bringing coldness and cold sweat, and syncope.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	you must then surely know that death is imminent.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign that an arrowhead has not penetrated is if there is no foam coming out of the wound, and the throat swells up, and the patient's colour changes, and they breathe heavily and seek cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrow hits near the shoulder blade, it is close to the small ribs.
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	it causes great pain and suffering and heavy sighing.
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and all the limbs of the shoulders become numb.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow falls on the stomach, perhaps something undigested may come out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow falls on the belly and no excrement comes out of the lower intestine, there is little hope for a cure or extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps and flows out, and the patient feels intense pain:
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	Know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, like the face, neck, throat, shoulder, arm, spine of the back, forearm, thigh, and legs, as well as similar limbs, are safe according to various positions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you happened to me so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a man, an arrow fell onto his arm at the root of the neck:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I grasped it, and drew it out from beneath the ear's fatty tissue, and he was healed without complication.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And in another case, I extracted an arrow that had lodged in the eye's fatty tissue beneath the conjunctiva; the arrowhead was missing, and only its tip could be felt towards the shaft. The arrow was large, made entirely of light iron without barbs.
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	The game was healed, and no misfortune befell it.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And draw an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I removed the barbs, and worked carefully until I drew it out, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And draw an arrow from the man, which was lodged in his thigh or belly, and I thought he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and after thirty days, there was no change in his condition;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut around the arrow, engineered it, and drew it out, and he had no ill effects.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a man with an arrow having fallen to his back or side, and the wound is closed over.
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and if the arrow remains inside him, and it does not alter his natural functions, nor does it cause any harm to any of his natural actions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And if you see another man, with an arrow having fallen to his face, and the wound is closed over;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and it remains there without causing him great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many similar things.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And draw an arrow from the king's face, which was stuck in his nose and was slightly leaning to the right side.
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	And the arrow was completely buried.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called for treatment after it had been cut three days ago.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound to be very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I probed it with great care, but did not feel anything.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	And he felt pain and pressure beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was due to the tip of the arrow, so I applied an attractive and digestive poultice there to prevent the flesh from swelling.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	And the flesh around the arrow appeared swollen.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I left the poultice there for two days, and this resolved the wound initially, but then the patient suffered long-term effects until he felt the arrow one day inside his nose.
et il le me dist.	And he told me this.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I applied corrosive medicine to the wound by hand during daytime, while it was open, and I probed it, feeling the head of the arrow move towards its place.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	Then I adjusted the arrow's position in the wound using that corrosive medicine until the head of the arrow became visible to me.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	And it took around four months for the tissues to heal completely. Then I widened the wound and inserted pliers into it, and moved them from side to side, but the arrow could not be extracted.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	So I did not stop experimenting and devising different instrument techniques until one day I took the pliers, which were well-made according to what is described at the end of this chapter, and with them, I gripped the arrow and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the doctor judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored.
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I then restored it, and the wound was sutured, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you focus your attention on what I do not say, because a book cannot cover everything.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	But wise masters build upon very little, and on what is presented to them they find new methods and new tools for the treatment of strange occurrences in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows do not leave the members in which they are stuck for two reasons:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	Where by low place where they enter, or from another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	And that which jumps from where it enters, is an arrow embedded in the flesh, and sometimes now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump out now, leave it until the flesh is rotten around it, and ease its exit.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And also if it is embedded in the bone, and cannot be removed, leave it thus for a few days, and move it every day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And then it will jump out, and if it does not, pierce around with a fine awl until the flesh around is enlarged, and then draw it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is embedded in the bone of the head, reaching one of the brains ventricles, and some of the accidents I have mentioned appear in the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	you must not remove it but leave it there until the wound around it becomes even after several days because if the arrow reaches the brain surface, death will follow.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not stuck solely in the bone, and does not come out through the skin, and the patient remains well for a few days without any bad incidents, then devise a way to remove it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if the arrow is deeply embedded in this way that it cannot be extracted easily, administer cauterization around it as I have instructed you previously.
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the wound until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is lodged deep within the body so that it cannot be seen but we feel its presence then seek it all over.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	And if you feel it, draw it out with an appropriate instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	And if you cannot remove it due to the tightness of the wound, and the depth of the arrowhead, and there is no bone, nerve or vein involved, then make an incision so that the wound becomes larger;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	And draw out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears that hold it in place, remove the flesh that is attached to it on both sides as much as possible, then break or bend the ears of the arrowhead until you can pull it out;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	Do this carefully so that you do not break the arrowhead, as it would be more difficult to remove if broken.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, leave it until the surrounding tissue is rotten, then pull it out, for its extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the loss of blood troubles you, perform as we have said regarding treatment in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	watch out for the incision of the nerve and the vein, and use a device as you can extract the arrow without danger, either soon or later, firmly or gently;
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	place the patient according to how they were positioned when the arrow struck them, for this is the greatest help available, and if you cannot, then place them according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	An arrow that comes from another place, or where nothing appears to come out of it, or the skin is swollen in that area if you can see or feel it obviously:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	Cut above then, until the forceps can grasp it, and then extract it:
si saut fuer maintenant.	If you jump now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained within the bone, rotate your hand circularly until you enter into the bone and widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, leave it there for now, then resume extraction until it has emerged;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if the arrow is in there, push against the whole shaft;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if it is broken off, and you wish to administer pushing, use a tapered instrument so that the point of the arrow enters the hollow of the instrument;
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	then push it in, and if the arrow is tapered, insert the instrument point first to aid extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	If the arrow is poisoned, you must cut away all of the flesh around it if possible, then treat the wound as necessary.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow falls on the foot or thigh or stomach or bladder or side, and it is close by, and you can cut above it, then cut.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	Be careful not to cut the vein or nerve, then extract it, and finally suture the wound if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And treat [the wound] until it is clean.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to treat arrows is similar to the beak of a bird, and here is its form [shape]:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	There are many ways to do this.
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	Large, medium, and small, depending on the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the driving instrument is also like a bird's feather, to push against the tip of the arrow, as here [the figure] shows its form.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of pincers to use for insertion and extraction is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	There are thirty-one veins which we heal from, sixteen of them are in the head, to wit:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	Two veins that are located behind the ears, which are called "herbech".
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the two arteries that are visible in the temples.
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and two veins that are located in the corners of the eyes, which are called "aspires".
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead.
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is at the back of the nose.
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two goitres that are on the neck.
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are located above the upper lip of the mouth, which are called "augeherich".
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and two veins which are below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins that are commonly treated are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic vein, which comes from the left side of the chest, and people call it "the head vein.
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	and the median is called "fast," and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, which people call the "heart vein.
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and the basilic is on the right side of the chest, and people call it the "belly vein," and it lies above the muscle, and it is the one that is treated, as it appears clearly on the forearm.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	The salve is the vein located between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches.
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	In the leg and foot there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	One is located on the underside of the arch of the left foot, and the second one is at the ankle joint on the right side.
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	And the vein that is called "nerve", which is located at the ankle on the other side.
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And in the other leg there are three veins underneath these ones.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The bleeding of the veins located behind the ears helps with chronic colds and headaches.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	and the qualities of the bleeding, as I tell you, is that you lift the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	then hold the patient's neck with a cloth, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two places dependent on the head;
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	feel them with your fingers, and where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, make an incision there;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	then take the lancet and push it beneath the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand along the whole length of the vein, cutting through both skin and vein with two fingers, and let out blood until you see fit;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Strain it and tie it tightly until it is clean.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And I have already spoken about the incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	Bleeding the two arteries located in the temples is beneficial for treating chronic and severe migraine, persistent ophthalmia, and excessive tearing from the eyes.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	The qualities of a good bleeder are as I have described:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	When the patient grasps their neck tightly, you will notice that both veins are clearly visible.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	And if you feel numbness below your finger, proceed with bleeding above it.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	Raise the heart up to the vein above your index finger, insert the lancet below it, lift the vein upwards and scrape it, just as you did with the other two veins, then let the blood flow according to your need.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then release the patient, and place your finger on the wound for an hour, then apply cotton.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And then form a bandage over it, and leave it until it is healed.
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	And we have previously discussed the cauterization process, as well as bloodletting and its extraction, which was mentioned at the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The bloodletting from the vein on the forehead is just as effective as bleeding from the temporal artery for ailments of the face, such as old age symptoms, headaches, and redness.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	Its quality is such that the patient twists their neck rigidly until the vein appears.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the instrument called "the fossor," whose form is as follows:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point over the vein, press it with your hand or something else, and let blood flow out according to the quantity you desire.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then release the patient's collarbone, and bind the wound so that it is tight but not too constricted, leaving some room for air to pass through occasionally.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	However, the bandage should not be too tight or sharp-edged.
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Bind it diagonally, for the bone is close to the surface, and by chance the bandage may break if it is too thin or delicate.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The draining of the two veins located in the temples aids the eyes, and treats inflammation, redness, itching within the eye, and conditions affecting the face.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the quality of their healing is such that patients must strain their necks by twisting with a cord, as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then treat the wound, and let the healing go through transversely, a little of the long side of the flame and a bit wider, for there is no flesh there.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flames are subtle, they may break by chance;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	Then let the blood flow, as much as you need, and then bind it with cotton, binding it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The healing of the vein in the nose is good for fever, and sudden headaches, and illnesses of the face, such as migraine and redness that appears on the face, especially when it is chronic.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	and the quality of the vein is such that the patient tightens their neck, then pull your nose to your left hand, and take the fine long flame, and insert it between the lips in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open easily there, and blood will now begin to flow.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	do not go too deep, and allow the blood to flow according to your need, then bandage it for a night, as it heals rather quickly;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The vein of the two temples aids in narrowing the forehead, and at the beginning of mascle-making, and for many diseases, impetigo, corrosion, herpes, and erysipelas;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the nature of the bleeding is such that the patient should strangle their neck between two points, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	And let the master stand above the patient's head, and the patient should sit on a seat. Then open the vein of the arm widely for a short length, then draw blood temperately as much as needed.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	Then repeat the same process on the other arm, then untie the ligature, and hold all veins moderately, so that the patient does not strangle.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	And leave him until morning, so that the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	The bloodletting of the lips,
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The draining of veins above the lips aids in healing mouth sores, gum disease, cracked lips, and their surroundings.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the nature of bloodletting is to have the patient sit in front of you, holding their neck as I've said.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	Then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one is on the right lip and the other on the left, and they are recognized by being black, and by having small black veins surrounding them.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	Treat both of them, and if you do not recognize them, or are in doubt, treat the larger one on each side; also treat all of the two veins that are above and below, as it is the same procedure.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	On bleeding below the tongue:
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The bleeding of the veins that are below the tongue aids after the bleeding of the carotid artery, and it is done at the narrowing of the throat, for diseases of the eye, and ailments of the mouth.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the quality of the bleeder should be that the patient sits between your hands towards the sun, and they lift their tongue, and look beneath on each side for a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Heal both of them then, and do not go too deep, for underneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the neck that we commonly heal are healed according to two methods:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	or by piercing with a very hot iron, or with an olive-oil based stylet so sharp it cuts like a knife, and this is called "anesil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and they are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of St Martin's flame is very renowned, and it is so broad as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	It is necessary to open the narrow veins that are full of clotted blood, and contain thick and cloudy blood;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the form of the olive-oil stylet:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more pointed, slender, and for bleeding delicate veins or when there is delicate yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The bleeding of the basilica, which is one of these veins, aids in treating illnesses that are below the throat, and in the neck, chest, and belly.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it is necessary for the healer to bleed carefully, taking care of the artery beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	If he cuts the artery, and blood flows out, it must be stopped, as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And the flame should not be compressed but cut like a sinew.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilica does not open clearly, you must draw it out and change to another.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	Or if you want any vein from it, or you bleed in its place the vein between the arms.
elle apert manifestement;	She clearly shows;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And the cap on the wound heals slowly, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you wish to know the location of the wound, you must first extend the arm and feel the area until you find the pulse.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	Then mark the spot with a sign, bind the arm, and treat the slow-healing wound.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	Be careful not to cut the artery when you see the spot swollen, for that is indeed an artery.
eschui la donques.	Avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it rise up like a child's urine, and the blood is bright red and thin, know that it is arterial blood.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hurry then, and place your finger on it for a while, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, which often happens.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	If his arm is immobilized, let it be so, and do not move the patient's arm.
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let him be afraid, and do not move it until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if the bleeding is not stopped and it overpowers you, and medical help is not present, then sever the artery if it is exposed, for this will stop the flow.
et estainche li sans.	And stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	Take a piece of fig bark, split it, and take one half, tying it securely until the next day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	If the bleeding stops, that's good.
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If not, treat it as we have said, with powders that stop the bleeding.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And the stoppage of bleeding is not always helpful in many situations due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm's ligaments.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The bleeding from the vein in the middle helps as it draws blood from the head above and the body below, because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic veins, as we have said.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	The surgeon must be careful not to cut too deeply below, as they may hit the nerve and cause it to swell, making treatment difficult, if not impossible.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	and this nerve appears often, and if it does not appear in some men due to its delicacy, you must treat it with a thin instrument.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	remove the nerve from your power (reach).
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a wound between the two nerves, make it longer with a cut.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The treatment of the cephalic nerve provides relief, as it draws blood from the head and aids the eyes.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is necessary to treat by making an incision with the olive-shaped blade or the myrtle-shaped blade, for this is the safest of all veins, as there are no nerves or arteries underneath.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, one should seek the lightest spot, and if one errs the first time, do not be distressed, just begin again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And perhaps some men's joints swell when dislocated for the first time, but it causes no serious harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of bleeding depends on your judgment.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you must know about bloodletting is that it is only undertaken to preserve health and avoid future illness.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	And bloodletting should be done in one of the three veins, which are located on the arm.
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	These are known as the cephalic, superficial, and basilic veins.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	You must bloodlet at the beginning of spring and autumn before eating when signs of fullness are apparent.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	It is recommended to bloodlet either on the first or third day after two or three hours of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The bleeding that is administered for illnesses has no determined time, but when needed, it can be done at any hour or night, during all hours and at any time.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it is not appropriate to bleed children until they are fourteen years old, nor a woman carrying a child except for the fourth month up until the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	They ought not to bleed the elderly who have passed sixty years of age.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when someone wishes to be bled, in any case, they should first cleanse their intestines with a light enema if there is an excess of retained feces so that the veins do not draw harmful and excessive waste from the intestines into the main organs.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	One should not be bled if they are overly full of meat, drunk, until the effect passes, or suffering from dropsy.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and if one worsens after colic pain, vomiting, abdominal distension, frequent intercourse with women, laboring, staying awake, fasting, and any other cause that exhausts all strength or power whether due to weaponry or the body;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then purify the humours gently if the blood is thick through diet and beverages and with medicine if you have that power;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	then enter the bath if nothing opposes it to purify the blood and heal yourself from the wound in the navel area as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and guard yourself that day against labor, fasting, lustful acts, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	and lie down and be joyful, have the one being healed raised higher than you, and rub their arm two or three times then tighten the bandage moderately because if it is too tight or slack blood cannot flow;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	And then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell and can be felt.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	Then moisten the incisions with a bit of old oil, then place your left index finger on that vein below the area where you want to incision, so the vein doesn't escape and miss when cut.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that escape like ropes when cut, and others that are full of windiness, such that when the flame is applied, it retracts from the flame, and one cannot open the vein, and so it is with these.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	And if one opens the vein, it may be too narrow a wound, therefore cauterizers must be aware of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the wound bleeds for the first time, it is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	If not, try again slightly below that place or above it, if the area is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the area is swollen and the patient becomes afraid, leave it for one or two days, do not bind their arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	Perhaps there will be hot abscesses coming on.
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Do not go into the bath, then reopen the wound if it pleases them.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	And if the opening is small, or blood flows out subtly and you doubt that it will not be enough for your purpose, then direct all the flame straight into that same opening.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	and work quickly, rather than waiting for it to swell;
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the place swollen, do not reopen the wound, and put a little olive oil on it, for it lightens the body of blood, and is helpful in this situation as oil is akin to grease.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and thus administer the olive oil ointment to each wound you treat in order to staunch the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	and this same effect is created by triacle and bile when applied to the wound.
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	so subtly does it separate the blood when it has grown too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if it turns into a large abscess, which often happens, especially when bloodletting has not been done recently or the opening of the vein is small, then you should hurry and apply a moist sponge soaked in warm water and salt to the site, compressing it for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and afterwards you must do this after the blood has been let from the vein, and if it remains in place for a few days without any blackness or greenness appearing, then it does no harm.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see anything black or green appearing there, apply something made of aloe or myrrh mixed with galbanum juice, or something similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And often there is abscess and appearance of an aperture at the base of the skull:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	Put your hand on it, and if you find the place soft to the touch of the hand, then this is a bad sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Avoid that you put pressure on any part of what we have mentioned, for perhaps it pierces the artery.
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	But apply a dry poultice to harden the place, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw from each person's blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the colour of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if the blood is black, let it exit until it becomes red.
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	And if you see that it is large, leave it alone until it becomes thin.
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	And if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is necessary for him who is full and strong, and requires bloodletting, that a wider wound be made for him, and the flames [of the cauterization] should be broad.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for him who is weak, do the opposite, and it is appropriate to bloodlet often and in small amounts, and one must bloodlet by making a cross-wise cut, not a straight one.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this manner of bloodletting is safe from excessive loss of blood and cutting of nerves, and it is better than long or broad bloodletting.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And for him whose body is weak after bloodletting, it is appropriate to give him moist bread in the juice of pomegranates.
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If he is overheated, draw three or four times [worth of blood] from him; and if he is of a cold complexion, give him beforehand moist bread in muscatel syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory root, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints during the treatment, after the loss of much blood, it is necessary that he drinks meat broth, and subtle fragrant syrup, and uses other things we have mentioned in the section or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to draw out the arm, and bleed again, it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he bleeds little by little, according to the quantity of his continued strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And for those who wish to draw out the arm after the first bleeding, and have a strong body, they should be bled seven hours after the first bleeding or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And for those who wish to be bled elsewhere, they should be bled on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For he has much blood within his body which is already heated, and causes fever.
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	If it requires extracting a large quantity, and enlarging the opening until it yields with compression;
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	Then you restore all the conditions of health, and place your hand on his pulse as he heals, lest death come in place of compression, and this happens many times when the healers are negligent.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	And it is not appropriate when you wish to release the arm, and extract blood a second time, while the opening is closed, for you to press heavily upon it.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	Unless it is crooked, have him extend the arm gently, as this would be harmful otherwise.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	But leave it until it heals a second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	Where you pierce it with the tip of flame, until the blood that has frozen exits from the wound, and place upon it some lint soaked in water, pressing lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the wound is swollen, leave it alone and do not constrict it until the abscess subsides.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, let it drain from the same place, or another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein between the arm is drained in place of the vein of the head because it is composite.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the method of the cautery is such that the patient immerses their hand in hot water until the nails are red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then be bound lightly so that the vein appears clearly, then cauterize it now across its width, neither too broad nor too narrow.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	And if the wound is large, cauterize it close to where the hand joins the arm, and if blood cannot escape, return the hand to hot water, allowing blood to flow into the water until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	And if it is summer, do not bathe the hand in warm water, as it should be done more often in winter than in summer.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the bleeding from this vein is safer than all other veins, as it does not involve an artery or nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The bleeding from the vein on the right side of the hand is beneficial for all liver ailments, and this is how it should be done:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Immerse the hand in warm water until the vein swells up so it becomes visible.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And if the bleeding is transverse, and you cut it entirely from end to end, it will not cause any harm.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	And do not go too deep, for the nerves are underneath, completely bare of flesh; then immerse the hand in warm water, if the blood is frozen in the wound and cannot escape.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	Once you have extracted as much blood as is necessary, apply oil and lint to the vein in order to seal it; do this for every wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The bleeding of the left arm's veins is beneficial for all spleen diseases; do this in the same way as I told you to do on the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The bleeding of the saphenous vein is valuable for all diseases below the body, such as illnesses of the uterus, retention of urine, kidney disease, and similar ailments of the thighs and legs.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the qualities of this medicine are such that the patient puts his foot in warm water and rubs it over the vein until it breaks up, then binds it above the ankle.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	And this vein is located at the ankle, and from there it ascends up the leg in many branches.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	Treat therefore the largest branch, which is at the ankle, for it moves better.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you treat it on the leg, beware of the nerves which are underneath, and treat it across just as when cutting.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	And let the flame be gentle.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot escape, return the foot to the water and allow the vein to be thoroughly emptied.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if it fails to cauterize the first time, repeat the process a second time slightly above, for the area is salty.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and treat the other foot similarly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The skin of the sciatic vein is at the back of the ankle, and its evacuation serves to relieve hip pain when caused by hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	The quality of the cauterization is such that the patient should enter a bath and compress above the ankle for four days with twisting, as otherwise the vein will not open.
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	And if it does open, cauterize thoroughly in all possible ways, crossing the skin.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And it is better to cut it, for the area is dry, and many men are sensitive there.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not find it [the bone], look for a line on the foot's back or toward the little toe and be careful of the nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	Remove the blood until you see it flowing out, then untie the ligature and apply cotton compresses to hold it in place.
ele est maintenant sanee.	It is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	Cupping incisions.
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Cups are made of horn, or brass, or glass.
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	And cupping is done according to two methods.
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Either by drawing blood or without making an incision.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this method of dry cupping is also done according to two methods.
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	Where there is complete fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	and venting, which is done by striking and extracting blood and is carried out in fourteen places of the body, some being entirely in the head.
et li autres est emmi le col;	and others are in the neck.
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	And two more at both sides of the neck.
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the cupping glass below the chin.
et li ventouse des II espaules;	And the cupping glasses at both shoulders.
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the cupping glass on the hips.
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	And the cupping glasses at both arms.
et les ventouses des II jambes;	And the cupping glasses for both legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	And the cupping glasses for both ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	And the cupping does not draw any blood, only small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh, and it will not weaken you at all, as is done with vein-letting;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And it must not be administered, nor with fire or hot iron, in any illness that arises from overindulgence, until the body is completely emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of illness we must use cupping, or for habit, then administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at its end, and in between during each season;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	For there are some who, when they need to have cupping performed, have such a heavy head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and with such [people] who find fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and on the neck, and darkness around the eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and such [people] who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongues, and spit up blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and there are such [people] who dream, and see by night blood and wounds and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we observe these signs, especially during the middle of the month, we instruct them to cup themselves after three hours in the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The bleeding of the nostril helps with the cracking noise from the head... that reaches the eyes, and it should not be done after the evacuation of all the body [humours];
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and this venting is in place of the phlebotomy of the cerebral vein, and one must not allow those with a cold constitution to use it, or those who have catarrh, as it does them great harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and for this reason, the elderly must not use it, nor those with cold diseases in their head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who heal often become forgetful, so it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower due to the fear of forgetting.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	The venting in the neck is in place of the phlebotomy of the head and the basilica vein, and for this reason, it helps with narrowing of the chest, and fissures in the channel of the lung, and coughing, and fullness.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it should be done gently, for if it is too tight, it may cause forgetfulness or stomach and heart problems.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The ventouses on the two collarbones are useful for headaches, eye inflammation, and migraines, as well as suffocation, tooth root pain, and it is located at the place of the basilic vein.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And you must instruct the patient to extend their hand for measurement, taking care not to cut the artery and avoid excessive bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The ventouses below the chin are useful for oral diseases, such as gum infections, and similar mouth ailments;
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	And it is located at the place of the veins of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The swellings of the shoulders are attributed to ailments caused by heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The ventouses on the elbows are just as effective as the three veins of the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	And instruct the healer not to make it too perfect, for the flesh is bare of muscle, and beneath lie nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The cupping glass that is placed on the buttocks is beneficial for hemorrhoids of the anus and diseases below it. The cupping glass should be large and made of brass, as it needs to draw well;
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	And perhaps, if it were too thin, it would break;
et i fai grans plaies.	And it makes large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	Cupping glasses on the legs heal visibly, for they draw blood from all over the body and are beneficial for old pains of the kidneys, bladder, and womb, and relieve inflammation;
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	And they are located at the two sophens (joints) and the two ankles, yet over time they weaken the body, and cause fainting in many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The way to apply the cup is as follows: first place it on an empty area, suck quickly, and then press down firmly. Move it evenly and do not stop until you see the skin turn red and swollen, revealing the redness of the blood beneath.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	Then lance (make an incision), and replace the cups. Take care with different body compositions, for some have thick flesh, while others have delicate skin.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	It is necessary to wound only once, creating large openings and deep holes.
et suce legierement.	And suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice.
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	The first time to thin out the path of thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the blood is very dense, it is necessary to strike a third time.
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And when we want to draw out thick and thin blood, we only stop once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we want a lot of blood, we often restart.
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And if the blood is thick, strike it thoroughly, and finish by piercing the heart suddenly; it is necessary for those with thick skin and hard, narrow veins that you oil their cups with an aperitive and dissolutive substance.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is made with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or cucumber seed oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is for the eyes, use watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of amaranth, or balsam-oil, or aniseed oil, and similar oils.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the patient has tender flesh and wide pores, no oil should be applied; instead, it must be washed after the fomentation with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry juice, or pumpkin water, or china root water, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And for those with much moisture, it rises easily with myrtle water, or sumac water, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And for those with excessive swelling, they should be raised using old wine, or juice of spinach, or a decoction of aniseed or chamomile, or something similar.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	and one should not bleed with cups either before or during the bath but an hour or two after it.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and they should not sleep after cupping; it is necessary that he sit up both when the cups are to be applied and while being cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware if the one who is healing is choleric, and if their blood is too thin and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	he must take cold things, such as pomegranates, endive, and lettuce in moderation, and similar items;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and eat little meat, and pork from castrated animals, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And for those with a cold constitution, take honey syrup, and medium-aged wine that is neither old nor new, eat little, few meats, small birds, and pigeons.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and on the day he cups himself, he must drink more than eat.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is fitting to give some men treacle or musk once before cupping, or after, to comfort the main limbs;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and let the blood be refined, but it is not appropriate for those who are hot to drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The cups that are placed without injury are those put over the liver, and over the breast, gout, abdomen, buttocks, kidneys, and hip, because these limbs cannot bear injury on their skin, and one should not force it except to draw blood from limb to limb, as we do on breasts when a child is nursing;
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we put cups on the abdomen and buttocks to reduce the size of the limb;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and it removes pain when there is gravel or stone, as it extracts by its attractive virtue perhaps the gravel, or empties the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	and so it does when applied over the liver and spleen in cases of retained flatulence, and these cups are administered empty to suck only.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	and sometimes they are administered with fire, and at other times filled with tepid water, as in cases of pleurisy, and the cup is filled in this manner with warm water alone, or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the cupping glass administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it has two thumbs in width and half a palm in depth, and on its side towards the middle there is a small hole, just enough to insert a needle, and it should be made of copper, soft so as not to injure the patient when applied to the limb.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and it has in the middle a bar of copper or iron across which to place a burning candle, and they come in various sizes, both large and small, according to the ailments and the constitution of those who use them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For children's cupping glasses are different from those of adults, and those of thin people from those of fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And thus you must apply this cupping glass to the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	Take the candle of wax or linen, and place it inside the cupping glass through the hole that is in the middle of the glass, so that the flame is at the bottom of the glass and does not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	Then place it on the limb, and keep your hands over the hole we mentioned, so that when you want to, you can release the vapour, and remove the cupping glass.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And take the linen again as before, and repeat this often if needed.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the cupping glass used for treating pleurisy, there is no handle or opening and it is applied only when full of water, being placed solely on the affected limb.
et c’est li forme:	and its shape is:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Suction cups are not applied except to limbs where cupping glasses cannot be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and on the exposed flesh of the body, such as cheeks or eyelids, and similar places.
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	The quality of the suction cups is such that when you find those filled with clean water without sediment, take them.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and place them in lukewarm water for one night until they become soft, ensuring they have no contents in their stomachs.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	then proceed with bleeding by opening the vein and using cupping therapy, then massage the limb until it turns red, and apply the poultices.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are full and fall off (the poultices), if it is where cupping can be applied, then apply the cupping therapy, for this helps greatly afterward.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, cleanse the area with oil, then water, very well, and afterward dry it.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the area bleeds too much after removing the poultices, dampen a linen cloth with cold water and place it on top until the bleeding stops.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the blood is multiplied, apply crushed vitriol on warts or similar things, until it subsides.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	where you place half of a peeled broad bean, leaving it until it dries up on the spot, so that now it will staunch.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you need more, take other leeches.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the leeches do not want to attach themselves, rub the spot of fresh blood or prick it with a needle until some blood flows out and then put them on, as soon as they sense the blood, they will attach.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they are defecating, apply a powder of fresh aloe and flax seed or ashes on them, so they will now detach.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu'il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n'en lurent;
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And for this reason knowledge is strange to our land, as I have never found any good ones.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	And I know nothing of it, except for the knowledge from ancient books where I have studied so much that I can treat this science through experience and by habit.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	And I have described to you in this chapter what is contained herein and abridged it at the end, clearly showing the forms of instruments used as I did in these two chapters before this one.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is necessary then that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the words and chapters where the sage puts his understanding, and remains true to reality, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsion or breakage occurs in someone, you must hurry to bleed the patient from one side and another if nothing else prevents it, such as weakness of body, children, or old age.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	Ou si le temps n'est pas très chaud, ou trop froid;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	Et mange des choses froides, comme des salades, du fromage et du chevreuil, et ne bois pas de vin, ni ne mange aucune viande grasse, et ne t'emplisse pas trop de viandes qui remplissent les veines de sang, tant que tu n'as pas peur d'une infection chaude, ou d'un écoulement de matière dans le membre;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	Si revient le malade à son premier régime qu'il avait suivi.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, one should nourish the patient with meats that produce thick nourishment and viscosity, such as wheat boiled in water, rice, testicles, feet, calf stomachs, eggs, fresh fish, red wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	Because with too much nourishment, the bones grow quickly and the fracture is more likely to occur again.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	Et sachez que les os brisés des vieillards et des décrépits ne peuvent pas être réparés ni soudés correctement selon leur nature à cause du dessèchement des membres, tout comme ceux qui sont trop tendres, tels que les os d'enfants en bas âge;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but have no care, reunite above the broken bone with thick tendons that bind and join the member together, so that it enforces as it was before;
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and do not at all leave him from his work, and for this reason he must be nourished with substantial meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that dislocations are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the skull is different from that of the arm, or the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways fractures can occur.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	As there is fracture that goes into splinters, and another in sharpening, like the cutting edge of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is fracture with an open wound, or fracture with just a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And to each manner have its own tool, and its proper instrument in the restoration, according to what memory comes to its place.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and the bone's breakage is known through this, that its place is twisted and clearly appears from outside, and it sounds hollow when pressed by hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting nor hollow sound upon touch, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is certainly no breakage.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	But it can indeed have tortuosity, or a crack, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You must not move it with your hand, but apply the medicines that follow here, then hold it firmly and carefully.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the fracture that goes lengthwise, and its two parts are disjoined, it is now necessary to align them evenly, otherwise hot abscesses will arise.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if hot abscesses come about, leave them for a day until the abscess is eased.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then align it equally to the muscles that you can feel lightly and gently, and know that its restoration is easier than for those with fragments.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then restrain it as must be done afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bone it is broken into pieces, then stretch it into two parts, whether it be hand or foot, or use one rope for a small limb, or two ropes for a larger member.
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are separated, you bring them together and reposition all the additions in their places as much as you can, and make sure that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust the two ends of the bones well according to their best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	if it heals well, do not restrain it too much or press upon it as some do who cause through their work hot abscesses and contractions in the limb, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is healed, you must instruct the patient well not to move it, neither while awake nor asleep, or in turning over, or any other way.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And ensure that the limb is secured so firmly that there is no sensation of pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when there is no pain felt, it is not yet ready, and one must place it in such a position that there is no pain felt.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	And take care to ensure that it is correctly aligned so that no crookedness comes about once it is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	And the quality of the broken limb is according to what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small limbs such as arms and fingers and similar ones.
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	One must wrap them in soft, fine linen cloths.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those who are overweight, like thighs and legs:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	you should wrap it with a wide and firm bandage, as the broad bands embrace the entire large limb, constricting it evenly from all sides so that there is no pressure.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then bind it with light padding, three or four turns according to the limb, and tighten your hand slightly on the bandage, then go above the fracture and loosen it a bit so that the fracture can move away.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and loosen the bandage little by little until you ease much of the healthy part, then take another bandage and bind it again on top of the broken area.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then return to the area below the break, and hold it gently, neither too hard nor too softly, as we have said in the first line above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place between the limbs linen swabs or soft cloth, so that they are all even, then bind it all with bandages above, and then put on your well-made splints, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or abscess, apply something to soothe the heat of the abscess, and reduce the swelling, leaving it like this for a few days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then place your splints above, and let them be half the width of a flexible cane that has been cut open, or of the wood used to make shingles, or of palm ribs, and let them be shaped like this:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But it is necessary that the star which one places on the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and also as long as is appropriate for the limb, whether small or large.
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then bind on top of the stars just like you did with the first dressing, then tie above it a thread appropriately, as in the first dressing for the fracture.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	narrower on top, wider below
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and it is necessary that the thread be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft flax.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the thread is too thick, as I have seen in the work of some fools who make their dressings with twisted flax cords, this is a great mistake, because the dressing cannot be even if it is too thin, and it should not have more than two finger-widths between each star.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is injured by the head of the shoulder after its restriction in their arm, place beneath it pads made of linen or woolen cloth so that they do not wound themselves.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by a fracture, and the heart is broken, I will speak of its cure afterward.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not necessary to reset all dislocated limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limb is large, one must not insert splints sooner than after 5 days or 7, or more according to your confidence in abscess occurring suddenly.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	And see here the manner of ancient plasters to restore fracture, dislocation, and twisting:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And take some flour that is found on the mill walls, and mix it with an abundance of eggs, and apply this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it; this is the common method of plastering to restore fracture in various positions, especially for women and small children, as it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another method of plaster to restore fracture, dislocation, and twisting:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Pren saupoudrez d'abréïs et de ladanier, ajoutez l'inule et de l'asafétida; incorporez de la gomme arabique et du muguet, pour un total de 10 mesures.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	Mélangez de la myrrhe et de l'aloès, pour un total de cinq mesures.
alechil VIIII З.;	Ajoutez huit mesures d'ail.
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	Moudre le tout pour faire une poudre et mélanger avec un blanc d'œuf.
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	If the patient's constitution is warm, this plaster can be used as it has a good composition and helps to restore broken bones rapidly for many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another type of plaster that is beneficial for sprains:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	Take mugwort and viscous mallow, take ten and three.
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	Myrrh and aloe, take nine and three;
acaice VI З.;	Wild mint, take six and three;
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Armeniaca powder ten and three; grind it well and mix with water or egg white, then administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another plaster for joints and dislocated bones to relieve pain, ease swelling, reduce bone rubbing, and treat fractures.
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take new wool, boil it in water and oil, then apply to the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not restore the joint or bone to its place, but are good for cooling hot abscesses and properly easing the pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another plaster for setting broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dry fig leaves, earth pepper leaves, grind them together, and make a poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another type of poultice for bone fracture repair and to reduce swelling caused by abscesses.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take roots of marshmallow, chamomile flowers, violet blossoms, flour of beans, one part each.
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Grind them together, mix with wine; if the limb is hot, add moist coriander water or plain water and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another poultice method stronger than the first when an abscess has formed in limb repair.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take marshmallow roots, flax seeds, pomegranate flowers, melilot, valerian root, and violet and chamomile blossoms, one part each.
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Grind together and mix with salt water, fresh water or wine depending on the limb's heat and rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras says in his book that one should not put anything on the broken limb to restore it other than a mixture of wax and oil, nothing else, and he says that it must be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And Galen suggests that one should apply dry things slightly warm to the broken limb in order to heal it, such as myrrh, aloe, incense and similar items, as we have mentioned before.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another type of plaster useful for injuries and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take mugwort and chopped human hair or bird feathers, viscous plant sap, and equal parts leather, grind them all together, make a plaster and let it set.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	Then you let it loosen a little after, making sure the patient feels no pain nor has the bone moved out of place.
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	If not loosened by hand outdoors.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain returns to the spot or itching, with rest or swelling, act fast and loosen it, removing the plaster at once.
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	Take light cloth, moist marine sponge, dip it in water and apply to the spot until itching stops and pain is soothed.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then leave the limb to rest for an hour, then apply dry linen, moistened with water or rose oil, and bind it onto a nut until you are certain of an abscess heat.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	It will rest the inflammation of the limb, and the pain shall be relieved, then resume the gentle binding, with a little plaster, but do not bind it so tightly as before.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And gently until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess has softened and turned red, causing pain and swelling which have all been removed, and you need an ointment and bandage, restart it as equally as before.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if there is no improvement in the limb as we have described, then do not release it until after three or four or five or seven days.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And never release it for twenty days, as we have observed, until the broken part has healed, and approaches proper alignment.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	Then hold him more firmly than before, and thicken his flesh, as I have said previously;
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	And if you see the place drying more than is necessary, know that nourishment cannot reach it;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Bathe it therefore in warm water every time you reset it, and do this every third day, and ease the tension a little;
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	Through this treatment, nourishment is restored to the limb, and corrects the deformity caused by those foolish surgeons who set it crookedly:
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	It is evil, and such work is frightening, and I see no other way but to leave it be and treat it properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of the various types of fractures
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	For it has breaks caused by sword impacts, and the shaft removes all the bone down to the marrow that lies beneath the bone, just as an axe or a pole does.
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	And for this reason, this type of break is called "axe fracture.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	Where the sword cuts through the bone without penetrating, and this type of break is called "absolute fracture.
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	And these two types of breaks cause large or small wounds.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded impact, or splitting, like from a stone or spearhead, or falling on stones, or similar.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating fracture that reaches the membrane beneath the bone, or it is on top of the bone, and this wound can be large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound that is as fine as a hair embedded in the bone, with a small fissure, this break is called "capillary fracture.
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	and if the wound is caused by a blow from a stone or by falling or similar, and it drives a fragment of bone into the cavity below, and the skin edges gape like those of a cauldrons when the tinsmith beats upon them.
si entre li piere dedens.	if it drives stone within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this occurs more often in those with moist bones underneath the skin, such as children's heads;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and it occurs in all these manners of fracture that small fragments become separated, like stars;
et je em parlerai en son leu.	and I will speak of them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of fractures through their displacement, and examination by touch, and through the corrupted flesh on top of them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of the hair is understood by this: when you uncover the bone and rub it, the black fracture opens up.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In treating the fracture, take care of the patient's accidents and symptoms, and if you see no ill accident such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, dizziness, fainting, feverishness, eyes turning pale and reddening, and other similar things in various conditions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you see no dreadful accident and expect recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the wound comes to you first, during winter, it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day so that you can treat it.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, lest the tissue beneath the bone become corrupted and the accidents we have mentioned occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the fracture of the bone reaches to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the affected part thus.
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	And you must take the patient's head and expose the bone in every way possible, revealing the wound as gently as you can, and if there is any bleeding from uncovering the bone or an abscess forms, then provide aid accordingly, for you should fill this place with cloth moistened in rose oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	Let it rest until the hot abscess is relieved, ensuring there is no more bleeding.
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	Then begin removing it from the bone, this is done in two ways of work:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	One way is to make an incision narrow in front, and this has the following form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then he makes another incision larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second method is that you have several different kinds of knives, some narrow and others broad, they should be pointed, and made entirely of iron.
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and work lightly so that you do not wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is hard and solid, you must drill into it instead, rather than using knives and chisels, do not pierce through to the brain, there should be a rim or circle on top of the point, so that the tip does not pass beyond the skull.
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and you will need several of these, so that each one fits into its place according to the type of bone, and you should have chisels for the entire skull.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And this is the form of the three types of arrowheads:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The way to pierce around the broken bone is that you place one arrowhead on top of the bone, and turn it with your hands until you know that the bone has been pierced;
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	Then move the arrowhead elsewhere slightly afterwards, and do this all around, then use cutters to remove the space of bone between the perforations, doing so as finely and lightly as you can, as we have said, until you extract the bone by hand or with any tools you have such as pincers or pliers;
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	And be careful not to touch the brain nor the soft parts.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	When you have pierced the bone and extracted it, you must clean the cavity left by the bone with any other similar instrument like an incisor, but it must be thinner and more subtle than any other incisor.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	And if there is nothing left of the small bones or scales, remove them lightly with one of your instruments;
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	Then treat the wound with tents and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And the other method of work is that which Galen describes, it is more safe.
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	Strike [the bone] hard, for this is his advice.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	You must first uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture is visible, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place underneath the head of this lenticular chisel, which has such a form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut it on one side only when the other is already acute to the bone.
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	Then strike gently with a small mallet above it so that you lightly chop the bone all around, and be well aware of the membrane underneath.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is adhering to the bone, remove it gently, for one removes it easily without harm or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate to the marrow, and the bone is only cut above, with small pieces remaining, you must smooth this roughness, and remove the splinters with a fine rasp, of which you should have various sizes, to accommodate each place appropriately, according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Use large rasps first, then finer ones, and do not cease until it is smooth.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In each of the other hair-trimming incisions or delicate breaks, you must adjust accordingly according to its direction.
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	And this is something not given in detail by him who has devoted his study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is uncovered, you must take a piece of linen cloth according to the size of the wound, dip it in rose oil, and place it on the wound.
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	Then take another piece of cloth doubled over twice or thrice, and dampen it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth.
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	Do this as lightly as you can, so as not to harm the wound, then apply another bandage on top, but do not tighten it too much, only enough to hold the wound in place.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	Leave it like this for one or two days, until the hot abscess is cooled, then untie it and apply medicated poultices such as lily root, oat flour, incense powder, aristolochia, and similar remedies.
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	Make a powder from these things and apply it to the wound, then treat with gentle medicated poultices without any harsh binding or pressure.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	and make sure the wound is always clean, so as not to leave ointment there or allow pus to accumulate, for when pus accumulates on the brain membrane, it will flow out and cause great harm to the patient;
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	for when one applies corrosive substances onto it, they will corrode from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take heed therefore, if any mishap occurs to the patient, as we have said, it is undoubtedly doubtful without a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if blackening occurs solely due to the medicine that has been applied there, and this medicine has such a property, then you must take one part honey and three parts rose oil, mix it into a paste, and apply this onto the wound.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it in the manner of treatments that is appropriate until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Know that sometimes both parts of the nose are broken, or just one, for there are two bones.
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	The upper one is cartilaginous and does not break but only bends or twists, then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	If one of the two parts is broken, you must insert your little finger into the nostril and place the broken piece evenly under your index finger, pushing from the outside until the nose returns to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	Do this gently, and wait for the patient not to feel pain from your treatment.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the part above the nose, and the bones cannot be brought back to their place, you must set it equal with the head of a nail slightly thicker.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is in two pieces, repeat this process, and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If not, after seven or ten days, when the hot abscess is calmed, then put a tent of fine linen cloth on the head of the nose if the fracture is in one place.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Where you apply another elsewhere if there is a fracture.
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	And let the tents be so large that they fill the openings of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some restorers say that one should wet the bandages with butter, and change them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	I do not think it is good, but they must be moistened with a mixture of raw egg white and flour.
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	Then leave the tent in place until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And sometimes goose quills are used in place of tents and a soft cloth is wrapped around them. If the fracture is held in place and the patient breathes into it, it helps the healing process.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	Frolick whatever you want.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses form at the nose while you are working on it, apply some softened wax or cotton moistened with rose oil, or put a bit of quicklime there.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if abscesses don't form there, apply a plaster from the outside, made of bran flour and incense powder, mixed with egg white, then put light cotton wool on top, but do not tie it too tightly.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	If the bone fracture is small and broken into tiny pieces, extract it with suitable instruments for this purpose, then cut open the wound, treat the surrounding flesh by cleaning and suturing it, sealing and dressing it with plasters and ointments suitable for such an injury.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no wound inside the bone, treat it with tenting, and insert splints of plum wood until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	For the fracture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is fractured below, and there is no external wound, and the break is only outside, not broken into two, nor bent inward, it can be identified gently.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you insert your index finger into the patient's mouth.
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	And if the fracture is on the left jawbone, insert your right index finger, and push the fracture gently from inside, shape it with the other hand from outside, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jaw fracture is divided into two, you must administer an extension of both parts until it is aligned.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if there are disturbances or ruptures of the teeth, secure them with a gold, silver, or silk thread, then apply wax to the broken jawbone and cover it with a double bandage.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	Cover the bandage with a well-made large splint or an equal-sized piece of leather that is long and wide according to the jawbone's length, secure it as best you can, and instruct the patient to rest and consume light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the alignment changes, dislocate it on the third day, then reset to what has changed.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	And apply a plaster on top, made with mill powder and an abundance of egg or sesame flour, after you have removed the scabs.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	And put a light woolen plaster on top, and if the plaster hardens and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until they are healed.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	Many times is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if a warm abscess appears, apply what we have mentioned many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is a fracture with an accompanying wound, first ensure that no part of the bone has been removed.
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	So subtly to remove the instruments suitable for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with a flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and no more remain, cleanse the wound if it is wide; apply appropriate dressings to generate flesh until it heals.
de la forcele	Of strength.
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The forearm breaks multiple times in front, towards the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in three ways:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	Or it is broken and split into two, with pieces, and this is the easiest to restore;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	Or there is a fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the treatment is as follows when the fracture is without a wound: have two assistants so that one can hold the arm where it is broken.
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	While the other extends the neck towards the affected part.
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	Then align the fracture with your two hands so that it fits together properly, without any displacement or unevenness.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you need more extension, place beneath the patient's shoulder a round pad of cloth or wool, and make it thick according to your necessity;
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	extend the arm and lift it up, hold the pad firmly in your hand, so that you can align the break properly as required.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull out the head of the broken limb from without because it has gone in perfectly, then have the patient lie prone on their back and place a medium-sized pillow under his shoulder; have your assistants push down on the shoulder until the bone of the fractured area is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	Then direct the broken part towards your hands, and if you find it shattered, you must split it upwards.
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and draw the pieces gently together, and if the bone cannot join despite all attempts at elevation, then cut it with one of your knives.
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but place beneath the arm this instrument to protect the skin.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and it resembles a spoon, it is not wood, and it should also be as wide as needed, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work.
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and it has two edges, as you can see, and one edge should be wide, while the other is narrow, just like the opening of the wound that you made when treating the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are certain of a hot abscess, cut open the wound, and if the opening is small or you suspect a deep-seated abscess, pack the wound with lint and bandages according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if a hot abscess appears, dampen a cloth with rose oil, egg white, and wine, then apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The immobilization of the bone when there is no fracture or injury involves applying a poultice of mill powder and egg white onto the bone, followed by light dressings on top. Place a cushion underneath if needed to support it during this process.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	Then take a very wide bandage, one palm-width across, then place two layers of cloth over the wool and apply the plaster.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a slender stick three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that one end of the bandage hangs free.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	Place the stick on the fracture, then wrap the bandage around the neck and under both armpits.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	And pull on each end of the bandage until you see that it holds the fracture in place and the stick doesn't move over the broken bone. Loosen the ties daily but retighten them if they become slack.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	And make the patient lie on their back, placing a small pillow under their neck when they sleep to raise the shoulder upward.
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	If it alleviates the fracture's pain by aligning the shoulder, bind their arm to their neck, and do not release them for twenty days unless an unfortunate accident occurs.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	Then reapply the poultice if you see that it is necessary, restraining them and leaving them in this manner until they are restored.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	And she will be healed within twenty-eight days at most, and in less time for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	For a broken shoulder.
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	Sometimes the shoulder dislocates or moves out of place at its joint, not from force but merely by being touched.
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	If you align it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in every way that you can.
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	Then place on it some flour from the mill with an egg white, and light pads, and put a double cloth over it.
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	Then put on top a wide and thin splint, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the splint slips off anywhere around the shoulder, then use linen pads to secure it so that the splint sits evenly.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	And then secure it firmly with a large bandage so that the splint does not move from its place, and check the binding every day.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	And every time he moves, hold it fast, and set the sternum straight if it has shifted from its place, and let the patient lie on their affected side.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	And the shoulder is restored in twenty days or twenty-five.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when this number of days is complete, untie him, and be confident, for it is not a bone that can be easily dislocated.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a part of the bone juts forward and punctures beneath the heart, do so above it, remove it, and follow what we have said for treating abscess-causing fractures.
de la brisure dou pis	Of the fracture of the spine
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The foot is sometimes broken in half, but this rarely happens.
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	But it often breaks above (the ankle).
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it slants downwards and the patient feels great pain, lacks movement, and coughs; they may also vomit blood, and the broken ends of bone are clearly seen through the skin, which is easily felt.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration method is to have the patient lie often on their back, and place a cushion between their shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and bring the sides of the two collarbones together with your hands, and subtly adjust as needed in every way you can, until the bone's shape is correct.
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	Then place on plasters and swabs above a slender stalk of salt, or some other light wood, and wrap it in a cloth, binding it to the broken bone so that it does not move.
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	Tie the bandage around in a circle at the back, and tighten it appropriately, then undo it every hour to check if it has softened, tightening it again if so.
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	If it needs to be unbound due to corrosion or itching in the area, or pain or abscess, then hasten and untie it, remove the plaster, and address the issue with appropriate treatment methods.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then reapply the plaster and tighten it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	Of rib fractures.
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Know that rib fractures only occur in the back and on the chest side towards the spine, and also inside near the head, as they are brittle bones.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	And it is felt well when pressing on the affected area during examination of the ribs.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is that you set the fracture evenly, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply a plaster cast, and secure it with a splint if needed.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the rib fracture is pushed inward, the patient feels severe pain and a pricking sensation like pins and needles because the bone is piercing the tissue.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	They breathe rapidly and suffer from acute pain as well as violent coughing and vomiting of large quantities of blood; it is a serious illness which ancient physicians tried to treat with great effort.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And so there are some who say one must administer meats that swell the belly to push the rupture outwards.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not cause this [condition], if hot abscesses have not come there already.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have appeared, treat them with cauterization.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	Some said to place cups over the affected area for suction which seems reasonable.
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	Nevertheless, there is doubt that the cupping glass does not draw out excesses from their place due to the condition of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some of you say to cover the spot with wet wool in hot oil, and put tent-like wrappings between the ribs to make even the tension around [the wound], then treat it with treatment for pleurisy, meat broth, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear due to the bone piercing the flesh, and there is doubt in the patient's mind, then it is necessary to make an incision over the location of the broken rib, and one must place beneath it a tool to protect the soft tissue.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	one must then cut the bone and gently extract it, and thereafter sew together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if an inflamed abscess forms, place damp linen cloths soaked in rose oil over the location.
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat it while it is still soft at this time that suits the abscess, and let it lie constantly on its side where it must be until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	From the broken neck.
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Sometimes there is breakage of the bones in the neck, and this often happens when it bends.
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	And also to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will recover or not, take note: if their hands become soft, swollen, and numb, unable to move or extend, and when you prick them with a needle, they feel no pain.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is deadly in many cases, but if they can change position and feel well when pressed or pricked, know that the bone joint is saved, and the patient may be cured with proper treatment.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if a similar thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know whether it is healed or not, take note if the feet are softened, and if there are any accidents that occur when they are in hand, and on the back watch out for windiness and egestion without volition;
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And when they lie softened on their belly, there should be egestion without volition.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is reminded of it on his back and he wants to mount [a horse], he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	He knows they are deadly:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	If you do not work on his treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if these accidents do not befall him, then the matter is less serious.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the treatment is such that you reward him if there is hot abscess, apply rosin oil or fresh egg yolk until it subsides.
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	Then apply one of the comforting and drying poultices, bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest.
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And let him not sleep on that part of his body where he feels pain until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bone becomes dislocated, you must cut into the heart above it.
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, and treat it with ointment to promote healing until it is healed.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	And if the bone of the shoulder is broken, which is called the "collarbone", place your left palm on it and push, aligning it with the other hand, then apply a poultice and a bandage over it, if necessary.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then hold it firmly in place, and if there is a severed bone, do the same on top of it, remove it, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the broken hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	Sometimes the hip bone is broken, which results in only a slight decrease in function at the joint.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	And make it long, and bend toward the back, and pain comes to the patient at the site, with pricking, swelling where broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And hold your hand above it, so that you are over the break;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and check which is the fracture and its form;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	and if the break is only at the head, equalize this fracture so that it has its natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is along its length, or it declines inwards, make the patient lie on their stomach so that you can see to restore this break.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have made it even, place an ointment on top, then put a stick of wood or heartwood above it and secure the break so that it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And pad the place below the sides until the level is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if hot abscesses develop, do not touch them until the hot abscesses are pacified, and apply what we have previously mentioned.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	then return to the restoration and hold it as required if there is no adverse event;
et c’est li maniere.	and this is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of shoulder dislocation
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The shoulder joints are located between the armpit and the head of the shoulder, and if they are broken, they must be restored using one of two methods:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	one of which is to take a single piece of wood with an average thickness, in this shape:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	Attach two ties to the two ends of it, lifting them upwards, and place the patient on a seat;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	Then throw their broken arm onto the stick until it reaches the elbow, and place in the middle a wooden bend, then lean on something heavy where the ministers stretch them down;
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Then place the splint so it breaks equally at their hands together, until the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	The second method involves hoisting the patient onto their back and tying their hand to their neck; next command two assistants such that one holds what is above the fracture in both hands while the other supports below at every joint, stretching each part as far as they are able.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more powerful, then restrain the ligament below the fracture, and above the fracture, and stretch each of the ministers to their respective parts.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, you must place one strap under the armpit and another towards the cut, underneath the splint.
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	And if the break is towards the cut, you must place one strap lightly and gently so that the splint is aligned on the arm and over the shoulder.
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then set the fracture evenly, as it is required, and hold it steady, unless incisions from abscesses occur.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if incisions from abscesses do occur, do not hold it tight for seven days, and apply moist woolen cloth with rose oil until the incisions have healed.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	Then hold it tight again, and the way to do so is that you apply a poultice on the fracture, then bring the arm onto the shoulder, and place your hand over the shoulder or armpit.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And place the cloth, and hold it tightly over the shoulder and arm, so that the arm is in its natural position, unless something prevents it or if the bone has moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone is not moving, use splints, and place on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than the others, with two fingers of space between each one, and let each splint be so large that it passes three fingers beyond each side of the break.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	Then pull up on the splints, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter regarding fractures, with more force and less separation.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the placement of the splints and the constriction, as we have said when restoring a broken limb, and doubt the hot abscess, leave it bound until the seventh day, just as we've stated.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	Then check it every three days to ensure that no itching or swelling occurs where the splint is bound, nor any numbness in the limb due to excessive tightness.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If addressed as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such accidents occur, you should not release the dislocation before three days or more have passed. The patient must sleep on their back with their hands resting on their stomach.
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	Place a cushion of equal wool under the affected shoulder. Check every hour during the day or night to ensure that the broken limb's position does not change and its joints do not loosen.
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	If the injury heals through medical treatment, give them the food we mentioned before in such a way that their diet is very light at first.
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And when they start to recover, make their diet heavier.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	It is customary for the shoulder and leg injuries to take forty days to heal completely.
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And then it must be loosened and treated with baths and ointment medicines to realign its place.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the dislocation is severe and difficult to move, it may take one day or two months to relieve it.
de la brisure du bras	Of arm fracture:
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "duo foscile", one of which is small and follows the wrist.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	And the other is large, which is below towards the little finger.
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	Perhaps only the large bone breaks or maybe just the small one, but perhaps it's both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small bone is broken, its restoration is light and its healing swift.
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	And when the large bone is broken, its healing is difficult and more serious than if they were both broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small bone that is broken, one should extend it gently and set it evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it is a large wound, you must compress it more firmly;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	place them on a cushion, and hold the wrist of the hand higher than the others, with the little fingers lower than the other fingers, and let the patient be crossed over themselves, and the cushion in front of them, elevated so that the patient may not suffer any exertion;
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	Then have your assistants extend their arms to the part below the patient's hand or wrist, while another assistant is above them on the other side.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	Then place the mirror in front of them evenly so they see their best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the bone is broken into pieces, place each one back in its place and grasp the heart of any piece that cannot be restored to its original position; then cut it away as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if with the fracture causing injury, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter;
si pren la cure.	then take care of the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if in the beginning of the restoration hot abscesses appear, so prepare the bandage with a cerate made from rose oil and white wax, let it be neither too hard nor too soft;
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and bind the bandage on gently, so that the hot abscesses may be calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	Then remove the cerate, and apply an emplastrum made from mill powder with much egg white, then place the splints, making sure that the splint for the fracture is closer and a little wider than the others;
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and know that there must be six splints on an arm in various arrangements:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	whether the fracture is in one of the bones or in two;
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and hold it tightly above the fracture, less so elsewhere, and always more in the direction of the break, as I said at the beginning of this chapter.
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and let the cloths that are placed on the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or rough.
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	and let the thread with which it is held be made of linen, not too thick nor too fine, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	Reward the limb and ligament after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any adverse event occurs in the limb, such as an itch that arises there, you must spray the limb with warm water until the itching is relieved.
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the limb rest without restriction.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Then restart the tightening process, and if the ligament is softened and the bones are separated or similar, address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you observe that nourishment cannot reach the limb due to its tightness, it is necessary that you soften it a little, and leave it thus for a few days until circulation flows again; then tighten it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said come to pass for the patient, do not release them until 20 days have passed.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	Where you inquire around him, then paint his hands on his neck, and let his necks be even, and beware of movement and twisting, and sleep on his back;
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	and know that this fracture is healed in thirty days or thirty-five, and perhaps even twenty, depending on the combinations and complexities of qualities.
de la brisure de la main	On the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and at the knuckles there are few fractures, but rather it is more often a dislocation.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the heel of the hand is fractured or bent, it is necessary for the patient to sit cross-legged, and sit upright directly in front of him evenly.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	then place his hand on the stretched cloth, and have the assistants stretch out the fractured bones, and make them even with each other, so that they are well-aligned.
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	and apply the plaster and bandages, unless an abscess forms, then place a splint according to the extent of injury.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And it shall be enveloped in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the fracture is around the front of the sole [of the foot], make a sphere of cloth, and instruct the patient to strap it tight against their broken sole.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	Then strap it with a long cloth, and let the heart-wood peg be as large as the sole of the hand, then tighten it accordingly.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is on the outside, you must put a pad above and another below the broken bone, so that the hand is open and straight; then bind it all around the hand, and secure the binding between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the fracture occurs in one of the fingers, set it equal [straight], as is required.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	And strap it with the sole [of the foot], and if you wish to insert a small straight peg to lift the fracture, and do not move it.
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	and if the fracture is in other places, such as in the index finger or any of the others, make it equal and bind it with the healthy finger that comes next.
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	or you bind them all together at the base, as it moves better, or place a stick above it, just like for an arrow.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	and take care in the restoration and treatment of a hot abscess, and alleviate what comes from it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The thigh bone is often fractured, and it is clearly seen when the leg turns forward or backward.
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	and its restoration is done by binding the two sides above and below the fracture.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	The patient lies on their face, then each attendant stretches their rope to its equal part.
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and this is when the fracture is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	If the fracture is close to the root of the thigh bone, one binding should be towards the armpit, and the other bindings below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	Also, if it is near the knee, then let the rope be placed below the knee, and the stretching be done downwards.
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	Then the surgeon should place the bone evenly with both hands, aligning it to its natural shape, and then apply a plaster cast, binding it up if an abscess forms.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	If there is a warm abscess present, leave it to heal before returning to your work and treatment.
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The binding is done in this way:
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	It is necessary that you wrap over the fracture with I hard bandage doubled in II or III, and let the excess remain, then turn the leg so that the heel reaches the base of the thigh, and thread I long piece of string between the thigh and the leg, around the knee below, and bring the end of the string above;
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	Then turn the bandage over the leg and up the thigh, then place splints on the fracture, and put a splint on the bone of the leg;
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	Then fill the empty space between the leg and thigh with soft cloths to evenly distribute the pressure, then begin to bind tightly in the form of III twists or IIII over the fracture;
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	And as you go further above the fracture, bind it less tightly;
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	Then attend to the two knots of thread that you have passed between the leg and thigh, and tie three stitches above them, then return below to the end of the thread until you reach near the foot.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	Hold it tight so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this until neither an abscess nor swelling or any other similar issue appears.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if it does appear, then untie it and address the issue that has arisen as we have said many times before;
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	And if there are splinters of bone stuck in the wound then it must be irrigated with water if one is able to do so;
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	And if this cannot be done then you must open the wound further to extract them with forceps;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And treat him as we have said, until he is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And sometimes the thigh is broken so that pins are inserted, as in the shoulder and arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	However, when such restoration is performed, the patient does not suffer.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored in twenty days, or perhaps a little less or more, depending on the diversity of constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	From the groove of the knee.
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the knee alley there is little breakage, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is but a crack or hole, and this happens with any wound, both wounded and unwounded, and one feels good about it.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is such that one places what is rounded in its place with both hands until they are joined as well as can be done.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	Then apply the plaster and insert a round pin if needed, securing it properly. Then follow all the procedures we have outlined for other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar conditions.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you apply to each injury what is appropriate for it, until it heals.
de la brisure de la jambe	On the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is rightly called "shin," and the other is called "tibia.
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And they have similar fractures as those that occur in the arm, and for this reason, the restoration is the same as that of the arm, and the treatments are all there too. If both bones are broken together, then the leg turns from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bone is broken, return to the previous step.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the larger bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it shows well.
et torne desoz.	And it turns downwards.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Therefore, provide extension, make them equal, and tie the splints equally.
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	But nonetheless, if the fracture is ugly and there are many fragments, the stretching should be reduced and made lighter.
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And ease it according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed your work, take two strips of wood and wrap them around the leg on either side, making sure they are as long as the leg from the knee down.
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	Then wrap two linen bandages around them and tie one in the middle, so that the leg cannot bend to the right or left. In this way it is well-supported.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	And have them put a splint along the length of the leg, made of wood or other material, to protect against any movement. It should be applied directly above where there is an open wound due to fracture.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	and move each leg daily to check for abscess or other complications;
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	if he treats it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of broken bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but in the bones of the foot, there can be breaks and bruises, and sometimes only a sprain in various conditions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if there is a broken bone in the foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, let the patient put his injured foot on the ground as if he wanted to walk, then place your foot on top of theirs, where the bones are raised, then press it until they return to their original positions;
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	Then apply the plaster and pack it with dressings, place under the belly of the foot a small wooden board with two curved ends, then strap it to the foot carefully, then wrap it with bandages and other materials you may need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, untie the binding, for you will find the bones equalized, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if there are any broken fingers, restore them, just as we have said for the fingers of the hand;
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	Then place a splint on the broken finger in alignment with its length, and let it be slightly wider. Place underneath the foot that board I mentioned, and strain it appropriately;
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	And if there are two or three, or more, broken fingers, place a splint on each finger according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth. Straiten the board underneath their foot;
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And let it be stretched over the head of the board outside their stomach so that it holds them well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And make sure you do not forget the other things I mentioned for treating breaks, just as we have said before;
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And heal every injury as it is required.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Of the fracture of the wrist bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bones of a woman's back are broken, make her sit spread out, then lean her towards the back part and support her from behind;
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	Then fill the patient's hollow back with cotton, and put in as much as it holds;
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	Then stand the woman up, lift her back bit by bit, and as the cotton rises, until it reaches the opening of her back passage, and the bones return to their place;
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	And when she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and once she is done, put it back in, and do this for seven days or so;
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	si sera restoree li brisure, and if you see it, take a sheep's bladder, tie a cane to the opening, and insert all of the bladder into the body.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	then blow hard into the cane, so that the bladder becomes completely inflated inside.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	the body will realign the broken bones.
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then fill it with cotton and leave it like that for a few days until the wound heals.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the wrist bone of a man or woman is broken, restore it in the same way as we have described for the hip bone.
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	these fractures near the wrist are not hidden from those who study them diligently and read my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the breaking [of bones] indicates to many its correct method of restoration:
enten le donques.	Understand it then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's windpipe and insert it into the penis;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	Then wrap it in cloth around, and leave it for three days so that it may heal swiftly.
de brisure avec plaie	Of breaks that have wounds.
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a break with wounds, especially if it's large like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, to be healed swiftly, as the healings we have discussed attest to.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, apply vitriol to staunch it, if you have nothing else, then begin again to restore the fracture that same hour or day, unless a hot abscess comes about.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	If a hot abscess does occur, leave the restoration for nine days until the abscess is alleviated, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, as you would bring about an ill outcome.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible on an uncovered heart, you must set it gently with your hands in slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extension is not equipped to align with your hands, then reset it with this iron instrument which has seven or eight tines and its width according to the size of the wound;
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and for this it is necessary that the surgeon apply pressure three or four times according to what is needed in each treatment of a broken bone.
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and round and slightly thick so that it does not bend under pressure on the limb you are working on, and pointed at the front, and thick from the middle onwards, like this;
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	It is called 'palainche', which means the curved head should be placed on top of the visible bone;
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and push it in one go until it returns to its place, ensuring they are aligned with each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot grasp the bone properly, then you must cut away the head of the bone until the instrument has a firm grip.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot reposition the bone as we have said, then use an appropriate tool such as an incision knife or a saw to your ability;
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	then remove what remains in the bone of roughness and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not yet in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	Si make sure it is back in its place, then wet a cloth with black styptic wine, and properly so if it is on the face.
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not put any ointment or other oily substance on the wound as it will cause sores and decay;
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	then apply splints once you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, wrapping the covering all around according to the size of the wound, taking great care that the wound is not constricted with the break.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	and many times have these foolish doctors done this, causing death or corrosion in some cases.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	and the constriction should be looser and softer than with other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is severe or large, and you fear bad consequences may arise, as we have mentioned, and you find pain in that place, it should not be treated with stars.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	But instead of using stars, wrap around it sturdy linen cloths, and tie them in place.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see swelling after one or two days at the wound, remove what you have placed on it entirely, and apply healing ointment such as Tetraconion and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	You must loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at night, until it is fused and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And ensure that the limb is bandaged in such a way that the swelling runs down slightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if after many days it still does not heal but swells again, know that there are small bone fragments present, which is why you must probe the wound with a needle, and remove all these dislocated pieces causing pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula forms there, or any other kind of corruption occurs, then you must treat it according to what he says in his chapter previously mentioned.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken and protruding from the limb, like the thighbone or humerus, and other such large bones, do not pull it out, for death often results, but leave it until it rots.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	Perhaps after twenty or thirty days it may fall off by itself, then treat the wound if you are able to do so.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if you cannot, leave it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	wounds that arise over the suture
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	We often come after the health of the fracture, especially when it is close to the joint, and it is an unpleasant sight to see the shape of the limb.
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	and perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Take care then if it is fresh for us:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	if the administrator of medicines gives you astringents, such as aloe, incense, and myrrh, or substances like sarco collum, galbanum, and similar others, then ensure you take any of these things, or all together, and mix them with astringent wine or egg white or isinglass;
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and apply them to the wound with pads, pressing it firmly, and do not remove it by hand for a day;
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	Then dislocate it again, and begin another one, until the knots are removed.
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	where you strain it over a well-formed plank of wood;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	Because the properties of wood are such that it removes all swelling from the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	And if the knot has already turned hard like a stone, and it must be removed, then cut away the surface layer, and expose the excess.
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	where you return it to a rasp until it is removed, and treat it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	From the member which is weak after recovery.
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the broken bone is healed, but the limb remains weak and delicate, this occurs for many reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	for which one is due to it being tied too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or because there were too many bindings, and nourishment could not reach the limb;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	or due to excessive bleeding;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or because of too much movement, not at the right time;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or because they have little blood in their body, thus being weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the treatment is that you should make the patient eat, and soften their body until blood is multiplied within them;
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and administer baths to them, giving joy and leisure;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	Then place lead on the limb, so that the lead draws out the great suppuration, and often irrigate it with warm water until the suppuration flows into the limb;
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	Of a twisted limb after injury
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bone is visibly broken, and its form is ugly, it still does not lose its natural function:
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	do not believe the fools who say one must break the limb anew, and many foolish doctors have done this in our land;
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and these procedures are to be blamed for bringing great harm, even death;
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k'il soient arosez d'aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	and to this wound make a softening plaster, like well-made dyaquilon ointment, and take the mucus of the mallow plant, and mix it with goose fat or sesame oil, and spread the mixture as an external application.
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	or you take fat figs, grind them with coltsfoot leaves, and similar medicines that lessen the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the nodule is removed by continually and extensively rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And provide gentle movement to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the tendon is hardened and knotted like stone, and it must be removed with an iron instrument, then one should cut as far down as the bone using a small delicate incision.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and apply sutures and take care in its treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs in someone, one must promptly reset it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if one delays, the wound swells, and sometimes it may be painfully reset into place;
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	For this reason, it must not be moved when it is swollen.
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	Often brings back swelling and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	However, when this happens, have the patient bleed, then leave them alone until the abscess is healed;
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Then immerse the limb in warm water and oil, then gently move it, and treat each member so that it returns to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from head to toe.
des mandibules	of jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	Sometimes both jaws become dislocated and the double dislocation occurs in two ways:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	in which they are slightly out of place and softened somewhat;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Where they are completely dislocated and hang downward, and saliva dribbles from the mouth which he cannot hold, nor can close his mouth, and his tongue becomes tangled in speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When a dislocation is minor, it can often return through various adjustments.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and fully dislocated, then you must reduce it quickly, without delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	and in such a manner that the assistant holds the patient's head, and pushes their finger from one of his hands into the root of the dislocated jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is in two parts; 
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other finger from both hands should be outside, to keep it even.
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and instruct the patient to relax his jaws, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	The practitioner then places it evenly until it returns to its proper place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if resetting it is difficult, especially if it involves the two mandibles together, soak them in warm water and oil until they can be reset gently;
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	Do not delay in resetting it, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are evenly reset and the patient's mouth is closed without swelling, apply wet dressings made of soft cloth in a ointment of rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with soft bandages.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	Let the patient sleep on their back, with their shoulders resting between two pillows so that they cannot move them to the right or left, and let them not exert themselves by chewing, but take light food until the pain is gone, and the mandibles are healed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And then have him chew what he wishes lightly, and do not exert himself to open his mouth for eating or drinking until the mandible is well-numbed and healed.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be reset to their original position within an hour and do not return to their proper place, fever and constant pain will result; possibly leading to diarrhea, or perhaps vomiting clear bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, know that it is destruction;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and many times the one who experiences it dies within nine days.
de la forcelle	From the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The fork cannot be dislocated from the inside of its shaft or below, and is sometimes dislocated outwards, which one can easily tell.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And its restoration is such that the patient often lies on their back and extends their arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then press the place firmly with your palm, and it will return.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then apply the plaster and bind it with bandages, holding it firmly.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the head which is towards the knife cannot dislocate;
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	if not, and if it dislocates at any time, then reset it to its place, as we have said;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	then apply the plaster and bandage, hold it tight, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed;
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and likewise is the head of the shoulder reset when it is dislodged from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	Know that the shoulder is dislocated only according to three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	one is that it dislocates at the back part underneath;
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second (dislocation) is to the area of the back.
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and sometimes dislocated above this part, which rarely happens;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inside towards the nerves;
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	and often dislocates downwards towards the armpit, especially in those with little flesh, for to them it jumps painfully.
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	for those who have sufficient flesh, it jumps slightly and returns slightly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And occasionally happens to some men a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells from a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	Therefore, you must test it until you are certain;
et adonques encomence la cure.	and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And thus is recognized dislocation when it occurs downward toward the armpit, and creates a noticeable difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find an obvious disparity between them.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	and you will find at the top of the shoulder a depression, and underneath the armpit on the other side, the head of the shoulder, as if it were an eye socket.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and the patient cannot bring their hand back to their nose or move any part of it.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden because you can clearly see it from the side.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this type of dislocation is not difficult to reset when it is recent or the patient is young.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the manner is that the attendants lift the patient's hand upwards, then place your palms underneath the armpit, and raise the joint forcefully upwards to its proper place;
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	and the attendants lift the hand, extend it upwards, then place it underneath;
si venra hastanment.	there will be dislocation.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come out as we have said with bare hands afterward, then the patient must be bathed in warm water;
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and the attendants apply softening and soothing ointments, such as a decoction of althea, fenugreek, and melilot in water, to be applied;
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then the patient is placed on their back, and a padded linen cushion, neither too soft nor too hard, is placed underneath the armpit. The heel of the patient's hand rests on top of the pillow, while we lift up the head of the shoulder gently, pulling the patient's arm;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and another minister holds the patient's head, so it does not move downwards.
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	this shoulder returns immediately, and if you observe as it is reset in this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and have another man present who is stronger than the patient;
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and he should stand upright by the patient's side, and push their shoulder underneath the patient's armpit, then lift the armpit upwards so that the patient hangs in mid-air.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	another minister pulls the patient's hand downwards towards their belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, weigh them down with something heavy, and the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	and it is also reset in another manner:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and one drives a long peg into the ground, so that the head is as high as the knee, and it should not be too thick nor too thin
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	then it should be placed underneath the patient, but let them have soft blankets on top, and the patient should extend their body along the length of the pole;
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then stretch out their arm from the other side, thus the joint will return to its place gradually;
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	and if it refuses to go back into place for all the things we have said, then do this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	take a pole two arms-lengths long and four fingers wide with the head flattened so you can insert it perfectly underneath the shoulder blade according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	Then place above the head of the patient a soft cloth, so that it does not wound the patient, then put it beneath the sick person's ass.
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	And extend their arms over the long side of the wooden frame, and tie the injured arm to the frame, and their hand to their head. Then place the other arm on a board that is wider than them and let it hang freely down from the board, leaving the body free to dangle on the other side:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	The joint has now recovered.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, however it may be, you must put under the bench an equal woolen pad, then apply a plaster prepared with flour powder, incense and egg white, over the entire shoulder and around it; then strap it underneath the bench appropriately, and turn the bandage back onto the plaster, embrace the hand to their neck, and let the hands stay thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And they should eat little for the time being until the limb is comfortable again because it will heal faster this way;
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	Then they should eat more after five or seven days, and begin to move about.
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And if it is closed and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is forced out of place due to moisture that has entered it or for another reason, then you must apply cauterization to three openings, as mentioned before in the chapter on cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all that and it still dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot lift his arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is either cut, stretched or softened.
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation that is towards the armpit, breasts, or behind, is caused by a push and stretching of hands, and another place is treated.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing process, the limb develops cracks and moves slowly, the patient should bathe frequently until these cracks are alleviated and return to their original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	Of shoulder dislocation:
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	Know that the dislocation of the neck is difficult to treat, and it often returns.
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	and if it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation has not been reduced because it can be clearly seen and felt.
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	and dislocated according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick man's wound with the healthy one, you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is dislocated, and he cannot bend his arm or reach his shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And you must reset it even if an abscess forms there, because if an abscess does form, it would be difficult to reduce.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	and by chance, it cannot always be reset completely, especially when it is at the back.
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	it is worse than other dislocations, causing greater pain, and in some cases, death may occur.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And when it is restored, once you have managed to reset it, extend their arm with your two hands;
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And his arms should be spread out, with the hands placed mirror-like according to the cut around, above and below, and press the knuckles together at his armpits or at the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it occurs when one doubles over their hand to their hand, and it strains the root of the palm where it is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not want to return to its place, apply strong extension.
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	And since two people administering the extension hold the arm, and two people bend it so that it does not move during the extension.
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	Then turn the arm from each side and wrap it with a double-layered long and wide cloth.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	And when the surgeon joins the knuckles of the hand, grease them with some oil to soften the joints, then press the knuckle firmly until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, apply a dry poultice with raw egg white on top, bind it tightly, and extend the arm to the patient's neck, leaving it there for several days before removing it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	and if the joint is firmly in place, release the bindings, and let it be.
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	and if you see that the joint does not hold well, then repeat the poultice and binding, leaving it so for several days until it is firmly set.
puis le deslie.	then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if they feel soreness after the joint is reset and it moves again, then bathe and gently massage it, pressing until it is soothed.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	where you place on the joint a layer of fatty sheep's wool, then leave it there for one day and night, remove it, and have them take a bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	and when they sweat, rub the joint gently, then replace the wool, and go back into the bath.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this twice or three times until it is healed.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	and if you see pus, apply moist warm cow dung mixed with butter on top of it.
si revenra a sa disposition.	it will return to its proper position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The dislocation of the hand is light and easy to reset compared to other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place immediately when dislocated, unless the area is swollen or an abscess forms there.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the process of resetting it is that you place the patient's hand on a table, and your assistant extends their hand, aligning it with the patient's; then they place their palm over the affected joint, pushing until it returns to its place.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	Nevertheless, you must ensure that it is correctly aligned.
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Then have the patient place the back of their hand on a table during extension and reduction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, have the patient place the back of their hand on the table and let the assistants put their hand over the apparent joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns to its place now, that is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If this does not work, strain out the emollient plasters for hot abscesses, and leave it like this without starting again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you are unable to put it back into place after some days, the joint remains dislocated.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and it does not harm the patient to leave his hand softened for as long as he cannot grasp anything at all:
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	then know that either the nerve is severed or the artery.
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	if there is no other means but to grasp by cauterization nearby, perhaps nothing else will work.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, apply the plaster we mentioned earlier, then strain it and leave for five days, then release the strain and leave as is.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if they cannot move it properly, and there is any tear or injury, then apply a compress of warm water, and rub until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	On the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Sometimes the fingers of the hand become dislocated on both sides, sometimes on the back of the palm or the belly.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then stretch the finger, and push the dislocation with your fingers until it returns, then support the head of the finger, and bend it towards the direction in which it is disjoined.
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	Leave it for two days, and then set it equal that day.
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	And bind it at night as we have said, release it during the day, make it move, and rebind it at night.
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Do this frequently until it is narrow, and do the same if it is dislocated at the palm of the hand, act in the same way that you have done before until it is healed.
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And do likewise when it is dislocated in any other place.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Of dislocation of the spine from the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine from the back or neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no cure, as death quickly takes the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the signs are that vomiting occurs without volition, and it cannot be controlled; often some members are weakened: both thighs or both arms or one of them.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And often the spine twists into four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	That which is twisted behind is called "gilbositez":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	The treatment is that if the "gilbositez" comes from childhood, you should reverse it.
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	If there is no cure nor full recovery.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment say there is not much benefit in all of it.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and formed instruments in diverse ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the hunchback condition that arises on one side, no physician is healthy.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	And also the condition that arises evenly in two sides, and it cannot be cured except for that which properly comes to the back, as I say.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	And it is that the patient should be extended on their face in an equal place, and have a strain under them so they do not hurt themselves.
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then fix one iron rod in the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a rope across the shoulders of the patient, and another to their hips, knees, and ankles.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and each assistant knows their task, one to hold the head and the other the feet, with two hot irons in between.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and [make sure] they are firmly fixed, the hot irons as we have said, and the physician places his palms on the spine gently, until it returns to its place.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return to its place with this treatment, take a board three feet long, and drive it underneath the wall, and let the patient be on their side, pressing the head of the board underneath the wall, then place the middle of the board over the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and let the physician place his feet on the other end of the board, pressing firmly until it returns to its place.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if you see this, make him turn to face the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And thrust two skewers into the head of the patient with one arm raised high and place two other skewers near the feet, leaving a span between each skewer above and below.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	And make one hole in each skewer where the tourniquet runs through, ensuring the skewers are firmly planted into the ground so they do not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	And place another skewer between the two skewers turning on an axle, with two small skewers of a span in length to turn the tourniquet.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	Then bind the loop which is among the axles to the tourniquet near the head and the other loop toward the feet at the other tourniquet, so each assistant turns their own axle alongside the master, who evenly applies pressure as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, apply a drying poultice with an abundance of eggs, then the swabs, and then a rod made from a three-day-old tablet, that reaches to the place of curvature and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage as we have said, and let the patient use gentle nourishment until they are healed.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	and if anything comes up in the end of the healing process, you must administer softening and soothing medicines, with the rod that we mentioned before.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	and sometimes it is administered in one part of the spine, and sometimes there appears a hunch in the lower back region of the spine, which is thought to be dislocation.
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	and this is the bone which appears, therefore one must not presume to act.
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	would perhaps bring about death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Hip Dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Know that only dislocations cause pain in the hip joints and shoulder joints, not like with other joints;
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	internally and externally, and in front and behind;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and more internally then, and sometimes dislocated both in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its internal dislocation is such that when one joins the affected leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the diseased knee appears more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their diseased knee to the floor.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And it is the place which is near swollen from a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes naturally is as follows: these accidents are contrary to those mentioned before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs for someone who has this beforehand is that they stretch their leg well according to its length;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	However, they cannot bend the knee without pain, and if one wants them to walk, they cannot beforehand, and they retain their urine, and the anus swells, and when they defecate, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of one who has dislocated behind them are such that they cannot straighten their knee or bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, with a softened groin, and the head of the femur is in place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The treatment of this similar type of dislocation is that you should reset it if the dislocation is old and remains according to its position, as there is no other treatment for it.
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	And one must not have any presumption about it.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And for the one whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of four types of dislocation, hurry to turn the joint back, stretch it both inwardly and outwardly, and move it to the right and left.
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	Perhaps it will return by chance, and no other treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return with this method, you must prepare a strong assistant and stretch the leg strongly with both hands or with a rope tied above the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	Another assistant should stretch his hand over it in such a way that he pushes his hands under the armpits and then tightens an elastic bandage around the thigh.
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	And another person holds the end of the rope.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	They extend it upstream and downstream all at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground simultaneously, remaining suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common for four similar cases, and if the dislocation has been corrected, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If not, you must apply treatment in a similar manner.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is on the inside, you must lay the patient onto their healthy side, then place the bandage at the root of the thigh, and the part below the groin, stretch the bandage upwards towards the groin, and towards the loins.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	Then have other assistants take hold of his arms, embrace the thick part of the injured thigh, and extend it outward forcefully.
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	It will return to its place immediately.
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	And this type of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot secure it in this manner as we have said, then you must bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft bandage over the heels and knees, and let the affected leg be extended twice more than the other.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	Then hang it from an upright post so that it is suspended above the ground by two arms' lengths.
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then instruct one assistant to embrace the patient's thigh, and let another assistant hang with the patient, embracing the thigh firmly, for the joint will now return swiftly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is external, let the patient lie down as we have said for one with curvature of the spine, and secure the bandage firmly around the affected leg and also the foot.
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then place two irons [heated in a fire], one on the head and another at the feet, then insert an iron between the thighs of the patient in the middle of the table.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	Surround it with wet cloths so that it does not burn the patient, then stretch each attendant towards him and let the surgeon align his hand to match [the alignment of] the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place it on a flat surface, i.e., a table, and press it as we have described for the treatment of clubfoot, and lay the patient on their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is in front, it's necessary to stretch out the sick leg as far as possible [to achieve a successful reduction of the joint], and according to what I have said [previously];
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And let the surgeon position himself on top of the affected limb [to help reduce it], then press with one hand and stretch downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is external, you should not stretch the patient downwards nor lift them up from the ground. Instead, they should be positioned as if their hip joint was also externally dislocated, just as we have mentioned regarding the position for a double hip dislocation.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	Let them lie on their face, with the ropes extended as we have mentioned previously, and one must press on the joint using a board.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	This will be sufficient when the patient stretches out their legs, ensuring they remain level.
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	Adjust the thighs and apply a plaster, securing it with a tight bandage so that the hip joint does not move.
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	Allow them to rest for three or four days, then remove the bandage and reapply the plaster on top of it.
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	And if you see that they are even, pinch them, as before, and leave it for three days.
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	Then untie it, and make him move gently, until the limb is strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The knee is dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	That is to say, internally and externally, and behind;
et ne desalue point devant.	And it does not dislocate in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the sign is that you ask the patient to bend their leg towards their thigh, and if it does not reach their thigh, then know that they are dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And the restoration for all of these is that you make the patient sit upright, and stretch their leg if they can, and place your back on their face, and put their foot on your feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	Then take his knee on your palms, and draw it between your two hands, then bend the two sides of the knee sharply.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	And have another minister stretch out his foot so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he lightly shakes his leg against his thigh.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	And apply the plaster over it, and have him lift his leg against his thigh, and keep them bound tightly together for three or four days, then release it.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the patient must not exert himself by walking until his limb is comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not broken, apply strong traction as we have mentioned in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	Of the dislocation of the heel,
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes bruised, and sometimes completely dislocated, both internally and externally.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the sign of this is that the ankle is swollen, and more so on the part where it was dislocated.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The re-alignment is light, and one must gently extend it with their hands when it is only slightly moved.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is completely dislocated, you must make the patient sit upright and have an assistant hold them from behind by the leg above the ankle.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then do it twice with your left, and extend upwards while gently pushing the foot up.
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	And do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot.
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	If it stays in place, that's good.
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	But if not, start the process again as it will return.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot be returned in this way, then make the patient lay on their back on the ground, and firmly insert a pole into the earth between their thighs, tie the cloth around it so that it does not hurt the patient.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then have the minister hold the thigh, and another minister extend the leg to their hands or tie it with a cord around the foot so that they bind it above the ankle.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then each minister should extend equally, and the pole should be close between the patient's thighs to hold them when they are being extended.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then place the mirrors equally on the dislocation with their hands, and another minister should hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return swiftly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is ready, apply the plaster and bandages on top, applying firm pressure, tie the foot to the leg, and protect the nerves behind the ankle, ensuring the bindings are not too tight.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	Then leave it for two or three days, and if the binding loosens, apply pressure again.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	Then remove the bindings on the third or fourth day, and prevent the patient from walking for four days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if they walk before this period is over, it is not guaranteed that the dislocation will not happen again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If pus forms in the abscess, you must soothe it as we have said elsewhere until it is healed.
des dois	twice
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the shoulder is dislocated, it should be gently stretched without strain, which is a simple matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any knuckle of the foot or ankle, you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or lie straight on a table, and place your foot on top of their affected joint, then press firmly with your foot until it returns to its proper position.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	and when it is even, and nothing appears, place beneath the sole of the foot a two-foot plank, then strain it firmly, and leave for three days, then release it.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and have them rest until they are healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	For wounds and dislocations together, you must first prepare the cautery of fire and use coals or stones to burn them red-hot; then take wax, pitch, rosin, fat, and oil, mixing all five substances. Take two small pieces of cloth, rub them with hog lard, spread the mixture on one side, and place it where you see that there is a dislocation. Let him rest for some time until the swelling goes down; then take some fine linen, soak it in water, and bind around his limb from the head to the foot of the member. Leave it bound tightly and let him sit still like this until the wound heals completely, or nearly so, if necessary.
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound accompanies the dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, often the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	do not be overly confident in your treatment if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate, merciful, and careful, do not be bold.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and apply soothing, abscess-reducing poultices at the beginning, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of recovery.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, then relocate the limb now, even if the abscess there gets hot;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is back in place, administer soothing things for the hot abscess, and treat the wound as it should be done, with drying ointments;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if with the dislocation there is a break, and small bones are separated, remove them, and do what we have said for simple illnesses;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	and beware of entering into a state of fear, as I have said, for it is according to your Creator's will, and for the safety of your soul and body.
