O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, very dear sons, I have completed this book for you which is the last in medical science together with its fulfillment, and I have made an end by its explanations and by its demonstrations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is greatly neglected in our region and has been deprived of everything everywhere, knowledge is lost and obscured, and only small fragments remain from ancient times in the books that have been preserved by hand.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes error and vanity, intentions are obscured, and knowledge is banished.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Now it seems to me that I should revive it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and explanation and abbreviation; and I shall come along with the forms of the iron instruments for cauterization, and other tools of work with the fitting adjustment of the explanation and preparation as required.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good master of hands is found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And one who undertakes this must surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, such that they know the judgment of limbs, their forms and conjunctions and separations, have knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the number of them, their movement, and of the moving vessels and resting ones, and where they emerge.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	Et for this, Hippocrates says that knowledge with the name is a lot, and with work is little; especially in the art of hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that one who is not knowledgeable about the aforementioned things should beware, lest they err and harm people; thus I have seen many times among those who engage in this practice without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish doctor who cut an abscess of scrofula from the neck of a woman and cut the arteries of her neck; because so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another doctor who treated a bladder stone in a man with water, and the stone was large; he took out a piece of the bladder along with it, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it were cut, he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another surgeon who took care of the Duke of our land, who had a broken leg with an open wound. The surgeons, full of ignorance, set the break over the wound with strong ligatures, leaving no room for drainage, and left it like that for some time. They commanded him not to remove it, and so he remained until his leg became completely swollen and his foot was lost.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to go to him, and I hurried to release his leg. When I undid the bandage, he immediately felt at peace and no longer experienced any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But however the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the limb was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And thus another wound will be opened to increase the abscess, and then it will become inflamed due to the malignancy of its nature.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For cancer, when it is purged of melancholic humour, one must not touch it with iron unless it is in such a place where all that is corrupt can be entirely removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, my dear son, you must know that surgical work is divided into two categories: namely, works where there is danger in several circumstances; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For this reason, it is necessary for you to be cautious so that the foolish doctor does not speak ill of you. Take your weapons in confidence, approach your patients gently yet firmly, and employ the best method so that by God's grace you may achieve salvation and receive praise. Leave behind terrifying diseases with severe consequences; remove your weapons from anything that causes doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can journey from this world to the other with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in some of his admonishments: "Do not treat any severe illness unless you want to be called a foolish doctor.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise in three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauterization and other medical procedures involving heat, and the chapter is organized from head to toe; it also covers the shapes of instruments, the tools for cauterization, and everything else necessary for the procedure.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and using cups, treating wounds, extracting arrows, and similar procedures; and this chapter describes the instruments used in order.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar issues; it is ordered from the head to the feet, and describes the instruments required.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Before we remember the work, it is necessary that I explain the quality of help and harm for each humour.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of help and harm is the longest speech and subtlest science and the most secretive reply; many wise men have spoken about it and agreed on this, but their words are few as I fear lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cauterization universally assists all constitutions where there is substance, except two constitutions: namely the warm constitution without matter and the dry constitution without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the warm and dry constitution with matter, some argued that cauterization is greatly beneficial; while others said the opposite, that it isn't effective for illnesses arising from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be used to treat warm illnesses due to heat or dryness, and says he who disagrees that cauterization provides great relief for warm and dry illnesses occurring in human bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the constitution of fire, you find that the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in any case, only those who have tested it and who understand through long practice the chapter on cauterization, and the diversity of human constitutions, and their dispositions and causes of illness, and how conditions arise over time; we have no fear for other constitutions, especially regarding cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the surgeons agreed and concurred with the cautery method.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my son, that the union of fire and cautery is one of the secrets of healing, and it has greater benefit than any burning medical cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come forth unless to the member that is cooked, and it does no harm to any other member so long as one is careful.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Burning medicines travel from member to another remotely, and cause the member to fall ill with hard-to-heal diseases; and perhaps kill the patient Fire because of its loftiness and goodness of its substance does not do this, unless there is excessiveness.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found through experiment and the length of my service and study in this art, and it is based on the truth of things; and for this I apologize for the length of my words, as I do not wish to take away the secret that resides within fire, and the quality of its work, how it removes diseases from bodies, just as the philosopher said in demonstration; now receive this into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, they agreed on when the cauterizations should be performed, choosing eager volunteers.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	I say that cauterization is suitable at any time, for the harmful consequences can be mitigated by its aid; especially if the cauterizations are needed urgently to alleviate pain and prevent greater harm from befalling the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear son, as the foolish physician does; for a disease that is healed by cauterization will not return; and they say it so; but it is not as they believe, because cauterization is only a medicine that alters the complexion, dries up the humors causing pain, and is better than regular medication due to its swift action, and the strength of its effect.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is a remarkable thing that the disease may sometimes come about according to the patient's constitution and the location of the illness and its severity; these superfluities are accumulated within them due to excessive consumption of food and similar things unless cauterizations are administered where there is little excess and moisture, such as dental cauterization for pain, or similar procedures. This can resolve such pain but it occurs rarely
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	Many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that cautery is valuable after medical treatments have failed, their intentions are false, and it is cautery that becomes the final treatment for such conditions because when we administer various methods of treatment for a particular illness and they fail, then we perform cauterization, which works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Thus it is clear that cauterization is the ultimate medical treatment, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauterization with a gold instrument is more effective than with iron, and they claimed this because of the quality of gold and the purity of its substance; and they said that the color of the cautery site does not cause harm, but this is not true as I have proven it, and I have found that it is indeed true for some people; and gold cauterization is better than iron, just as they stated.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	However, when you heat a gold instrument, you do not know when it is hot by its color, and it may cool down quickly; and if it is overheated, it will melt in the fire; thus, there are enough drawbacks to it.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we use fire cautery which we have adapted to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	For I have ordered this chapter of the head to feet, so that it is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	Olive oil cautery.
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauteries are used for moisture and coldness on the brain, and there are two types that are done due to an illness called "soda", and because of many humours that descend from the head to the eyes, ears, causing numerous dreams, toothache, throat pain, and especially all illnesses that come from cold like paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged with a medicine that dissolves and cleanses III nights or IIII, according to what their constitution, humours and custom can bear; then let them sleep the night away.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make them sit crossed-legged between your hands, and place their hands on top of yours; after this, put the root of your palm onto the root of their nose between their two eyes; allow yourself to come close, bleed a little afterwards, heat up the cautery called 'olivare', which is shaped like this:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	Place it on the spot marked with ink, and move it up and down while squeezing your hand repeatedly in a twisting motion; then lift your hand gently, look for the bone; if you see it, stop there, but if not, repeat the cautery until you do see the bone as I've instructed; afterwards take one pouch of silk, place some soft cotton inside and put this on the spot, leaving it III days; after that apply softened cotton in butter, keeping it covered until the burning sensation has passed; finally treat the wound with an ointment called 'tetrafarmacon' until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the elders said that the longer a wound remains open, the more it purges; and for this reason it heals better.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some said that one must let the cautery burn until part of the bone is charred, and then remove what has been burned from the bone, and it shall be treated.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one must keep the cautery in place, and press down so hard that they scrape away some of the bone, as wide as a woman's pin that is put into her gown for this reason, so that the humors may issue forth; and it should be left open for a long time; afterwards, it must be treated and sutured.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to me to be good at all in any way, except perhaps in some people if there is a sign of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave it alone; for the shoulder becomes weakened by the continued effects of nature, as we observe this in other body parts; and even when the patient's shoulder is naturally weak, and the first type of cauterization appears more beneficial and effective to me, and thus I use it whenever there is a need.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	Of the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the entire head is afflicted with chronic pain that persists for a long time, the patient must use herbs and pills called "cochie," as well as purgatives, oils, and poultices; and if one performs the cauterization we mentioned earlier, but it brings no relief.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care if the shoulder of the patient is of a strong constitution and not too cold; then cauterize below that cautery we mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	Afterwards, perform the cauterization on each corner of the head up to the bone, as we said before, and do a cautery in the place called the "vessel"; and there are places where cups are applied; lighten your hand so that you do not see down to the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it later; and the cauteries on the corners must be more subtle than those used for the middle part of the head, and here is how:
dou cautere dou chief	For the head cautery
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in a part of the head and extends to the eye, and the skull is cleaned with softening medicines, and other treatments I have mentioned for dividing diseases are carried out, but none provide relief: then make cauterizations according to two methods, namely with hot iron and cold medicine.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauterization with cold medicine is as follows: take a piece of elm wood and remove the bark, then cut it into two parts at both ends, after that split open the temple where the pain is felt in such a way that you can insert the elm wood under the skin; when this is done bind it tight and hold it tightly for twelve hours; afterwards untie it and press the piece of elm strongly against the wound, leaving the wound as is for two or three days; then apply cotton soaked in butter until it heals.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to do so, use some of the combusting medicines that I have written about in the twelfth treatise on combusting medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is performed in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cauterizing instrument, which has this shape.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	It is called a "clamp" due to its head being shaped like a claw with some curvature and a small tip in the middle; place it on the painful area, hold your hand steady but slightly turn the iron so that half of the blade's edge burns; lift your hand before the artery burns, which lies outside, and an abundance of blood will flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After apply cotton in the shape of wool, and place it there for three days; then put moistened cotton with butter, and afterward cure the spot until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with a cautery called "cultellare," be careful not to cut the artery during this non-chronic migraine.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat a migraine as we have previously mentioned in the division of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauterization methods previously described in medicine and with iron are insufficient, then you must heat up the cautery called "cultellare" until it turns white; cauterize by placing it on the spot, drawing a line half an inch long, and withdraw your hand once, being careful not to cut the artery or reach the bone; be cautious of the movement of the jaw when chewing, and ensure that the patient does not move their neck nor experience spasms, and be wary of the heavy bleeding from the artery if it is cut, especially for those who are unaware and unstudied in this matter; leave the operation halfway. I will explain to you how to stop the bleeding when an artery is cut, and I will show you where that is mentioned in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauterizations are not sufficient for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him on top of his head just as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you wish, apply the cauterization that we mentioned in the chapter about arterial extraction, with a cautery tool which has two blades; this type of cauterization is better than the former one and more beneficial.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	From the pain in the ears due to coldness.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ear arises from coldness and one must apply dissolving medicines and other treatments as we have mentioned before in the classification, but the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery called "point", of which here is its form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.
de la torture de la bouche	The torture of the mouth.
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture which must be treated by cauterization other than those caused by phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not use cautery on similar conditions arising from dryness and nerve spasms.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this condition of torture caused by phlegm from sores and cleansings of the head, and gargling, if it does not improve, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another slightly outside the temple, and a third where the two lips meet; apply the cautery to the part that appears healthy, and place it above the ear on the head, a little below the crown, and another in the temple as long as a thumb; leave the cautery there until half of the heart's beat has passed; this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it resembles the surgical knife we described earlier, but it is slightly more delicate, and the blade must be a little thicker; treat the site as I explained before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is an old condition and you treat it as we have described, and there is no improvement, and the patient has no fever, then apply four cauteries: two on the two corners of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one at the location called "vessel" as we mentioned before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; treat them as we have said previously.
de litargie	Of lethargy.
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness, give the patient large herbs and pills to clean the brain; after removing all hair from the patient's head, apply on the occipital bone the sinapi poultice which is described in the treatise of plasters; and this is how the cautery should be done: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healed in this way, it is good; and if not, make three cauterizations within the head descending to the neck, with a space of two finger widths between each cautery; treat them like others, and if you wish to add more, and the patient can endure it, make one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two others above the two horns, and treat until healed; let the cauterizations be as 'olivare', as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	From the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	The head must be cleansed of hairs and other things as we have said before; after shaving the patient's head, make a cauterization in the middle of the head and above each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; if you need to do more, and the body is moist and the patient can endure it, and the illness is severe, make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; let them be until the strongest part of the heart is burned, then lift your hand; treat until healed, and let the cauterizations be as 'olivare' which we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptic should not undergo fire cauterization unless they are phlegmatic; first, the brain must be tempered with herbs and other treatments as we have described in the section on treating severe cases where the patient is unable to take medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot withstand this, let him gargle and chew often to temper the brain with good meats; afterward, remove the excess phlegm from his head by pressing on it in the middle, then perform cauterization as we have described before, cauterizing both vessels and each horn. If the patient is strong but suffers, give them the same cauterizations I mentioned for those who suffer paralysis and softening of the body: along the spine and neck; let the cauterizations be of olive oil, done in the manner that has been explained.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, perform this subtle cautery procedure as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When melancholy is caused by excess or corrupted moistures and thick phlegm, then cauterize with several cauteries as we have described for one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if melancholy is caused by excesses descending into melancholy and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that will cleanse their brain, as described previously in this treatise.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Clean the patient's head; then make a linen cap well-formed, like a helmet, and place it on their head; have the patient sit cross-legged, holding still from all sides; apply a liniment, preferably made of old goat butter; heat the iron to a moderate temperature, so that the skin can bear its touch; remove the circle from inside the cap on their head, and let it cool down; perform this treatment once a week for the patient with additional good care until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you want to cauterize him by making several pricks throughout the entire cautery site.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This type of cautery softens the brain equally; then apply wet cotton on top, moistened with butter and goose grease.
de l’awe des eulz	from the awe (of the eyes)
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the awe (fright) first comes to the eyes due to the signs I mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something purifying for the head, protect them from all moisture, and make him sweat in the bath several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	Afterwards instruct him to raise his head and cauterize between the eyes, making two cauteries over the two temples if the descent of awe is in both eyes together, or one if it's in only one; and avoid all veins and arteries that are below the heart when doing the cautery, which should be long according to the width of the temple; watch out for excess blood flow, and stop any bleeding you see with as much force as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will instruct you in the extraction of arteries and the incision, cautioning you on how to staunch it; sometimes a cauterisation is made below the two bones at the rear.
dou cors des larmes	the body of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears from the eyes are old and accustomed and flow over the veins, or close to the arteries that appear outside the head; and it is seen that these are cold, phlegmatic excesses, then apply the cauterisation that I mentioned at the start of this work, descending towards the eyes: one cautery in the middle of the head, two on the two temples, and two below the two bones at the back; and if more is required, carefully cauterise above the eyebrow with small cauteries.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Through the body of tears from within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat him according to what we have said in the division, and he does not benefit from it, then give the patient to drink three nights with cock's grease; after, raise his head, and cauterize him in the middle of the olive-shaped part; and make two 'clavilis' cauteries above the two wrists, a little below the hairline; and be careful of the artery so you do not cut it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the 'clavilis' cautery:
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called 'olive'.
de coi ci est li forme:	from which this comes to be :
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that do two cauterizations on the two thumbs as long as the nails are and leave your hand there until a third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the eyelashes turn inwards and prick the eye, so one must perform a cauterization by two methods: with fire or burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are even, then place the patient on your bench; afterward, draw on the paper of the eyes a figure that is similar to the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be by the hairs; then put cotton moistened in egg white and parsley poultice on the eye, then heat the cautery with which this is formed:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cauterize on the figure you have marked little by little many times, until the heart of the place is burnt; and the sign of the success of the work is that you see the paper retracting, and the hairs standing at the tip of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then put moist cotton in butter as long as the scald passes away; afterward cure with ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards the hairs grow back and the skin is softened, then resume the cautery on that same spot as you did before; and if the hairs have fallen out, cauterize it until the skin rises to its natural place, and is even, without irritating the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning cauteries of medicine are when you instruct the patient to leave the hairs intact until they are large and even, then make parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf; take French soap and live heat, each in equal parts, and grind them together well; do this quickly so it doesn't cool, then spread it on the form you have made like a myrtle leaf, and place it on the skin around the eyes; if the patient's illness is only in one eye, operate on that one alone, but if both are affected too; put moist cotton wool soaked in egg white underneath the eye; the patient's head should be upright and your finger pointing upwards on the medicine, press once with the thumb and index finger each time the patient feels a burning sensation from the treatment, for they will feel as though being burned.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, remove the medicine with your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the bite has healed, lift the cloth of water, and observe if you see the paper raised just as it was previously due to the fire or incision, and if so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, apply more medicine to the place where it has been opened before, until your work is even and your eyes are precise; then cover with cotton soaked in butter until the burning heart is cooled, after heal the wound with an ointment called "diaphenis" or another, until it is clean.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to be careful with your work, take great care that none of the medicine goes into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterward, and the hairs prick in the eye, so restart the medicine on that place which is softened by the paper itself, as you have done before; after the cure until it is healed; and this is the form of the myrtle leaf.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this be your constraints; and let not the right way be refused by one who is studying this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	On the treatment of fistula with cautery.
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not bring benefit, then it is necessary that you use cautery according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head on your healthy side; hold the ministers' head between your hands so that it does not move or shift; then apply moist cotton wool soaked in egg white or parsley juice onto the eye; afterwards, heat up the cautery which is shaped like a dovetail joint, ensuring they match; if you wish, make sure its point reaches from one end to another, and similarly if you want it to resemble a tent; however, this dovetail shape works best for your procedure.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Afterwards, press the fistula if it is open and extract any pus, then dry it; if it is closed, operate on it and draw out any foul matter forcefully; afterwards, place a hot cautery iron onto the affected area, keeping your hand over the cautery near the knuckle above the eye to ensure you do not make a mistake; finally, insert the cautery into the eye socket and burn away the corrupted flesh.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you start with the cautery at the bone level, it would be beneficial.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, resume the cautery again and repeat if needed, leaving it for three days. Afterwards, apply moist cotton wool soaked in butter, and treat with a drying ointment until it is healed. If forty days pass without healing, use corrosive medicine to expose the bone; treat according to what follows in this chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	There is also a method of cauterising a fistula that none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Examine the fistula, then make an incision in the site. Afterwards, insert into this opening a slender probe of similar form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	et they make it to the size of a .З. of lead; and hold your hand or implement firmly, and do not move the patient at all, so that the molten lead does not run into their eye; and one must place over the patient's eye moist cotton with egg white or honey: the lead thus reaches the site of the fistula, and heals remarkably for great health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, one must administer a perforation by the nail, and return the fistula to the body of the nail according to what is needed in its proper place.
des crevaices en levres	Cracks in lips.
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cracks occur on lips which are called "hair", especially those of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as mentioned in the previous text and the treatment is not effective, then heat a small knife-shaped cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it inside the cracks until it reaches the bottom; afterward, cover the area with wax until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	On abscesses of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess occurs at the root of the throat or in the tonsil, palate, or tooth roots, it becomes infected and swollen and turns into a fistula; you treat it as mentioned previously, but if it doesn't heal, then you must use a cautery according to the size of the fistula; open the fistula's hole and keep your hand steady until the hot iron reaches its bottom and furthest point; do this once or twice after treating it as described earlier, until it is healed; if it heals like this, that's good; if not, you must uncover the area and remove any rotten bone according to what you find in the relevant chapter.
dou movement des dens	The movement of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it doesn't help, then place the patient's head on your lap; afterward, heat the cautery that will be described hereafter in such a way that you put a stick over the tooth; insert the hot cautery into it quickly, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth; after remove your hand and repeat the cautery according to your preference; then fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and keep it there for an hour and rinse well.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	In this way, the moving tooth is stabilized, the softened gum restrained, and the corrupted moisture dried up.
de la dolor des dens	From the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain arises due to coldness, whether it is actual cold or not, and medical treatments are ineffective, then there is a need for cautery in two ways: butter cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Butter cautery is done as follows: take cow butter and place a bit of it in an iron or copper spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a stick, dip this in boiling butter, and apply it to the aching tooth until it cools down; do this often enough for its effect to reach the root of the tooth. You can also soak wool and cotton in cold butter and place it on the sore tooth, then put hot iron over it so that the heat reaches the end of the tooth
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cauterizations using fire are such that you should take a cane of iron or copper, and make it thick enough so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth; afterward heat the cautery, from which its shape will come after, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand there until the cauterization is cooled down; do this often, because pain will be removed that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And the patient should fill their mouth with good butter during the urgency of this cauterization, and then let it cool; and that is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make the upper lip's cauterization wherever you wish, and according to your ability; and that is the shape of the cane:
des scrophules	Des scrophules
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrophules are caused by phlegm and cold moisture, and they do not respond to digestion through medicine, then heat the cautery tool with what is described below, and make two openings for smoke to exit from the other side of the cautery; place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice as needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; if the abscess is small, use a smaller cautery according to its size, and leave it there for three days; then apply moist cotton with butter to remove the burn; afterward, treat the area with ointments and dressings until it heals.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture overwhelms the channels of the brain, especially when it arises from a cold constitution, then the patient should first be cleansed by solvents; afterwards cauterize at the root of the throat, but take care not to reach the throat itself, and burn only a little of the heart.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards, perform another cauterization at the junction of the neck and skull, with cautery called "clavicle," as described before; treat the area as mentioned earlier until it is healed.
de la toust	From the throat.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	Whenever all chest diseases are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and it is an old illness, perform two cauterizations on the vertebrae in their view; another cauterization in the middle of the breast between the two breasts; and let the cautery be called "clavicle" according to the form previously mentioned.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see fit, perform the fire cautery by pricking at all points that form what is called the "point" in ear diseases previously mentioned; and let there be thirty or so punctures around it.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the area as previously stated, let there be three rows of cauterization in this shape:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because these cauterizations are lighter, you must do three at once.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	Of the shoulder's dislocation:
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; 
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the heart until it is pierced through to the ribs, and four cautery marks would appear together; and for this, cauterization is done with the three-pronged cauterizer, thus forming six cautery marks; and these are the nerves according to their subtlety, and this is the shape of the three-pronged cauterizer:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	and sometimes it is adjusted to this one nerve, which results in eight cautery marks.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Afterward, place the powder-filled cauterizer on it; then let the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until it is well healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated again soon afterward, then do a quick cauterization on the thick part of the collarbone, or many cautery marks by pricking deeply.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When cold and excessive moisture afflict the stomach, extracting it from its natural state, and catarrh multiplies within him, and usual treatments are employed yet bring no benefit, then the patient must be reminded of his back, extending his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	Next, make three cauterizations beneath the buttock with a spoon-shaped instrument as deep as a thumb, for the entire cautery is clavil. And two cauterizations outside the two sides such that the shape of the cauterizations forms three angles, and there should be enough space between them so they do not join together when cast out; and let these cauterizations be so perfect that they purify both parts of the heart, and let the figure of the cauterization take this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form; and for one who has fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and bleeding on the stomach at one point according to the amount that you wish to insert; then cauterize it all over with the cautery which is called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound that we had before, until it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver feels pain due to cold and moisture and is burdened by excessive flatulence, such that it is thrown out of its natural complexion by superfluities; and the patient is treated according to what we have said in divisions, but it does not benefit him, then the patient must be reminded about his body; and apply three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity on top of the liver, outside the hypochondrium, where the man's ribs are located; and there should be a space between each cautery equal to the thickness of a finger; and the cauteries should be as long as the body, do not press your hand too hard during the entire cautery; and only burn half of the heart, and have the patient stand upright on their feet; if they cannot, then let them lie down, extend their legs, and lift their arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if your wish is so, cauterize these cutellarius cauteries (cauterization by a surgical knife), if you are skilled and wise in this art; be careful not to burn the entire heart, for it would cause all body tissues to dry up; avoid reaching the mouth, since the heart is very delicate there, as you know well.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver and you need to know if it's within the liver tissue or on its membrane: If it's inside the liver, the patient will feel a pain that isn't too intense; but if it's on the membrane, they'll suffer from violent pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then when this treatment must be applied, the patient should be reminded of it on their head. Next, incise that place where the abscess is, and afterward heat a cutellarius cautery whose shape resembles the following drawing:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize the wound until the heart is burnt, and it reaches the bone marrow, so that all redness is gone; afterwards treat it according to the cure for boils until it is healed; and no one should use this cautery other than those who have studied medicine for a long time, by whose hands these illnesses have sometimes been cured.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then one may operate boldly, yet it seems to me that leaving [it] is better.
dou cautere de pleuresin	A ligature cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that for a ligature cautery one should make roots from aristolochia, and in this way: take a long root of aristolochia, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, also as thick and as long as your finger; soak [it] in oil, then put it over fire, and cauterize with a ligature cautery between the throat and neck, and two small cauteries slightly downwards on the part below the beard; two cauteries between the fifth rib and sixth, declining backwards a little; one cautery in the middle of the chest, another above the stomach, and one between both shoulders, and two at both sides of the chest outside the cautery that is between the shoulders; do not press your hand hard, but do it lightly as when anointing.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And some ancients said that any man should use a fire cautery like a razor, heat it up and place it between the ribs until it reaches that abscess; burning away the pain as we have said with the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear that the patient may die now, or a fistula develops which cannot be healed.
de la mice	Of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the illness of a mouse as we have said in the sections on treatments, and it does not improve, then there are three types of cautery which are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	The first method involves making three or four cauterisations in a line along the length of the mouse, following the shape of the liver cautery we described earlier; do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and have the patient lean over their back; another cautery method is to heat up the iron with two nerves, as we showed for shoulder dislocation; lift up the heart which is at the site of the mouse, or where the patient's pain comes from towards the left, and let the elevation by which you lift the heart follow the length of the body, and let the cautery follow the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, 
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After treatment, when it has thrown up pus for a long time, this is worse than other treatments mentioned earlier.
de ydropisie	Of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not effective for dropsy, except in the manner called 'ascites'.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods we have mentioned in the divisions, and your treatment does not benefit them, then you must make four cauterizations around the navel, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back on the spine, and one near the breasts; and let the cauterizations be close to the heart's base.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	Afterwards, leave the open cauterization for a long time to drain pus, and do not let go of the patient's treatment after cauterization; healing would quicken, and the two intentions would come together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly should be as we have shown before with the clavicle; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what has been stated previously.
de l’enfleure des piez	Of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and they are full of yellow water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; lift your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not go in too deeply, otherwise you would burn the yellow water, and the cautery should be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After that, make two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the little finger; and let the long cauteries be one beneath the knee in front and the other outside, in the middle of the leg; leave the cauteries without cleaning them for a long time so that the yellow water comes out; after treating the other conditions we have mentioned.
de la menoison	Of the household
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the abdominal illness comes from cold and moisture, such that the retaining and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestine are weakened, and it cannot be cured by regular treatments; you see the patient suffering greatly with strong vitality, then perform a large circular cautery on the stomach as described before for the stomach cautery; four small subtle cauteries around the navel along with one larger subtle cautery, and two more cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, perform a cautery on the wrist, one cautery on each elbow, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	For the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are present at the foundation (anus), whether one or multiple, and they are old, consisting of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and treatment as previously mentioned in divisions is not beneficial, then cauterization is performed: III on the spine of the back, which is entirely outside the lower abdomen area, with three triangular-shaped cauterizations; I cautery beneath the buttocks for two days. If you suspect their stomach has become cold, and food is not being digested properly, causing the face to swell, then apply I large cautery on the stomach as previously mentioned, and I other cautery on the liver (liver), and I another on the spleen, with all three cauterizations clavi-shaped; leave the cautery open for a long period of time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, let the wound heal completely.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	Of fleshiness which is called 'thelul'
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you treat the 'thelul', heat up the cautery like a razor, then place it fully ablaze on top of the treated 'thelul'; leave your hand there until the cautery touches the edge of the wound, from which blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is more 'thelul', cauterise each one as we have said; afterward treat with healing ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterise with a large cautery on 'alchatim', it will provide greater help.
de plaie mal curee	of wound poorly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When a patient cannot endure cutting or opening, as we will explain in their place, such illness arises that can only be healed by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a certain person develops a fistula, and it becomes infested with worms and corrupted moisture, you should treat it with an entire delicate dressing, making sure you know the entire extent of the wound.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cauterizing iron like a razor, insert it into the fistula according to how deep the dressing is, and repeat the cautery as many times as needed until all corrupted flesh is burned away, once or twice or thrice depending on need; be careful not to burn any nerves or major veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; 
de la maladie des reins	Of kidney disease.
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from coldness comes to the kidneys, and there is severe flatulence, and it does not take on a female appearance, then you must perform cautery on the kidneys, one on each side, with the clavicle cautery we mentioned before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will provide greater relief.
de la vessie	Of bladder disease.
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak due to coldness and moisture, such that the patient retains urine, then perform cautery outside on the part where the hair begins on the forearm, one on each side, each cautery as long as a thumb's width; and do one cautery outside the back, or two if needed; and let the clavicle cauteries be done according to the form mentioned before.
de la marris	From illness
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the womb is cold and moist, and does not allow conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their endings delayed; and when they come, she feels great pain: then it is necessary to perform three cauterizations around the navel, as we have said for bladder cautery, and two cauterizations outside the back; and let the cauterization be claviated, as we have explained.
de la hainche	Of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moistures descend into the hip joint, and due to this it moves out of its place, and the sign is that one thigh appears longer than the other when measured together; and if you find the area of separation below, then you must cauterize the patient on the hip joint with one cautery resembling a circle, and bleed in front of the location around the joint as it turns, so that the joint remains within the circle; and let this cautery be similar to that used for the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present, make three large olive branch cauteries, and let the cauterization be as perfect as all hearts; and treat until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	From the pain in the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip joint, caused by cold and moisture, and the patient has been treated as we have said in the division but is not cured, and the illness is chronic: then you must purge the patient of thick foul humors with fetid pills or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After performing the cautery; and the method of cauterization is in two ways: that is to say, with burning medicines or with fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Cautery of fire is practiced in many ways, one of which is as follows: make three triangular cauterizations over the bone of the hip, in this shape; make them deep and wide; leave space between each one equal to the width of a thumb; let the cauterizations be olive-shaped. Sometimes it is done in the center, on top of the head of the hip; therefore, there are four of them made according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you prefer, use the circular cautery we described earlier for hip dislocations; but make it so that the circles encompass the entire hip, and all heartwood is burnt.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	This method is used for sciatica when the pain remains in the hip and does not extend down to the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	Et if it comes down to the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations where the patient says the pain is located, and four cauterizations above the ankle on the left side slightly; let the cauterization be cutellary, burning off the thickest part of the heart; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the toes or nearby, cauterize it three times with a point or four times with a 'point' cauterizer.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if necessary, do more; and if you know that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, make a cutellary or circular cauterization, and be careful with all your cauterizations not to leave them too long so as not to burn nerves and large arteries, and cause greater harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who underwent fire cauterization on the ankle of their foot, and they left it until the leg was entirely swollen, as well as the feet, and [their] feet were pierced and corrupted altogether.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After an evacuation of his belly, from which he had death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, cauterize in one part and in the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise ones said about cauterization of the hip, that this is how it should be done: make such an iron tool and have its head as big as a two-digit measure or a little less, and between the prongs, which are intertwined, let there be space equal to one thumb width; and the prongs shall go in one side and end on another with their tips facing outwards from each other by two parts, and there should also be handles made of iron well crafted; this is its form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it until it is all red and throw away the coals, then put it on top of the sick hip bone and rotate to the painful side; cauterize once with one iron and leave for three days; afterwards apply an ointment plaster, leaving the wound open a long time; after the cure of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasis says we use this cautery sparingly due to the fear of its appearance, and see little who do so; yet it is a good cauterization, which can be endured where there is need for it.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The burning cautery of medicine is such that you make one instrument made up of crossed pieces into which the margin of a door fits, and it is either brass or iron on one side long, and in height has two nails, and between each there is the quantity of the thickness of a finger; and they are open below and above, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After place the box of the hip on the patient lying on their sound side, and press your hand mightily upon the box of the hip; thereafter pour between the two circles of hot water that has been heated over one fire pot, and leave it an hour's time, and let the patient suffer its heat and burning.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it shall find cauterization akin to fire there, and once the cauterization is passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip with gentle water, and leave thus three days, and apply butter until that which is black from the scalding has been removed; and let this stand for three days while putrefaction is extracted; and this would be the final aid after the cure of ointments so long as it heals.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or down to the leg, make an instrument for him that holds salt according to what you have done at the hip similarly; and this is the manner of the hot compress, and I have written about it in the treatise on medical correction.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, equal parts of each, grind them together, and place them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	where there is a small opening for the entry of a razor's point; place this pot inside another well-sealed one, and add alkali, quicklime, and warm water above it, enough so that two fingers are covered when you grasp it by hand; let it sit until cool water and vapor descend into the sealed pot, then take all this water and pour it back over the alkali and quicklime as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And so it will be very painful and treated in many ways through medical practices and cauteries of other members. For fire produces a similar effect to them, and there are other medicines that cauterize the hip just as well, such as tesysey, honey, anacardium nut oil, and hot soap; all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a treatment where a man was cured of hip pain and sciatic nerve pain, he suffered greatly, and says no other treatment was done, and that he was healed in one go when this treatment was performed; and it is as follows.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says to do it in this way: take some fresh and dry verdigris litharge, and grind it very well with one part of fat, then place it on the hip, thigh, and leg where the pain is; and bind it there. Leave it for three hours or as much time as the patient does not feel a burning sensation anymore.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then have him enter the bath until his body is slightly warmed up, and make him go to bed, and the pain will disappear completely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such medicinal cauterization without first evacuating the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat dung, it greatly helps; and the cautery should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take some linen and smear it with old oil, and apply it to the hollow between the big toe and the one next to it, called the fossa.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Then take dry goat dung and light it until it becomes charcoal, put it on the linen, and leave it there until it goes out; repeat this process again and keep doing so without stopping until you think by feeling that it reaches up to the hip, and the pain has ceased; and this type of cautery is called "goat cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	Of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether due to falling, impact, excessive bleeding, or similar matters involving cold and dispersed material, cauterization is effective only for that which arises from an influx of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	One must then ensure the patient is purged of fetid pills or other similar substances, applying three rows of signed enamel to the back where pain persists, with five cauterizations per row based on virtue and quantity that the patient can withstand; perform these cauterizations using the "pin" method, but if preferred, one may use four at the median cleat instead, arranged thusly:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This illness often afflicts young children, and the initial signs include a constricted collarbone upon rising, accompanied by fear; one finds an appearance in the lower spine region of the back, similar to that observed elsewhere.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this one and wish to treat it, cauterize it with a hot iron according to this method.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery touches each part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you wish to do so, circumferentially cauterize the spine with a hot iron in two or three lines close together.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treating the area until it is healed as we have said, take care not to apply a hot iron to any spinal nerve or its surroundings.
de la dolor des jointes	On the pain of joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain is caused by moisture spread to each limb of the body, and when it presents in the foot, which physicians call "gout", and when it is due to cold and cannot be cured with medicine, then it should be treated with cautery in this manner: make several cauterizations around the ankle joint, and let the cauteries have an olive shape according to this pattern:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need to grasp onto the face of the foot, perform a 'point' cauterization on it.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	If the pains reach up to the knees and other joints, and this happens frequently, perform three or four 'olive' cauterizations on each knee, for each part; if you need more, do more but do not hold your hand there once the heart's steel is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knees and back, administer the cauterization we have mentioned in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	If the pains are in the hands, make 'points' around the wrist with two lines; if there is no pain remaining in the arms, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; if the pains reach up to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and ensure good care for the patient and provide medicine.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give good treatment and purge the phlegm, he will recover with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the fracture of the thighbone.
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When fracture happens in the groin area, and the balls descend into the scrotum, if it is recent, you should ensure that he does not urinate that day when you treat him. Let him take things which ease the belly, so that urine passes from his stomach. After this make him sit on his back between your hands, tell him to hold his breath until the balls are returned to their place and draw them with your fingers. Then cut over the fracture site above the bone of the wrist, and in all a sign that is similar to half a circle across the body; then heat up this cautery which has this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	As long as they are white and give off no odor.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Realign the balls to their place; and have your assistant hold his hand still so that it doesn't return backward; and work well on the patient's thighs, and place a cushion underneath him with a strap over the thighs, and another one holding his hands; then apply the cautery right up to your whole hand, and keep it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you don't reach it the first time, repeat again until you come up to the bone; and be careful that the ball doesn't pop out when you are doing the cautery; or else you'll burn him; and because of this, the patient might die, or suffer other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that if you don't reach the bone with the cautery, your work is useless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And the cautery for children should be subtle according to their size, and for adults also large according to their measure; after III days treat the place of the cautery with butter until the scald is removed; after that cure other ointments so it heals, and let the patient lie on his back XL days until the wound is well-fused; and make sure their nourishment is satisfying over a long period, so the belly doesn't protrude when he tries to get up.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	After XL days, when he wishes to rise, provide him with a well-made bandage, and wear it for another XL days; let him have good rest, do not work hard nor overfill his belly, nor shout too much; and once he follows this instruction, he will be fully healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	Et I shall say hereafter the cure of cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	De the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, if it is the first cautery, make it according to its quantity, and burn one third of the heart; afterward, treat it as we have said; and some ancients say that it must be cauterized with a three-angled cautery in this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But first mark the place of attachment and make a line across the width above the rupture, then another outside it; hold your hand in the middle of the entire cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and quicker.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain arises in any limb, whether from a fall or an injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and medical treatment is ineffective, then it is necessary that they be cauterized with the cautery called "point," and the cautery should be applied according to the length of the limb, its thickness, weakness, strength, and the location of twists and pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If the first cautery is effective, it is good; if not, apply another cautery on top of it, for it is customary that it must move to the member closest to it, which means you should perform cauteries until the patient is cured.
de meselerie	of surgery
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The months are aided sometimes by cautery with great relief, especially for illnesses that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	If you want to see the patient cauterized, be careful if it is at the beginning of their illness and if they are treated as we have said in the previous division, and do not decrease nor stay still, but you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the disease; then make five cauterizations on top of the head: one in the middle of the scalp to the nape of the neck, another towards the front at the end of the hairline, and two more on each side; finally, one behind on the highest point. Leave your hand there until you reach the bone and as long as scabs form so that vapors from thick humours can escape; cauterize it like this under the skin.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	Et si le mal est partout dispersé ; et qu'elle perd manifestement, alors il convient que tu la cautérises avec ces cautères que nous avons dit pour le chef, et un cautère sur le nez, et deux cautères sur l'épine du cou, et six cautères sur l'épine du dos, et un grand sur la crupie et un autre à côté, et deux sur les deux épaules ; et deux sur les coudes, et deux sur les tendons du poignet, et un sur chaque joint des mains et des pieds, et sur les creux des mains ; et garde-toi des nerfs qui sont sur l'arrière en marchant, que tu ne les brûles ; et quelquefois fais un cautère sur l'os du poignet, et un autre sur l'os de l'estomac, et un autre sur le foie.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more you perform cauterization, the more help it provides and benefits them; and know that patients feel no pain from the cautery as healthy people do because their bodies are already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	The cautery should be large or small depending on the limbs and joints, according to what you find in terms of iron tools.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment apply flour paste to the place, mixed with honey and other treatments until it is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medicine, oils, and poultices but it is not healed, then apply cautery to the affected limb according to its size, let the cautery be a little inside towards the heart; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes one performs cauterization on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; yet still none should attempt this if they are not knowledgeable about limbs and the paths of moving nerves.
de albaras	From whitlows
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called 'whitlows' persists and medicinal remedies are ineffective, cauterize it with a moderate cautery, according to the species of the heart's quantity, until the white is removed, and its color changes; then treat it with a mixture of flour from vetch and lentils along with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from pigeons and doves, each in equal parts; blend everything together, apply as a poultice to the affected area, and let it air until healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of cancer by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When cancer arises at the beginning, and you wish to halt its progress, cauterize it with a circular-shaped cautery, all around the circumference of the cancerous growth.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And yet the wise physicians say that one should also cauterize the center of the cancerous growth; however, this does not seem good to me, for I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen this happen several times before; a more proper approach is to cauterize around its edges, with the circular-shaped cautery, as we have discussed previously in regard to various types of cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	On swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When one has an illness called "adubelati", and it delays death either due to its excessiveness or because of the patient's water when they are decrepit (that is, very old) and have little blood, or because of the season; and you see that it hastens their death: then cauterize them with many small cauteries by pricking; afterwards leave them be.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten their death.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing through the entire cautery, heat the cautery with what it is made of:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	Place your hand over the middle of this illness called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the heart, and let these cauteries be such that the patient feels them from the outside in such a way as to alleviate the course of the putrefaction.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment, ensure it is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cautery with iron  tool
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another type of illness there is which is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than the wasting away of limbs, for it gnaws at the limbs just as fire consumes dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this illness in a place that can withstand fire cautery, then heat up small and large iron tools according to what is suitable for the location of the disease; afterwards cauterize it thoroughly from all sides until you eradicate any corruption, leaving nothing of it behind so that everything that was corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and apply ground up herbs with oil to the cauterized areas until the burns from the fire are gone along with all of the corrupted tissue.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of ointments generates flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that healthy flesh has not formed, it is good; and if not, restart the cautery on what remains of the corrupted tissue.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this treatment has sometimes been cured with medical ointment instead of fire cautery; however, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already explained the cure with medical ointment in the relevant section: take whichever you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	from boils that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often there is a disease that occurs on the feet called "claws" in our terminology, and it is a faulty, swollen thing that wounds the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterization for this illness is done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, cauterization by fire, and cauterization with hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Cauterization by fire is when you heat a hollow cautery like a quill, made of good iron sized to fit over the nail from all sides and with fine edges; after placing it hot over the nail, turn your hand around the nail until it reaches its base; leave it there for three days until it begins to discharge pus; then apply a plaster of wild mallows ground with salt, leaving the plaster on overnight, and the nail will fall out, uprooted from its root.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure the wound's place of treatment with ointment until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by fire into the body, and often occur on hands and feet, then you must apply hot water cautery; it is done in this way: take a brass or iron rod, or a pigeon feather, and place it over the wart and touch it with a nail, that is, for treating warts; put the rod on so that it grips all around, then add a drop of hot water, hold your hand steady, and press your hand in rotation so that the edge of the rod reaches the root of the wart, allowing the hot water to penetrate deep down to the root; let the patient bear the stinging sensation of the hot water for an hour; then leave it be, and it will remove all roots altogether.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another, until you have reset all those that are out of joint in the body, then treat them with ointments that produce flesh.
li cure dou trembler	the doctor for shaking (or trembling)
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone shakes from coldness of nerves, or from quartan fever or another, you should apply four cauterizations, or five, along the spine of the back, one between each vertebra; and one on the foot, and one on the stomach using an olive-oil cautery; this will stop the shaking and hasten recovery from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	smelly blisters
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes the body breaks out in baths (sores) or smelly blisters, which come from gross corrupted matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	So it is suitable at first when they appear that one should perform a cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery with myrtle wood, so that the tip is taken by fire, or with the root of long aristoloche, or with the lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes one cauterizes them at the beginning when they appear, according to this method, and they cannot grow further, but rather the excess from which they come is destroyed, and they are healed; but it should be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut.
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	There are often great outpourings of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound which comes afterwards, or when incising an abscess, or with a member's cauterization, and in similar things; it is very difficult to stop this bleeding.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And nevertheless when it happens to someone, hurry up and place your index finger on the wound's injury, press hard so that the blood is calmed beneath your finger, with no more drops escaping; then put several small and large olive oil cauterizers over fire until they are all red; take one, big or small depending on the wound and where the artery goes, and place the cauterizer above said vein while you hold your finger down, keeping the cauterizer there until bleeding stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it should burst open when you lift your finger from the wound, and the cauterizers are cold, take another one quickly from those that are over fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	Do not cease doing one after the other until bleeding stops; be careful that you do not burn the nearby nerve, nor any other harm come to the patient; know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be properly staunched especially if the artery is large, unless by one of four methods we have mentioned: either by cauterization, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by strong binding with thread, or by applying medicines that can stop bleeding; and bind and tighten appropriately.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers restraint with a tightly wrapped bandage of fine cloth or places hot objects on it, or similar treatments, may not find them beneficial.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to someone and they do not have a doctor or medicine available, then they must place their index finger on the wound over the vein as mentioned before, and press down firmly until it is compressed above the wound and the vein; without moving the finger, moisten it with cold water often, ensuring it is very cold so that the blood becomes solidified and thickened and compressed; afterwards, make arrangements for what they require in terms of cauterisation and medication.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book on surgical procedures.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We told you in the first chapter about all illnesses that require cauterisation with fire or burning medications and their various applications, causes, instruments and forms; I placed this chapter on the head to feet so that one can more easily find what they are looking for.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so when I begin this, my dear child, you must learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the previous one on cauterization, and therefore it requires even greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many different kinds of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	They come with such fear and awareness of their illness that they die easily from the shock of encountering their disease and the severity of their condition; these are the ones we must fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there are those who give you their sense, and say: "Wait, I am healed"; and yet the illness is deceitful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	You should not agree to those who come to you with such claims, but put greater concern in your honor than in your greed, and do not act foolishly but wisely in matters of which you are certain and can obtain profit from; use prognostication and indication in treating your patients for their benefit; this will help you gain a good reputation, glory, and honorable memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, may our Lord give you good understanding and guidance, and if he wishes, inspire you with his holy breath of spirit, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter for you in a way that divides it into sections, according to how it stands before the chapter on cauterization, which I explained to you from head to toe, so that you can find more easily what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this illness often comes to children at birth when the midwife grasps the child's head too tightly; and sometimes it happens for reasons unknown.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this illness occur in anyone but children, and all those whom I have seen suffer from it have died; for that reason, I think it is best to leave such treatment to others.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose shoulder was full of water, and the head grew larger each day until he could no longer bear it; and the moisture increased so much that he died, and this moisture had gathered beneath the bone on the side of the spine, between the heart and the bone; and the treatment is such if the moisture is between the heart and bone, and the abscesses are small, that you must make an incision into the head a breadth of two fingers long so that the moisture flows out; and here is the form of the spatulum:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscesses are larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see signs of the sutures of the head opening on each side, and the water springs forth when you press it with your hand from within, and this does not stop: then you must make three incisions into the head in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all moisture vigorously.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After applying compresses and powders, bind it with wine and oil, leaving it thus for five days; then release the binding, treat the wound with dressings and ointments, keep the head in an even position, and feed the patient dry meat to avoid moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	Another manner of incision is when you observe where the swelling and collection of pus are visible; sometimes it is in front, at other times behind, to the right or left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Make an incision at the site of visible pus and swelling, opening it up according to your ability; take care not to cut the artery; and if blood flows, let the patient bleed from this loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of rheumatism
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When it happens to someone that they suffer from a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or throat, and this disease is chronic, and medical treatment provides no benefit, then the last resort is cautery along with cutting of the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you are about to cut the veins, have the patient lean back; afterward, rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries become visible, then restrain the patient's neck with a cloth; look where the vein passes, and how it lies between one and the other ear, and press upon it; cauterize these areas first, then cut both of them with an acute spatule to the bone, and do this across the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see it, push the spatula under the artery and flip the piece above, cutting as deep as necessary across it.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is cut open, blood will continuously gush out in a torrent.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the artery does not open to bleeding, you must measure out a length of three fingers' breadth and incise down to the bone; the amount of blood that will flow is six half-ounces, perhaps slightly more or less depending on how much the patient can endure and according to how full the artery is; then inspect the wound: if any part remains above the bone without being cauterized by a hot iron, reopen the wound so abscesses do not form; afterward extract any foreign bodies and bind the wound with bandages, treating it until completely healed.
de emigrainne	Of a migraine.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migraine comes with a cold and moisture in the eyes, hot temples, recurring headaches from long ago, and similar issues; if medicines, cures, and other treatments do not help, we remove the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have explained.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them is such that the patient should pluck the hairs from their temples and pay attention to the artery which appears in the temple, for it shows itself clearly through its pulsation, being more prominent in some men who are very cold; if it is hidden, then the patient should wrap his neck with some cloth, then rub the place with a rough fabric and moisten it with hot water until the artery becomes plainly visible; take this instrument whose form is as follows:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it upwards with pincers, and separate well the membranes that are underneath on each side; and if the artery is subtle, turn it to the point of the probe, then cut it from this part according to the quantity of the two edges.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, the blood cannot flow out entirely from all over.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And drain the blood from the six cavities until only three remain; and if the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread, so that pus does not come out before the wound heals, and blood continues to flow; then cut away the surplus between the two ties at the same time, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with the knife-cauterizer until the edges are cut through to the bone; and this is a dangerous operation if the patient does not have a fever and has a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cauterization is helpful to dry out moisture, it is of great aid for such moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries to fill the space with old cotton and place well-made bandages on top; and when you remove them, ensure you use dry medicines that promote flesh growth, and bandages, until it heals; and if blood escapes from the artery while you work, then quickly cut it off with cauterization, or use vitriol and squeeze it in your hand to stop the bleeding; and if you don't have those available, put your finger over the wound until the blood coagulates, pour cold water on the area to stem the flow, and ensure it is tightly bound as needed; what is harmful and more dangerous during artery extraction is that you cauterize the vein with this sharp cautery in two parts, but make sure the incisions are deep enough to retain heat for longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too thin, they retain less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there should be a width of one finger between the two blades, and then when you have clamped down on the two places, place the burning iron onto it until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein into two parts; and let them be separated between the two shoulders because this cautery is not continuous throughout. And this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes flow down onto the veins that are on top of the head from fire, and it does not help to treat with medicine what is done there, and you see the patient's face turn red, and feel trembling on the forehead; and their eyes become thin and moist so that the hairs of the eyelids fall out, and the eyelids are scalded by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», and it is that you do at the back of the patient who has this disease, the hair on his forehead; then make three incisions on his forehead evenly along the length of his forehead; one incision should be like two fingers wide in the middle of his forehead going downwards to his nose; the other two are located above each temple, and you must avoid cutting into the arteries which are found at each side above the temples; move your hand away from where the two jaws connect, and let each wound have a length of three finger widths across, horizontally; have ready a piece of sponge and much cloth without holes to wipe the blood, then insert the sharp spatule in two parts of which this is formed:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; and remove all the skin that is between the two incisions down to the bone, then do likewise from the middle incision to the other second one, and afterwards extract this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	So push the instrument called "scalpel" into the first incision; it is very sharp on one side and soft, not sharp, on the other, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the sharp side toward the flesh near the heart and the soft side towards the bone; push it until it reaches the middle incision.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes so that the incision is continuous up to those which are visible of the heart; and then do likewise in the middle incision until you reach the other side; and then extract blood equally and compress the place for the extracted blood; afterwards, put in each incision a plug made of old cotton, and cover with moistened bandages in wine, oil and honey, taking care that hot abscesses don't form there; on the third day remove the ligature and apply abundant tepid water, then treat it with basilicon ointment together with rosehip oil, and other treatments used for wounds until they are healed.
dou reume des eulz	Of the disease of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When someone has a severe catarrh and you see their eyes sunken and small, their vision weakened, the membranes burnt; and hair falls out, there is pain in the head with swelling, and the patient sneezes; then know from these symptoms that this matter and such catarrhs do not arise except from many veins, and the treatment for it is as follows.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	Tell the patient to lay on his back, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead and another from one side of the head to the other.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	Start the incision from the left temple to the right temple, and let it go down to the bone; keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that are related to eating; once the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then put old cotton and linen thread in between the two lips of the incision; next bind some cloths moistened with wine and oil on top, and beware of hot abscesses; when this is taken away, you must rub the bone until flesh starts to grow there, then treat it with drying substances that promote flesh growth.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this way: take two parts wheat flour and four parts colophony to make a plaster; apply it on these wounds to promote flesh growth throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	The cleaning of the ears.
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of four things: either grains, or insects, or mineral stones or similar metal objects; or seeds, such as beans, peas, pulses; or flowing matter like water and liquid substances and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When stones or other objects that do not fit the ear fall into it, and do not grow in the ear, place the ear towards the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you can see the stone, apply a few drops of violet oil or oil from sisymbrium (hedge mustard) to extract it; have him sneeze with comfits, and plug his nose when sneezing occurs, then wrap around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; hold the ear upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; 
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If she jumps from pincers, that is good; if not, use subtle extraction with small tweezers; and if it cannot be done this way, make a brass rod and insert the end of the rod into the ear canal firmly, stop up what surrounds the rod with soft wax so that air cannot enter along with the rod; then pull strongly, for often it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in such a manner, take some glue that birds are caught with, put some on an instrument which is pointed to do this, wrap a bit of cotton around; press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, then pull.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not come out by all these things we have said, then hasten to split the ear rather than abscess becomes warm and spasm occurs; and the method of the incision is that you first bleed the patient with the cephalic vein, extracting blood according to its measure, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn their ear upwards, incise a small slit in the root of the ear at the fatty place where it depends; and let the slit be like a crescent moon, so that you reach the stone, then remove it as best you can, suck it quickly to your mouth; treat until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if this tumor is here and it swells, proceed with its extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer a very thin spatula according to the following form.
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and apply an incision on that tumor.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not attempt this if you suspect the tumor is moist due to ear moisture, until it has been cut into many pieces; then extract with subtle pincers and suck it out, as we have said, so that the extraction may be eased.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case of water which falls into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze first and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let them lie on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If she has been wounded by this, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, take many thin and light stones according to the length of your finger, heat them slightly over a fire; place one end in the patient's ear canal and allow it to exit through their other side, then pierce the stone within the ear with another heated stone until all the fluid has evaporated so that she may be healed entirely. If you wish instead use reeds: insert one reed into an ear hole while holding its other end over fire until more than half of this burnt away; repeat process using new reeds till no more liquid remains as mentioned previously regarding stones in ears treatment.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of insects such as fleas and similar creatures if they have small bodies treat accordingly as mentioned previously for wounds; however should their size be larger so that one can feel them employ extraction by tweezers which offers a quicker means than other methods available for taking out these bugs from ears.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms embedded in the ears, when you treat it as we have mentioned in the section and chapter on distillations, and the treatment is not effective, you must then examine the ear in sunlight; if any worms are visible, remove them with fine forceps, and if none are seen, take a reed like this one:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Push the finest end into the ear according to the extent of the patient's suffering, then suck steadily on the entire reed; do this often until all the worms emerge.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey and come out, pack cotton around the reed as I have said for stones; and if they still do not emerge as we have mentioned, apply the distillations that the ancients have tried and tested for expelling worms, which you will find in the chapter on distillations; and distil your oils and medicines into the ear with this entire instrument, of which there is an illustration:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, and desus overs por distiller; and por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, and se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, and ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, and li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, and presse ta main tempreement tant that li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; and lou sente li malaides dedens, and soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; and garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	For the stuffing of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without holes in their ears; and this same thing happens to men due to the stuffing of a wound or something stuck inside the ear, and this blockage sometimes becomes complete within the ear, so it cannot be seen; and sometimes it occurs outside the hole, and one can see it clearly.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which becomes complete and cannot be seen is quickly cured in many ways, and for this visible one it is necessary that you put the patient's ear towards the sun; look inside: if you see any apparent inflammation, treat with all of these remedies as follows:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be sharp and pointed in front and behind all over, so that it does not cut the ear; if the inflammation is due to something stuck or a piece of flesh within the ear, then take some subtle pincers, and gently remove it until all the matter is gone.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the scabs are complete inside the ear, take a subtle, light razor and warm it slightly over fire, then place it in the ear's body.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you perceive the scab which causes the patient itching in their ear, pierce it slightly, ensuring that you do not injure the nerves of the ear; then insert into the ear a tent according to the size of the hole, and moisten with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this every day until the wound is healed, taking a tent and moistening it in rosewater, sprinkling ground vitriol over it; if you see swelling of the ear, then remove that tent and insert another one soaked in ointment composed of sweet oil and wax, continuing until the swelling is reduced; then treat them until they are cured.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and employ other treatments that stop the flow of blood as outlined in the section on distillations.
de la char des papieres	Of the flesh of writings.
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This elderberry, which comes from writings of the eyes when they are moist and dry, you must treat with tongs and forceps, and scrape off a portion of its roots with a spatula; then apply crushed vitriol to the affected area.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if there is no improvement, then perform a subtle lenticular cauterization, and the cautery instrument after incision should be moved; often this requires multiple treatments, as any remaining root can regrow; when they are burned with fire, these roots are destroyed and will not return.
de la gresle	Of the hailstorm
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times on papers there are some things that appear like hail in their form and hardness, and for this reason, this disease is called "grandine", and it is an assembly of thick moisture on the paper above and below; the works [to be done] are as follows: take care if the hail changes from one side to another, and this is a light thing to know; make then a wide incision, then lightly pare the skin of each part, then take [it] with pincers, and cut.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	if you cannot cut without piercing the paper a little, it does not harm the patient; and if the incision is large, gather it with a suture, and treat until it is healed; and if it is small, do not force it, for the ointments will restore it quickly and generate flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hail is descending into the ear towards the upper part, it turns the eardrum upside down, and grasp the hail with a pair of forceps, and cover and press from one side to another; and if the eardrum is removed by incision, it causes no harm; and when the hail is extracted, rinse the eye with salt water, and treat the place where infectious matter breeds in flesh until the patient is cured.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a fat that forms in the membranes of the eardrums above, and this happens more often in children than adults, causing great harm to their eyes, and they develop catarrh in the mornings, and are unable to look at the sunlight due to tears filling their eyes; because of this, they lay on their faces with their eyes closed, and sleep upwards, and their eardrums beneath their eyebrows become moist as the swelling and appearance have covered the exinach that appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the place with your fingers and feel the exit of air between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	The manner of the operation is as follows: have the patient place their head on your lap; then take a linen cloth and prepare a funnel-shaped device according to the amount of air that escapes from each part, then place it over them; press with your fingers from one side to another so that the exit of air gathers within the circle; then make an incision in the middle of the moist area using a sharp spatula, but do not make it larger than the wound you make when opening a vein; and cut the skin perfectly until you reach the exit of air; and in various cases, air escapes from the incision, forming like a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract it then as one piece of cloth padding between your two fingers on the outside, and turn your hand to the right and left so that it is spread out; and be careful not to get close to the gap, lest you reach all the way to the spatula near the eye, lest you injure it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	If the splinter does not come out at first in the gap, then widen the gap slightly until it appears; then extract it as we have said, then dampen the cloth with oil and water, and place it on the spot, and restrain with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And for such people who grind salt and place it on [the wound] to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it reaches the hot abscess place, so treat it with soothing plasters until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	The hairs of papers.
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When in papers hairs grow that are not natural and are neglected, they harm the eyes, causing various ailments such as customary tears, softening of the papers, and albuginea, leading to eye destruction; and the treatment is done in four ways: either with cauterization by fire or with medicine according to what was said earlier about cautery, this being done either through incision and stitching or with canes, as I shall explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must place the patient's head on your lap and turn their paper from the eye into your left hand; if it is turned over, that is good; but if not, you should insert a needle with thread near the margin of the paper where hairs grow close to those hairs and draw the thread over all of the paper, then shave it flat using the razor; next make an incision in the portion below the paper, underneath the unnatural hairs, carefully cutting away everything from the large lacrimal up to the small one; afterwards withdraw the thread and place beneath the paper a little tent made out of cotton and cloth, then press onto the paper with mastic, like myrtle leaf, while also making sure that the shape matches the quantity you want to lift the divided paper.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; 
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cut off what overlies the small powers equally according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the forceps, and the thing is not equal, take a needle with a thread, and insert it into the face; and pass one end of the thread through the large cavity, and the other end through the small one, then gather the threads equally between your two hands; lift your hand evenly, and raise all the skin you have clamped upon as we have described, then join together the two lips of the wound with sutures, and treat it until it is healed; if an abscess appears at your incision, ease it with cerote and similar soothing ointments; sometimes it happens that the hair on the paper becomes converted: in such a case you must use what has been said about the incision; but the suture on both sides is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure of gangrene is in this form: you should turn the paper and make a slit inside according to what I said; then you must make two canes per art, and two thin ties as long as the length of the paper, and with the width of the spatumile; cut at both ends of the two pieces where you hold the threads together; then assemble one and another carefully on top of the eyelet made in the paper, stretch the two canes from each side formed thus, leave it for several days, and the stretched leather will die and blacken, rot until it falls by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it takes a long time, you should cut with force, then treat until it is healed. Once the wound has fused shut, and the paper lifted, hair shall not grow there anymore. This is how to make two canes as shown in this figure, according to these dimensions of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, and place a delicate silk thread in it, then gather the heads and tie one to the other delicately, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then arrange another fine silk thread briefly into the shaft, and tie the ends of the thread; then have the patient put their head on yours; and be near the sun so that the work is illuminated, for it is a delicate and small work, then insert the needle throughout the shaft close to the root of the hair, and make it pierce the paper swiftly until you draw it above the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the shaft, and place in the shaft this hair, if there be one or two or three or more; then withdraw your hand so that the hairs come out towards the whole shaft into the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	Et if the scab is treated and the hair does not come off with it, you will treat the scab from beneath along the entire thread that you have placed there until the scab comes away from the hole above and you see it by sight; then you will remove the scab and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days until the hair has re-rooted in its place and flesh has grown back over it; and if the hair is small, take a single long natural hair from the eyebrow and fasten it with this one that you are leaving there so that they are extended together then remove them.
de la porriture de l’oil	From the ulcer of the eye.
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease called "aleacrati" or the ulcer occurs in the eye, there are two kinds of it: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And [these injuries] occur suddenly due to wounds, or cuts, or cauterization, and by similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method of treatment is that you should split this adhesion, and separate its lips, then insert linen threads inside, binding it until it heals; and do not use anything in their care that dries out or constricts [the wound].
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do not, the illness will return worse than before; but use softening substances such as fenugreek; and boil water or other liquid with flax seed in it, and ointments of daffodil bulbs melted into any oil, and wrap a thread around this, then treat [the wound] with these.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the secret of your treatment is that you should take care not to let it heal in the same way as before; and these treatments we have discussed are only meant to prevent this illness from returning in its former form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is called "axacrati" is truly natural, or an accident.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wounds, cracks, cauterization and similar things; the way to work on it is as follows: take a needle with double thread, insert it into the flesh, making it pierce from left eye socket to right one so that the thread emerges in two parts of the flesh; then stretch the skin above all the way along the needle, cutting it at about 1 inch wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is required, it is good; but if not, take a razor and place it in the gap, turn over the paper and make two slits on its side; let these be at either end of the incision you have cut, making angles such that when they are joined together their shape will resemble that of an 'I' in Greek script; then remove this flesh according to how much is necessary beyond what follows the paper's edge, then join the two parted sections with a thread of woollen yarn and let it heal by means we mentioned concerning softening medicines and bandages until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the illness comes from a crack or a suture or a cautery, you must open a full incision under the hairs of the skin, and according to what is mentioned before; then separate between the two lips of the wound, as I said; and one should perform the treatment according to the form of the illness, for it has very diverse forms, and the wise master prepares all his skill to make the figure return to its natural state; and the patient himself, depending on what is needed in terms of work and instruments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	Suddenly from the skin
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this healing occurs in men's hands such that the skin over it is stuck to the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must put the tip of a razor under the skin and lift it up; and stretch it with pincers until you cut off what has dried out by using a subtle spatula which should not be too sharp nor blunt so that the patient does not suffer from the spatula being too sharp wounding the eye; and let your incision where you peel away this assembly be light, such that the skin returns to its natural state; and heal all of this assembly, sometimes with saltwater in the eye, and wash with clean water, and use a collar; then place between the skin and the eye a linen tent, and put on the eye wool soaked in egg white; and after three days stop using the collar and things that dry out until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the fingernail of the eye.
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the fingernail is according to two manners: it is nervous and similar to a hard surface, and another which is not nervous, but resembles frozen white moisture, when touched with iron and thought to be scraped by pincers, yet cannot; both appearances begin towards the large tear duct, and grow little by little until they cover all vision, light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is such that the patient places their head in your lap, then opens their eyes; lift the eyelid with your hand, then coil the fingernail onto small pincers, and extend it above; then take a needle, and attach a horsehair, or cow hair, or ox hair, and strong thread; double the tip of the needle slightly and insert it into the nail, piercing through with the entire needle, and tie the nail with a thread and extend it above, and scrape out all the hair alongside the nail that attaches to the eyelid and the eyelashes down to the head, then remove the remainder at the root of the tear duct with an extremely thin spatula and small forceps, and leave the natural flesh around the tear duct so that through the incision the body of tears may not come; sometimes the fingernail is extended only onto the pincers, and thread, as we have said; then scrape it out with a very fine spatule such as this:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And make sure the spatula does not touch and break through the fleshy tissue, and that the plumule is not pierced; after the incision throw into the eye a pinch of ground flax seed, and some colloidal lead, leaving it there until the next day; then treat with what is needed to heal.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, and the pincers cannot enter, this type of similar nail is often treated by medicine; it grows as I have described earlier in the chapter, and if you see it cut, treat the eye of the patient, and take a light spatula slightly sharp according to this shape:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And lift the nail carefully above it, and if you see that it does not diminish in size and the root presses against it, then drip from your mouth into the eye a mixture of colloidal lead and red ochre and ground flax seed, and plug the eye until the next day; then resume the other work according to this same process, until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing opposes you in the eye, such as a warm abscess, then lance it and treat first the hot abscess until it is healed; then resume the work as before until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of flesh from the eyelash bed causes great harm to the eye, then suspend it with a hook and remove part of it but not all at once so that no moisture comes out; afterwards pour red collar ointment into the eye which is made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	Of flesh growing on the cornea.
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	In some men's eyes there is sometimes born red flesh which covers the cornea and grows onto the iris and turns outward, resembling a rose of pomegranate; the treatment for this is that the patient should place his head in your lap, then you open his eye, take all that flesh with suitable hooks and hold it firmly; cut away the first piece of flesh, and keep cutting with a razor until finished, being careful not to injure the eye during the procedure; make incisions using the spatula we described earlier for nail surgery and with small forceps such as are used to remove warts, as shown in this chapter's illustration; when all incision is complete and all flesh removed, fill the eye with powdered wax or pour red collar ointment and similar corrosive medicines into it, and place cotton soaked in raw egg white on top of the eye so that you may be sure abscess hot has been prevented. If any remains behind, if pus appears above your incision site and you suspect abscess hot, then ignore the eye and treat the abscess with things soothing to abscess hot; return later to your work when it is healed, thus proceeding until all such flesh on the eye shall have been cured by these means.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nonetheless, it is necessary for you to relieve the treatment of each weak eye in a natural way; and in an accidental manner, with the use of iron; and do not put your hand into any of these procedures until you see that this limb can bear the procedure.
des voines des eulz	the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Above the eyes are red veins that cover them, hindering their function and weakening vision over time.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is thus necessary for you to first examine the eye, where it is affected, whether there are other diseases aside from this redness; then treat it in such a way: instruct the patient to place their head upon your shoulder, and then suspend those veins with a thread according to your expertise, making sure that the stitches are subtle yet firm.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And there are two ounces per degree in the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then carefully coil the forceps around those veins, wipe away the blood hour after another, until you see those veins recede from the eye; and take care not to wound the eye with the tips of the spatulas, and perform this work at midday in front of the sun, being very diligent so that you cut only those veins; and when you have done this, instill green and red collyrium into the eye to corrupt that which remains from the scab.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you are unable to gather all of this in that hour, then apply a plaster onto the eye made from things soothing eye pain, and leave it for some days until the pain is relieved and there is assurance of warm abscess, then resume according to this manner which comes before until it is healed; and this is the form of forceps:
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the eye's fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The surgeon names this "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and burning medicine as I have previously said, and it is not healed, there is pus within that you must cut over the abscess, where it should die, and drain all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, take all the instrument of which this has the form; and it is called an "aspere chief", and made of iron until the head, and pointed like a file as it is in its present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the spot of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that corruption is removed; do this several times, then restore the area with drying medicine.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	if the wound is closed, and flesh has grown over it, and the body of the fistula is sealed, remaining so for forty days, and there are no new developments or abscesses, and no adverse symptoms occur, then know that it is healed; if not, there is another remedy to bring the fistula back to the navel opening in this manner: you must uncover the bone a second time with an iron instrument, and sharp medicines, and when uncovered take one chisel like this, which has three angles, and let its handle be tapered as shown here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then place it on the bone near the ridge, keep your hand an inch from his eye, then turn the chisel until it pierces the bone and the patient feels a breeze passing through if he holds his hand over his navel; you may then restore the opening with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when flesh grows and hardens at the opening, push the matter to the navel; this is an easier process for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the eye's exit
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eye opens entirely and there is no obstruction or narrowing of the nerve, you must bind the patient; then treat it, then apply cups or hatchet without injuring to suck out, then place on the eye a poultice made of alum, aloe, incense and storax, and then strain the eye, and put ointment on bandages and cloths; and the way of the cloths is that you take quite soft cloths, and double each in four, and then put one upon another according to the amount the eye needs; then apply a firm splint above, and repeat cups to suck without hurting; then remove the cups and keep the eye strained day and night, and if the bandages soften, you must strain it strongly; then remove the bandage after day and night, and if you see the eye repairing, that is good; if not, repeat the poultice and cloths and binding and cups until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Through the rupture of the dry membrane
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When ruptures occur in the dry membrane, it opens up and expels papery substances like resin grains, which is frightening to see; if you notice this, the procedure is such that you insert a needle into the root of the affected area from below until it reaches above, then insert another needle with double thread from the eyelid margin; pierce through and leave the first needle in place according to its position; cut the double-threaded spot and tie a piece of membrane around it, securing it well, then withdraw the needle and apply moist wool soaked in egg white onto the eye; leave this until the threads shrink along with the membrane, then treat the eye with comforting agents until the wound is healed; sometimes the wound needs to be constrained by membrane on either side with a circular piece of cloth until it heals.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes give great cause for concern, pierce them with a thin spatula that reaches deep into the eye, remove the white moisture and lower the eyelids, then insert it immediately; afterwards extract it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the eye socket
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease, called "alcunnati", is nothing but the bow of the eye which is assembled in the eye, similar to descending water, and it is not water; and the way of appearance of this work is that you make the patient sit on a straight chair, then take their head between your two hands, move them until you see the bow coming above your eyes; then be stuck, do not lower or uncover the light, and let the patient see things as usual; and if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the descent of the bow is not arranged as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you sit the patient between your hands, then take the fine spatula and make an incision on the horny tissue with one poke through the continuation of the conjunctiva along with the horny tissue and the cornea, until the bowels come out; and when they have emerged, pour into the eye warm water mixed with honey, or water boiled with fenugreek and honey, then let it be cured by another cure until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	Eye waters.
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen similarities to eye waters in the dissection, and what is required to pierce them; so we act according to good health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	You should make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from light so that the sun doesn't shine on them, and bind their healthy eye tightly shut; then put the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are left, or in your right hand if they're right; then take into your right hand, if the eyes are left, the instrument called 'almagda', or to your left hand, if the eyes are right; then place the tip of the instrument near the cornea with the thickness of a line on that white part of the eye at the base of the lower eyelid, then push the instrument which is called 'almagda' skilfully, and turn your hand so that it pierces into the white of the eye, and feel that almagda goes to the empty place; and the measure of the way almagda must be exactly of the space between the plum-stone up to the end of blackness; and this is the cornea of the eye; you will see the bone on that paper due to the clarity of the horny tissue, and then put the instrument where there is water, then squeeze it from underneath using another way.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the water descends now, the patient sees it before them and an instrument in their eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting briefly, if the water rises again by another route, insert the needle with force and when it is well inserted and stops rising, remove the almugem gently while turning your hand back and forth; then put in a little gem seal agaric, and raise from this eye within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then cover the eye with outside swabs or linen moistened in rose oil and egg white, and bind it together with the sound eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are of our time, put on it ground cumin with plenty of egg white.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the emollient cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, as there are such people who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called 'alberit', of which this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Puncture only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep, but make it a subtle incision; then put in the emollient as we have said; and upon completion of this work, provide the patient with an attractive pillow, on which they sleep on their back in a dark place; remain still from all movement, eat light foods, and refrain from moving their head either to the right or left; be bound according to his constitution for three days; then unbind him in that same dim house, test his vision, make him look at certain things, and then bind him again until the seventh day; this must not be done during the hour of treatment or after incision, but you should raise his head slightly, so that the fluids drain swiftly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	If an abscess becomes hot, you must open the eye before the seventh day and treat it with a remedy for abscesses; when it is soothed, then remove the bandage from your sight and put on its face a small dressing to cover it for one day, and remain in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	Then take it out of the house gently and gently, and if it converts to this state; and know that no disciple should get involved in such a case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And then a man came to us from Iran who told us that in his country they make perforated almagda, through which water is sucked out, but I have never seen any such thing in our land nor read about it in the books of the ancients; perhaps this is a new invention.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the likenesses of the forms of alchemy, so that those who do not know them may see them; and they should be made properly of brass.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the head of these be made with this same subtle skill, and the last one in three angled corners.
de la char sor le neis	on top of it is a horn.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes there are born tails of different sizes joined together, and some of these look like scorpions with many feet; and if it has a tail marked with colored stripes, and the body is soft of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In this case, of these tails which are soft and not marked, you must make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun; open his nostrils, and take hold of those tails, and pull them hard; then cut off what you can sustain with a sharp subtle spatula on one side, until you know that tail is completely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if any part remains that cannot be cut off, open it with all the subtle instruments gently so nothing remains; and if you are overcome by suppuration or hot abscess, treat them as required; and if these are malignant abscesses, hasten to cauterize until the blood is extinguished and all flesh removed, then pour on vinegar or sharp wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the vinegar works and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healed; and if the moisture does not penetrate as required, know that there is new flesh on the bone above which prevents the instrument from reaching: then you must put a piece of linen thread slightly thicker than a hair into the nostril until it reaches its end, and tie two knots near each other at a distance of about an inch or less; let the patient grasp the head of the thread in his nostril with all his might, pulling gently until he draws it out through the nostril into the mouth; schools boys often do this which is easy for those who wish to perform it; then hold one end coming from the nostril with one hand and the other from the mouth with the other, and follow carefully the knots which are on the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this so that you know the nose has corrupted this flesh, then pull out the hair, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and put it back in the nostril as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode all remaining flesh; then insert into the nostril a piece of lead for some days until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them; and this is how to make an instrument to clean out the nose, with which oils and medicines are applied to the nostrils:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be made of silver or copper, resembling an open lamp, like a rod, and similarly constructed; and if you wish, make a closed tube, and let the instrument be full for cleaning out the head; and have one hand on the head to hold it when heating oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh above the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Often a disease arises on the head near the nose, which is called "telul", and it grows and becomes large until it appears visible; thus, you must cut it out at its beginning, and remove all of it, then apply a cauterizing agent or burning medicine to the area; if one waits too long to treat it when it has grown large, be wary if it is hard, of dark color, and lacking sensation: one should not touch it with iron, for this is an entrenched abscess, as when it is cut once, great harm comes to the patient; but if the abscess is soft to the touch, not of dark color, and you see that it can be entirely removed, then empty the patient and remove it without fear, and treat the area with drying and constricting agents.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when the surgery involves one of these cartilaginous operations, it is rarely beneficial, except for some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	You must therefore see to it that when it happens to someone, you examine whether the wound is fresh and full of blood; then join the two lips together with a suture, then treat it until it heals; and if the lips are already separated on one side or the other, you must remove all the flesh from their hearts until they bleed, then bring the two lips together in a suture, and hold them fast, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder and ground incense upon them; put over the powders a piece of strong plaster or some other sealing plaster, and leave it there until it scabs over by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of suturing is such that you bring together the edges: either with needles, as we have mentioned in abdominal surgery; or with thread, as I have instructed you.
des apostemes des levres	An abscess of the lips.
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Malefactors often have abscesses inside the lips that are hard and resemble grains of wheat, some small and others large. In such a case, you must turn back the lip, incise each nodule with scissors, grasp it with pincers, and cut off its core in all directions until blood is drawn; then leave it alone for now, dressing the wound with powdered glass mixed with vinegar to cauterize it after the incision, until the bleeding ceases. Then let it heal easily, treating the place with dry substances until it heals.
de la char des gencives	For the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often there arises on the gums compacted flesh, which the ancients call 'albulus'; you must hold it with forceps and cut it at its root, letting out pus or blood; then apply ground vitriol, or other drying and astringent powders; if this flesh reappears after incision, which often happens, cut it away again and cauterize: it will not return after cautery; these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	Of abscesses
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes growths are found on the tooth roots inside the mouth between the gums: ugly, rough crusts; and sometimes teeth turn black or yellow-greenish as the decay reaches the gum, making them foul-smelling; you must seat the patient between your hands with their head in yours, and extract teeth or crusts until nothing is left; do this for blackness, greenness, yellowness and other stains so that they are cleansed; if what is causing the problem at first is not removed, begin to dig again on the second day, and the third, until everything has been dug out; know that teeth require different forms of instruments to extract them according to their condition, as the scaler used for external scaling has a different shape than that used between teeth; you must be provided with these shapes and others.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you delay the extraction as much as you can, for this should not be done; because it is a very high-level substance until such time as one has no excuse to remove it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is compelled to extract, you must be certain of which tooth is causing pain.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain deceives the patient, and they think it is in a healthy tooth, leading to the extraction of a good tooth; yet the pain remains because the evil root has not been removed, as we have already seen with these unfortunate people; and when you are absolutely sure which tooth is causing pain, you must scrape around the tooth with a sharp spoon to protect the gum from all sides; then use your fingers or delicate forceps for the first gentle pull and pull until it is well loosened, then clamp the forceps tightly; and have the patient's head in your lap between your knees, holding it firmly so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth properly without breaking it, and if it cannot be removed, take one of these instruments and gently insert it from each side, moving it as you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is perforated and worn down, you must fill it with small pieces of cloth where the hole is; then gently grasp it with forceps so that it does not break when extracting; and one must work very carefully around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	Be careful not to break it and leave a part behind, for this could cause the patient greater pain than before due to the root's cunning nature.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	Beware not to act as the ignorant surgeons do, driven by their haste and boldness, sometimes breaking the jawbone, and failing to treat what we have described; but instead bring about severe diseases due to roots left behind or a broken jaw, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is removed, clean the place with wine or egg white and silk; and if bleeding occurs, which is frequent, fill the space with powdered vitriol; and if this doesn't help, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, with which one extracts teeth first, should have long points and thick handles so that they do not double when you extract the tooth. These are the forms.
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should have thick parts so that they do not bend when extracting, and be well-made iron, and toothed in order to hold onto the teeth.
de la racine des dens	From the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains after extraction, you must place moist cotton soaked in butter over the wound for a day or two.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	Until the wound is softened, you can insert pincers which are called "algefri", and the head resembles a bird's beak. The interior should be shaped like a rasp, and this is its form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with these tongs, then you must uncover all the flesh around the root and insert the instrument known as "althali", which is shaped like this:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And it should be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root comes out with this, it is good; but if not, assist yourself with all of these instruments, which are shaped as follows:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you need help with this instrument that has two edges, its shape is as follows:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other iron instruments which are in front of the reason for the teeth, and this instrument that looks like large tongs, its shape is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let these instruments be strong so that they do not break, and know that there are many dental instruments; also other instruments which are not mentioned; wise masters find their own tools for themselves according to the work that needs doing and the illness it is needed for, because there are such diseases where no instrument was taught by the ancients due to its diversity; if a bone is broken or damaged then seek out the appropriate instruments I have told you about, which will help with gestures, of which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And they should be thick and well-gripping to hold the bone, so it does not escape, but can be held and removed; then restore the place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, take out all of these instruments:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not according to their natural form, and are ugly, especially in young women, you must know if the tooth is newly formed after another one, and it's not in its proper place, and cannot be treated or filed: then extract it; and if it is connected with the other tooth, take this instrument which has this shape, and resembles a small beak, and let it be made of iron sharpened at the end.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And strike it several times with a hammer for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you don't move the others, and if it is apparent that one can file it, then use this type of file which has this shape.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is also similar to the file used for making needles; and with this file gently shape the tooth several times, so that it doesn't move as much; then smoothen it at the end with any razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and hurts the tongue, you must file its roughness until it becomes even, so that it does not hurt the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth loosen
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the front teeth loosen due to impact or fall, and the patient cannot bite down without them falling out, and you have treated them with constricting medicines, but it is ineffective; then they must be secured with a golden wire, for silver wire turns green and decays, but gold never changes. Let the wire be neither too thin nor too thick according to the space between the teeth; and if you wish to align the teeth, take the wire and pass it doubled between two healthy teeth, then place the tooth or teeth that are loose in between them, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then restart covering up to the part where you began, drawing your hand carefully and gently so as not to move it; make sure the ligature is at the root of the tooth to prevent escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then cut the gums of the thread with a pair of tweezers, and assemble them, and rejoin them between the healthy tooth, and place it so that it does not injure the tongue; then leave it as tight as possible for as long as it can remain there, and if it loosens or the thread frays, tighten it with another thread; it would stay in place and serve thus for its entire duration, and this is the form of teeth and the arrangement of two healthy teeth, and two moved ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, it is replaced in its place gradually over time, as we have said; and do not allow anyone who is unwise or impatient to be involved, sometimes a tooth made from cow bone is used and placed where the missing tooth was, and tightened as we have described, and it will remain there for a long period.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cut the bond of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	in no instance is this bond found under the tongue by nature, one is born thus; or due to an accident of a healed wound; and the work involved is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and have their head in your hand, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous ligament broadly, so that the tongue is released from its attachment, and if there is hardness or knot, and it's due to sudden wounding, insert the uncinus and cut this ligament widely; be aware that the incision should not be too deep on account of the artery below; when you've done this lift with rosewater and oil, or cold water, then place a linen strip beneath the tongue; let the patient hold their mouth thus each night to prevent healing.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if there is bleeding, apply powdered vitriol directly to the wound. If blood continues to escape, use the small-spotted cautery, which is suitable for this purpose. Then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it appears to be of an abnormal color, either black or hard, and the patient does not feel anything, do not touch it as this is a cancerous tumor. If it seems to turn towards whitening, and there is moisture present, scrape away the surface with an unguent, and open it from one side; if blood escapes during your treatment, apply ground vitriol until the bleeding stops then return to your work until everything is treated properly. Then clean the area with oil and silk, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	Of abscesses in the throat.
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes boils arise in the throat which are called 'godath', and properly they are known as the two tonsils, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if it is a hard abscess of small size and pale colour, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is swollen, do not touch it with iron due to blood loss; instead leave it until it matures, then you can remove it, or else it would burst on its own; and if it is white and fluid-filled, and the root is subtle, prepare your instrument for cutting, but first ensure that the abscess is warm and has calmed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, and his chiés soit en ton sain, and li oevre la bouche and lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, and presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; and soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, and you press the tongue against this instrument,  et tu vois l'aposteme, and you see the abscess, si pren l'oncine et lou fiche en l'amandre, then take the lancet and insert it into the almond, and traie fuer au desus plus que tu pues; pull strongly upwards as much as you can; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, and draw something from the linen with it, puis la cope a l'estrument, then fit this to the instrument, de coi ci est li forme, for this is its shape, que semble unes forces; which resembles a pair of forceps; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, yet the heads are curved, et l’un endroit l’autre, and one against the other, et sont molt agut, and they are very sharp, et est fait de fer inde ou d'andainne: and it is made from hard iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, then fit it to the pincers, for this is its shape:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	Et soit trenchans d'une part, et d'autre part nom; and when you have cut one of the almonds, so cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, warm water and vinegar, and if there is bleeding then gargle the patient with water or boiled pomegranate rind, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood flow ceases; then leave it to heal until it is cured; and sometimes other abscesses occur in the throat aside from the two almonds, so cut these just like you would for the two almonds.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that had formed inside her throat; this is to say it was a small abscess; and it almost entirely blocked the entire throat such that the woman could not breathe through the passageway which was closed off, nor could she eat or drink, and she would have died if left like this for one day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscesses were so high up that two rods had been inserted through the nostrils.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I hastened immediately, and inserted a probe into one [nostril], then the probe was pushed further, and a large portion of bowel was extracted; then I reinserted it through the other nostril opening, and the patient's mouth was opened and their tongue pressed down; after that, I placed the probe in the abscesses, and cut off a part, and only a small amount of blood came out; thus, the passage to the throat of the woman was cleared, and she began now to drink water and then wine, without ceasing to drain from this abscess for a long time; and the abscess grew again, filling up the space I had emptied, until it became very large; then I incised it and cauterized inside the throat: thus it remained without growing; and I left that place, not knowing what God would do after me.
de l’uve	Of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When rheum descends to the eye, and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is beneath, thick, and round, it is called an "eye.
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cleansed as we have said in the division, and the cure is not beneficial, and you see that the abscesses are eased, and it is subtle, then you must cut it; and for one that is round, assembled but not long, and is bloody or of false colour or black, you must avoid incising it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is necessary, therefore, when you see it according to the manner I have described, regarding its whiteness and length, that you seat the patient facing the sun, and press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned before; then insert the needle into the eye, draw it out from beneath, and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned for incising the testicles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you must not cut away any more flesh than the superfluous part that lies beyond the natural limit; for if you remove more, it will damage the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient fears the cutting, then you must use an instrument for cauterization to ease their fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The manner of the cautery is sharp fire.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And have the patient put their head in your lap, and then press their tongue with an instrument like the one we mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and sear it with hot sharp fire, not too thick nor too thin; and this is how the instrument should be shaped...
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; 
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or cauterization; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calmly wormwood, hyssop, oregano, rue, chamomile and similar herbs, and mix all of them together into one pot with oil, boil the mixture slowly. The pot should be well glazed with strong clay and have one instrument with a pointed end made specifically for this purpose placed inside it in the middle:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be made of silver or copper and have one end inserted into the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the eye through the nose until the eye is withered; then repeat this often until the eye dries up, making sure you do not perform this procedure at the beginning of a hot abscess as many things can happen. It should only be performed in the absence of heat from an abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put a piece of egg shell inside the patient's mouth so that it does not become too hot; for the egg shell will not allow the steam to harm the mouth, and this is a good treatment along with healing.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Often there is something caught in the throat, like a bone or fishbone or any object; therefore, you must remove what you can see, and press the patient's tongue towards the sun with all your might so that the object moves; and for what does not appear to you and remains stuck in the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit until the food is digested in the stomach; perhaps then the object will be expelled through vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel orange peel, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread; and tie a thread to the sponge, and then have them swallow it; when it reaches the right place, it will become unstuck, and then you can pull it out; and if it does not come out by what we have said, take an instrument made of lead in this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instruments be bent at the head so that they can more easily enter the throat, and keep the patient's head elevated; beware not to touch the epiglottis lest it swells up, nor push any bones inwards; it is better for the patient to insert the instrument himself because he knows where the problem is; if you must do this yourself, guide the tool carefully downwards or pull it back gently until all instruments are level and nothing is blocking them.
de la sansue de la gorge	From the mucus of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Never has mucus been medicine, as I said in the division of cures; and when it does not benefit, then look into the throat of the patient with the sun, after you have pressed their tongue with an instrument as previously described.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the leech, draw it out with a very small hook, or use delicate tweezers suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, take a plucked hair, and push it into the patient's throat; then insert at its end a hot iron, and repeat this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient should keep holding water all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full glass of cold water, and open the patient's mouth, pouring it in so that they swallow it, and move their hand frequently as you do this; as soon as the leech senses the water, it will fall out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not fall out as we have said, then suffumigate the patient with asafetida, using the instrument I mentioned in the treatment of an eye disease; do this many times, for it will surely fall.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot with visible coals, and cover it with a perforated lid in the middle, where the head of the instrument should be placed; then add your fumigant, and have the patient place the end of the cane in their mouth, closing their mouth so that smoke does not escape but rather reaches their tonsils; and now the tonsils will descend, if they do not, recommence fumigation several times; let the patient suffer thirst, eating salty things only, drinking no water; then it shall be necessary for them to expel them through this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument used to treat tonsils is such that when they can be seen, it resembles bent pliers for entering the throat; and has a resemblance to the beak of a bird, with roughness like a file, so that whatever it grasps, it cannot let go; see its form here:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters of abscesses.
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	There are many types of abscesses, according to what the following text recalls from various sources in this book, and they vary in perforation and size; They fall into two categories: one is based on its appearance itself, and the other due to moisture content.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second category refers to their location within the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For abscesses of the head are different from those of the anus, and abscesses in fleshy places differ from those that occur in joints, with each requiring specific treatment when acting upon them.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if you should not pierce abscesses while the boil is soft according to its maturity; but for those that must be pierced when ripe and do not become soft with maturation, such as abscesses near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses occur near joints, and they are left to rot around it, perhaps the ligaments and nerves of the joint become corrupted, which is why this causes contractions in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	When the abscess is near the main limb, and you delay perforating it until it dies, this will harm the main limb; when it is near the foundation, pierce it before it dies; you must not puncture an abscess formed without digestion being complete, except for one that is near the foundation, which can rot completely, elongate inside, and become a fistula; it cannot heal quickly.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you must know the opening for perforation of a dead abscess according to its development, and that is when the pain subsides, and the fevers depart, and the reduction in pain and redness, and of swelling and sharpness at the head of the abscess, and other signs; you must make the perforation where it depends on the place of the abscess, and where it appears mobile; the perforation should be along the length of the body, and if the abscess is on hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there are no folds.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those who bend, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the fleshy part, it is better that you let the perforation remain until it is confirmed to be fully digested, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before that, the body of the poison would be elongated, and it is full of much filth; and by chance, the lips and depth of it may harden.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And for any abscess that is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you must bring small abscesses, small holes; and in large abscesses, large openings, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and for those abscesses where it is necessary to cut out the heart, as when it has become like a rag and is dead, then you must do as with boils: and there are some that split into three angles, and others that are removed like the leaf of myrtle, such as abscesses from ants; and there are those in which one makes a round incision, other incisions and similar cuts.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For sometimes the spirit falters with the release of bowels, which may cause the patient's death, and you will not realize it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and once you have pierced your abscess, wipe the wound clean, and examine if the abscess wound is small; and if it is a full-size lesion, insert tented linen or old cotton threads; but for large abscesses that are highly porous, you must pack each pore with a tent so that they press upon one another; and when you have cut through part of the skin to access the abscess, and turned back its edges, then fill this space with old cotton or dry shreds of linen without moisture, bind it tight for three days; then remove these dressings, cleaning and anointing until healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs during your procedure, apply cold and light pressure, dampen some cloth, and place it on the bleeding site multiple times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the bleeding persists, apply a compress and healing salve, along with the powders I mentioned on various pages in this book. If it is winter, and the skin or abscess is very sensitive, you should place warm tents and cloths soaked in wine and oil over it; but if it is summer, and the skin is fleshy, use cold water, oil, wine, and oil-soaked cloths as described before for three days; then remove the compress, dry and treat the wound as necessary until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this you must know universally about the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how one should proceed with treating abscesses, and here is the chapter for it.
des soros	scars
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where the head of the chief comes abscesses, small and resembling webs, like a hen's egg, and many such things exist.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fatty and such where there is moisture like pus; and of such kind which are hard and stony to cut into, and there is no doubt if the artery does not act contrary.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of cutting is such that you prove with every instrument which is called an "entromissoire", from whence its form comes after, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if moisture is present, they do it above the bone.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is evacuated, thoroughly scrape away without leaving anything the skin that contains this moisture, for it returns if nothing is left behind; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if present; if not, in water and salt, apply it to the wound, and leave it there until the next day; during which what remains of the night will pass.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then repeat the cotton application, as before, on the second day and the third, until you know for sure that nothing remains from the night; then treat the wound with ointment suitable to it, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds onto fatty tissue, remove it in this way: from above the bone; cut off your pincers, and scrape away all around, focusing entirely on extracting the root where it lies; but if an artery opposes you, do as I have told you before.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do so for an abscess if it is pus-filled, and to cut and clean as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the incision on the pus-filled abscess and moisture is lighter, for they contain little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if for some of these abscesses or sores where there is no moisture, and I recall one abscess on the head of an old woman; I found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and it could not be broken; and if any had struck it with a tool, they would have caused just as much damage as a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	With other abscesses coming on the head, especially those that appear on children's heads and at the roots of ears, make sure to open them as low as possible so that the pus may drain out; and treat them accordingly.
des scrophules	Some ulcers
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Often these abscesses occur on the neck and underarm, and in other areas of the body, and they are very common and linked to one another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	Each ulcer is properly within its own layer, like the brain and abscess of the head, as we have said; there are many types of these ulcers.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones that do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In those which you see a good condition to touch, and are similar in color to the body, and soft on all sides without being aerial like the nerves of the neck or arteries, and it is not deep; you must cut it from above, and strip off its skin on each side, and spread out the two lips of the wound with pincers if necessary, as we have said for abscesses of the head; draw it apart piece by piece, being sure that you do not cut any nerve or vein, nor should your spatula be sharp so the flesh does not escape, and take care not to go too far forward lest you cut what you must not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not stop working, apply ground glass or some blood-clotting powders to the wound; compress the wound and let it be until the abscess subsides, the wound softens, and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	Once the bleeding has stopped, return to your work until it is completed; then examine with your index finger if any small knots remain, cut them and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large wound in the root of the knot, do not cut that knot at its root but tie it with a strong double thread and let it fall by itself without harm; then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut out the entire scrofula, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, seeing that there remains no excess due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	you must proceed to cut out the root of it, and draw out the sinews, and sew as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For those scrofulous sores that have excess matter, pierce it where the sore dies out; and pierce like the one mentioned before, depending on how it is, then apply ointment with tents and similar things, so that what remains of the corruption is corrupted; and when the wound is well cleaned, treat with an ointment that promotes flesh until it heals.
de squinance	of dislocation
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke of the surgery to the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is a record of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those with dislocation, it is necessary that the cleft of the throat, which is called the epiglottis, be examined; and no aid should be given by this means, because all the veins and passages of the patient are affected by abscesses hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both tonsils.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the passage of the airway, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to avoid the danger that comes from suffocation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is therefore necessary, when we wish to split the epiglottis, that we split it below three circles or four with a small transverse incision between the two circles or according to the quantity of the incisional line of the syfac, not in the cartilage; and these are suitable for the section of the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessels are long from above.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is afraid, it is necessary that he stretch the skin of the throat entirely along its length, then split the heart until you reach the windpipe; and remove the blood vessels, if you see anything, and then cut the syfac as we have said; and this is demonstrated by the section of the flow of air in the windpipe which must pass through the broken place, and by the defect in the voice; and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed since strangulation was suspected, gather the two lips of the wound from the heart, and cut them entirely without the cartilage; then administer medicines that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says one should not do this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dying, and breathing fails.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Therefore, make an incision on the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe, and he breathes through the wound, thus avoiding death; and for this, the ancients instructed to leave the wound open until the malignancy of the disease has passed, which takes three or four days. Then they would instruct to close the wound and treat it until it is healed; I will tell you what I witnessed.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw a young lady take a knife and thrust it into her throat, cutting part of the windpipe; I was called to treat her, and found her as good as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found blood flowing from it; I knew she had not cut a vein or damaged her throat, and breath was escaping through the injury.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried to sew up the wound and treat it until it was healed; all that remained for the young lady was a hoarse voice, and she later returned to her normal state; from this I conclude there is no fear in cutting through the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	Of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called a "throat hernia", and it is a large abscess with a yellow color, and it occurs more often in women; it can be caused by two factors: natural or accidental, where there is no underlying disease.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	The accidental occurrence is of two types, one resembling our fat tissue, and the other similar to an abscess caused by a ruptured artery; there is fear involved, and cauterization with fire should not be attempted except in small cases, and this must be proven and examined thoroughly: if you find it similar to our fatty tissue, and it cannot open into any vein, then cut it as we cut a boil, and remove its entire covering membrane if present; treat it promptly and cure it appropriately until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	de us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many ways we have, of which I will speak about all the similarities; and now it is necessary that I tell you all the differences between us and them.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that they are troubled with heat and fever until the ebullitions have passed, and the putrefaction is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With us there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sac and is according to the colour of the body, and begins like a spot, and becomes large; and they are of two types, either hard or moist, and very different in colour as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	You must, when you come to treat the neck, first examine and assess all the instruments known as 'entromissoire', according to their form described in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the way to inquire about new abscesses is that you take hold of the moistest place you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers back and forth until you feel that the instrument has pierced the core, then it should be according to the size of the abscess; then withdraw the entromissoire, taking care not to spill.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If running moisture is short and regardless of its color, treat it as I have said for other abscesses; if after withdrawing the entromissoire no moisture comes out, know that it is fatty, so make a cross-shaped incision and take hold with forceps, lightly peeling off each side and taking care of the coat where it lies so you can pull it healthy with the neck; and if you cannot pull it whole and healthy, then pull it in pieces so nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if anything remains, the nerve will return many times; and if a piece is left behind, and the blood irritates you, then fill the wound with some sharp corrosive powders, tighten the wound, and place soothing warm poultices over the abscess, curing it with other treatments until it heals; and if the nerve is large, cut the two lips of the wound, and treat it with something that encourages flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the beating vein opposes you or causes trouble, hasten and apply crushed vitriol to the place, leaving it there for two or three days until the wound rots, resting the boiling of the blood; then return to cut away that which remains of the night.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See here the shapes of the instruments to be inserted, and there are three types: large, medium, and small; and among them are three squares called "albaret", and one called a "breb", and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, for probing abscesses and fistulas; and they are like needles used to sew up sores, made of brass, iron, or silver, but those that are yellow are better, and more proven is black lead for probing the crookedness of fistulas; and these come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of incisions are very similar, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and there are incisions with two curves in three ways; and there are incisions with three curves, also in three ways; and there are incisions with two curves, and incisions with one curve only, also in three ways; and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The heads of these have what one makes them for are sharp, and there are some that only cut flesh from one side, which one peels off the nerves, so as not to damage the vein or the nerve; and of these introducer ones there are the blunt probes in many sizes, so that the patient does not feel it during the opening of an abscess; and they are of three types: large, small, and medium, as you can see; and one should only use them on fleshy areas such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar places; and sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling bark from a fistula, according to this form, with which one stops the bleeding.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is placed back into its original position to heal through the closure of veins, arteries, and sometimes according to this large framework:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, making them appear like female breasts; and they remain ugly and swollen, and for those who wish to treat it, one must follow this method from point b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	scorch the fat, and fill the wound with a meat-based medicine, then bring together the two lips of the wound by stitching them shut, treat it until it is healed; if the breast sags downwards, having become softened due to its size like in women, you must cut it into two parts above with two similar incisions; so that one part holds onto the other at each end, such that the larger line contains the smaller according to this diagram from b to g; then peel away the skin which is between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, as well as any other necessary treatments until it is healed; if it has not yet healed or the incision was not completely made due either to the patient's unwillingness to rest or else due to a loss of blood, then you must fill the wound with moist cotton saturated in corrosive ointment, leaving this in place until it reduces the remaining flesh and fat; treat it as before so that it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	Of abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from beneath the armpits are like hard scrofulae, some with sides and some containing moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b. to line g.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the entire bowels within the abscess are emptied, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day; then remove all of the cotton, and treat it gently until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is similar to a scrofula, then treat it as we have said for scrofulae incisions; and if the wound contains bowels, apply the cautery as we have described before.
de la routure de l’artere	From the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is ruptured, and the skin above it is sealed, abscesses often form, and the vein also becomes swollen and infected; you know this by the fact that when it's due to the artery, the abscess runs lengthwise through it; and when you feel it with your fingers, you sense constriction; but if it's the vein, the swelling spreads outwardly; it is madness to cut open this abscess, especially where it lies beneath the armpit or neck, or in many other places, as it would be too extensive.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	You must therefore avoid iron treatment, and likewise with the one at the head, you should also avoid it; in the case of an artery swollen from a cut through the skin lengthwise; then make an incision with an lancet, and separate the artery carefully from its membrane until it is exposed; then insert beneath it a needle, and pierce it all the way to the other side, binding the artery with double thread at two places, as I have taught you in the treatment of the two arteries found on the temples; then lance the space between the two bindings with an introital dilator until blood flows out from within, and open up the abscess; then apply a cure that stimulates suppuration, so that the bond falls off; then treat what remains appropriately, until it is healed; if the abscess stems from the incision of the vein, you must hold in your hand as much of it as you can along with the skin, then insert the needle beneath the place you are holding by hand, and pierce it, and attach a double thread so that you draw it out to the other side; then bind the abscess, as I have told you, with bindings on either side of two parts of the thread; if you fear the thread will fall off, reinsert another needle along the full length of the abscess beneath all the incision of the first needle, and tighten the threads at four places; then lance the abscess so that superfluities flow out, then cut away the excess from the heart, leaving what is bound; afterward apply a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil, then bring treatments with tents and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	From abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also abscesses come in the artery and vein, abscesses form on nerves when they are injured or due to excessive work, and similar causes.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	They occur more often in shoulders and arms and anywhere there are joints, and these are serious abscesses with a colour similar to that of the body, and it causes pain in various positions; when pressure is applied, the patient feels pain, but it is not at the surface but beneath the heart. It moves in all directions, neither forward nor backward, below or above, and one that forms on joints should not be cut with an iron instrument - this could cause contraction; while one forming on the head or forehead requires the application of a spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, hold it with forceps and cut it at its root; if it is large, suspend it to a hook, skin it, then remove it and sew up the wound, treating it until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	large boils hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	They occur sometimes in the stomach and nowhere else on the body, and it is a disease called "fungus" due to its similarity with mushrooms, and it has subtle roots and large heads; there are both small and very large ones; I saw a man who had two on his belly which looked more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, they were white, had fine roots, were finely cut, and emitted moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I cut them and found one weighing eighteen ounces, and the other six З., and for the operation of incision, you must consider whether the patient is moist, and the color of the artel is white and moist from delicate roots; then cut it with a wide spatule, and have cauterization by fire in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For cutting often results in too much blood loss, and if you faint from it, then quickly proceed with cauterization; and if you see the patient terrified and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made thread of lead, and bind the artel as we have said, leaving it for two days; then restrain it, and do not cease tightening the lead thread until you cut the artel, and each by his own accord; and if the roots are large, there is fear in cutting especially for the belly, but you can well cut half of it, then cauterize so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and make sure to avoid cutting the thelul which is of a fugitive color and has little sense or milk-like appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an aggravated abscess, and I will come to the treatment of cancer afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	when one faints from hunger
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the abscess comes from cauterizing wounds or fissures in sores, and it is on the belly with some excrement present, as can happen in other injuries, or from blood flowing from veins or arteries according to what was mentioned before, or due to flatulence; and if this happens because of a rupture in the sore and an issue with the bowel, then the color of the abscess resembles that of the body, it is a light sensation without pain, and appears through various openings.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the discharge from the intestines, then it becomes more varied, and when one presses it with their fingers, it retracts and reappears, or perhaps it is constipated, greatly enlarging at the entrance of the bath and due to strenuous labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a minor issue, and it becomes evident when you press it with your hand, as it does not constrict; but if it is because of blood, then these signs appear: the abscess is large and hard, and it is fixed in one place according to its quantity; and if it is due to windiness, then it feels soft to the touch, and you must observe whether the appearance indicates arterial or venous bleeding, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	You should let the treatment rest.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	Because there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance indicates the intestine or anus, you must instruct the patient to hold their breath and lie down straight, then bleed all around the abdomen; have them frequently rest their stomach between your hands, then go around the marked place with your whole handspan, then extend half of the abscess over the entire large inch; bind it tightly with a strong thread or sturdy silk cord, and secure the knot above; open the extended half of the abscess on top of the knot, insert your index finger, and search for the intestine; if you find it caught in the knot, untie it and push the intestine out of the belly; if you find the anus, grasp it with your thumb, then trim any excess; if the artery or vein causes hindrance, carefully go around them, then return to your work and take two needles, insert two strong threads through them, and pierce the previously made cross with the two needles; extract the abscess in four places on the needles, and if you can see it, remove the needles, and leave the place until it decays, letting the dead flesh fall off by itself; or cut away the soft putrid matter when it becomes thin, then treat the wound as needed, and close the abscess as we have said; drain any blood or moisture that you find, then treat the area accordingly, and heal the place.
dou chancre	Of cancer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have mentioned the similarities of cancer in its classification and how it should be treated with medicines while avoiding iron-based treatments. We discussed cancer that invades the marrow requiring great caution during treatment, ancient physicians stated that when a cancer is superficial like those found in the breasts or groin area and similar locations must be completely removed at an early stage; however if they are large and old then you should not approach them as I have never cured any nor has anyone ever done so before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when it is in a place where it can be removed as we have said, the procedure is to purge the patient of black bile once, then make them bleed if there is any evident fullness, prepare the patient by placing them in an appropriate position for the operation; next cut away your ounces of flesh or skin affected by cancer and remove all of it without leaving anything behind, allow blood to flow freely from the wound, and press the area well with your hand or something else, if blood loss makes you fear arterial or venous incision then cauterize until bleeding stops, treat further using other cures until healing occurs.
de ydropisie	Of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have explained in the division the appearances of dropsy, and how the accumulation of water is formed, and the signs of each appearance, and the treatment that can be done with medication or surgery; we will only write about the latter as it's necessary to avoid surgical intervention for these two types of dropsy: tympanites and yposarche since they are deadly. Therefore when you treat this type of dropsy which is called "eclites" with medications, but the cure does not work, then consider if the patient is weak or has another disease apart from dropsy such as diarrhea and similar things; do not operate on him since it's risky due to his condition. And if you see that the patient is in good health and he only suffers from dropsy without any other illness, nor being too young or old then proceed with this treatment: lift the patient straight above your hands, and let one of the assistants press firmly on his stomach while directing the water towards the lowest part of the hips. Then take a sharp surgical instrument with thorns in this form
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be two parts cut.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	A point and yet not so deep that it may reach the intestine when inserted, nor can injure it; then look to see if the dropsy is derived towards the intestines: you must cut above the navel three fingers directly below the waistline; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, let your incision be on the left of the navel by three fingers; but if it's for bile, then on the right, and do not allow the patient to lie upon the incision that superfluities may not flow to that weak spot. Then pierce through all the skin with the instrument, push in and raise up your hand with the whole spatule between the skin and the subcutaneous tissue just like when flaying a quantity of one nail or around it; then pierce the subcutaneous tissue so that the spatula reaches an empty space, which is the place for water, then pull it out and insert this instrument whose shape is as follows:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it resembles a fine silver cane, and is made of light brass or copper, and has at its base one small hole; on the side, three holes; two on another side, and one on the other; the handle is cut like a feather, and this is the form of the incision as described by the writers:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	at the top is a handle, so that when the instrument reaches the liquid, it can be lowered onto the instrument immediately; empty half or a third of it, because if you remove more than necessary at this moment, perhaps the patient will die due to their spirit leaving their body, or they may become unconscious, or near death; instead, drain according to the amount of virtue he possesses, and following what his condition indicates regarding his virtues, as well as his pulse; then pull out the instrument and hold back the liquid, which is now retained by the heart, blocking the hole on the surface that I mentioned earlier, which you should pierce in this way; restart the process with the instrument the next day if you see the patient suffering from it, and draw out a small amount of liquid; repeat this every day, but be careful not to leave more than just a bit of liquid there.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt the patient's condition, and they retain a lot of water, cure them with burial in warm sand or clay, and through excessive sweating or bathing and sun exposure, and restrict their drinking; treat them with drying medicines until they are healed, cauterize over the stomach, liver, and spleen after extracting the water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Of the swelling of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born without an opening in the penis, or with a small one, or it may not be in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	In such cases, it is necessary to pierce the penis with a very fine speculum of this shape:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place the subtle cloth plug into the opening and bind it, keeping it there for three or four days. When they wish to urinate, remove the plug, allow them to urinate, then replace it; perhaps this is not necessary as the urine that flows out will not permit the closure of the plug.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those whose opening is small will be treated with the cloth plug as we have said, it shall widen.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have their opening in its place are wounded because some are born with the opening at the head of the penis, thus they cannot urinate without lifting their penis upwards; nor can they engage in sex due to matter unable to reach the glans, and this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of work is such that the patient often lies on their back, then extend the head of the penis and the testicles as much as a feather's length, so that the opening stretches in the middle, as it should; and be wary of blood loss which happens many times, and if it occurs, stop it with what stops bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	Pimples of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these abscesses occur on the penis, and it is an appearance of ugly flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so you must take a fine lancet, and lance and clean them all, then apply moist cotton with Egyptian ointment; then treat it with diaphonic ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the alboth is malignant, of putrid colour and offensive, you must apply a cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cauterized it, and if the alboth is situated at a point where part of it lies beneath the skin and part outside, then you must first remove the part that is inside; once it has healed, treat the part on the exterior.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it together, the head of the penis is not secure from being pierced, and blackening and corruption occur within the shaft and the glans; therefore, all that is black and corrupted must be removed, then bind upon this a plaster made of honey and flour which has been mixed with pomegranate rind and figwort, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	Et if bleeding occurs, apply the lunar caustic according to this method:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauterizations help in two conditions: namely, for bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you insert into the penis a lead pipe, and let the patient urinate through it; and when the skin becomes dry at the tip of the penis which occurs in those who have not been circumcised, or due to a wound or an abscess, then one must strip off the skin with a sharp instrument so that the ligaments are loosened, and the head of the penis is freed from all sides; and if this is a severe case to treat, then it is necessary to strip the skin with a spatula at some point on the top of the penis and the skin; then carefully separate between them, and place a fine piece of moist linen with cold water over it, so that it does not dry out again.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not like other wounds, it is not a matter of disconnection; nevertheless, when we perform this work willingly, and especially on children, it is necessary that we do our best, and the lightest operation for their well-being.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not perform circumcision on their children, for it was not practiced in their law, and we have only what we acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For the most part, masters and scholars performed circumcision around the age of one, or earlier, with forceps, using only one instrument; this would damage the glans because it has two layers, and sometimes the top layer is torn off, leaving the lower one exposed.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Now you cut it again, and the pain is doubled; and in the cleaning which comes after does not reach the tip of the limb; and in the nail's cleaning perhaps the iron escapes, and the work is done wrong, and many times thus arises a need for no cleansing that I want.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the cleaning done with thread I have found the goodness of experiment for the threads cut precisely both above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, you cut equally in one go all that is tense; but let the thread be well narrow around the skin; and the manner of first work should make the child think that you only bind the thread around the finger, then you can do it any way possible; then have them stand between your hands straight up, and hide the threads from view between your hands or below your feet so the child sees none of the tools; then put your hand to their finger and blow on the heart, and draw it upwards until the head of their finger is inside; then clean it well of dirt that has gathered there, tie a loose signet with double thread at the spot marked, then bind under one pouch to another link; hold this with two fingers by the second binding, thumb and index finger, cut between the two threads, lift the heart upwards gently and draw the head of the finger; then let blood flow in spurts for it is pus; put powder on top and over the powder a cloth glued with half an egg cooked tempered with rose water, mixed with good fresh oil roset, leave this until next day, treat with other cure till healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of forceps for cleansing is as follows: the two jaws should be turned and sharp, and the jaws should be just as wide as the handles evenly.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of cleansing is when the inner core escapes during incision; therefore, you must extend it with your nail first to prevent the core from causing an abscess; cut it evenly and if you cannot hold it with your nail, use tweezers then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they surpass three days and that which is below the handle becomes swollen, leave it until the hot abscess subsides a bit, lightly peel it off; cut as much as you can while avoiding the part of the handle for it will not harm anything.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure therefore the place of fresh wounds with powder, as we have said in the chapter about powders, and if it reaches beyond the heart excessively, and rises above, it will do no harm; cure it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	in retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to obstruction by a stone, or frozen blood, or bowels, or new flesh, or similar things, as we have said in the classification; and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is caused by a stone stuck in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over their knees; their feet should be placed on their back, extending their belly from above the back, and the patient should restrain their breath as much as they can; thus, the neck of the bladder is constrained to expel the stone upwards, which allows the urine to flow out; and if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instruments called a 'syringe', which is formed like this: made of thin, silver hair-like material, like the quill of a bird; it should be one palm long and half thick at the end, and very fine at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, and place a loop of thread at the head and tie a small bag of cotton or wool around it; et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; then push the head of the catheter through the tube; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringune, then trim away excess wool and push until you reach the end of the tube, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, and grease the catheter with oil or butter and egg yolk, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, and have the patient sit on a chair, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; then lubricate both the bladder and urethra with oil or olive oil and warm water; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, gently insert the catheter into the urethra until you reach the base of the penis, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; then secure the penis with a rolled cloth towards the body; puis boute la siringune avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, and insert the catheter until the patient feels it reach their bladder to begin emptying, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; however this is not always successful as the passage in which the catheter must travel may be twisted, puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, and pull on the thread to draw out all of the wool bag, et li urine en suit la laine, then the urine will follow the path of the cotton or wool, puis l’estrai fuer, and remove it, et fai corre l’urine; and let the patient urinate; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, and repeat this procedure until the bladder is emptied, et soit aligiez li malaides. and provide comfort for your patient.
des maladies de la vessie	Of bladder diseases.
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scabs or blood come into the bladder, and rot is gathered there, and you see it distilling water and medicine, then do so with all of the instrument which is called 'clepsydra', and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and it has three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you can see; and let the opening through which the medicine passes be such that it stops up the penis well without addition, so that one may draw out the moisture, and drive in what is necessary; and when you wish to introduce your medicines into the bladder, put the end of the funnel into the moisture, and pull on the string which is attached; thus will you draw the moisture through the funnel, and then push strongly the attached string again; so will the moistures enter inside, and come now to the bladder, such that the patient feels it; and this is the form of the subtle enema with which one gives an enema to the bladder: here it is:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	Et est d'argent ou d'archaut, and it is the head that is higher; and below at I has fallen to his chest; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture with which you want to fill the bladder for an enema, then tie it between the two breasts firmly with a good double thread, and heat this moisture on the fire in the pot; then insert the head of the enema into the penis, then press your hand over the bladder so that all the moisture comes out gently, until the patient feels that this moisture has come to the bladder; and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle with it, pierce it roundly around; then insert a strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle like one assembles a thimble, put inside what you want in oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; do as you did for the bladder by pressing with your hand until the moisture comes out of the bladder.
de la piere	of a stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already spoken about the types of stones and their extraction along with medical treatments; I have explained the difference between kidney stones and all the signs, and which stones require surgery; as well as those in the bladder and urethra; now I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	The stone which is formed in the bladder occurs more frequently in children, and it is a sign that the urine flows from the bladder like water in its subtlety; it appears sandy, and the patient's penis becomes sore, and they urinate often, then become constipated; this flow of sand affects their foundations (bowels); the cure is light for children up to four years old, very serious for the elderly, and average for young adults, those between youth and old age; and the treatment is easier for those with larger stones than for those with smaller ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to remove all the bile that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it obstructs sometimes in seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and raise him up and move him backwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it emerges from the upper part; then let him sit between your prepared hands, and his hands should be below his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely inclined downwards; then seek and feel for it inside; if you sense the stone in this space, then hurry now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not fall with the first touch, then moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand if the patient is a child, or with your middle finger if the patient is an adult male; and insert it into their anus, seek for the stone, and when you sense it with your finger, guide it to the neck of the bladder; then press upon it with your finger, and push it out where you wish to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to stretch out his right hand, raising the testicles upwards, while with his left hand he removes the skin that is beneath the testicles in the area where the incision is made; then insert the spatulemile, cutting it, which has this form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	Make an incision between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the scrotum; let it be straight over the stone, and your two fingers should be close to or touching the anus, and let the incision crosswise so that it is wide on the outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, but not too large; perhaps the pressure from your finger at the anus will cause it to jump out without effort; and know that there are some stones with angles and edges: they are difficult to remove; and there are others which are underneath, similar to a pea, and round, from which the opening is slight.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; 
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, one must take care of it, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either they die, or urine returns due to an open wound that cannot heal; however, try your best to extract it, whether by pulling or scooping with forceps, until you remove it in pieces; and once you have completed your work, fill the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, then compress it, and apply a moist cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rose water with cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; afterward, lay the patient down on their neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you untie it, rinse the place well with oil and water, then treat it with ointment of alum and ointment of basilicon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses and inflammation occur in the wound along with blood clots in the bladder, causing retention of urine which is known to be discharged with urine: so push your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains there, the bladder will rupture and become infected; then wash the wound with water, egg-white and honey, and treat him in all ways you know until he is healed; and every time you treat him, bind his two thighs together and apply the medications to the site.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small and it is stuck in the urethra of the penis, preventing urine from passing through; then treat him as I say so you can cut it many times, and one is excused for cutting due to this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already experienced this thus.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take an iron rod according to this form, with three corners fixed into a firebrand:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone (calculus), so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the rod gently into the penis until you reach the stone, and turn the rod with your hand in the stone back and forth until you can pierce the stone from another side. Thus, urine will flow immediately, after which press your hand on what is left of the stone that remains inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is broken immediately and comes out with the urine, then the patient will be cured of their illness. If you cannot do this for whatever reason that prevents you from doing so, tie a thread below the stone and another above it, then cut open the penis towards the stone between the two threads, extract it with an instrument, untie the thread, and clean the coagulated blood that is in the wound; treat it until it heals.
de la piere des femmes	From the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Sometimes it happens that a stone forms in women, and if this occurs, the treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden for three reasons: one is because perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that we cannot find an expert woman who can be revealed to men, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third reason is that perhaps we cannot find a skilled woman in this art; and the fourth reason is that the stone of a woman is deeper than that of a man, so a deeper incision must be made, which is very feared. And if necessity arises for this, you must take an experienced midwife, who is difficult to find, or failing that, seek out a chaste subtle maiden; and present her with a wise woman who knows the life of women, or a woman who understands some of the art, and instruct her to do what you command regarding the investigation of the stone; carefully check if the woman is a virgin: then she must insert her finger into the anus and search for the stone; and if she finds it, force it out from under her finger, and advise her to insert her finger where the patient hurts, and press with her left hand firmly onto the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	S'elle la trueve, si covient qu'elle la mueve de greit en greit des l'entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu'elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; 
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	Know their symptoms to understand the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	If blood overpowers you, quickly apply crushed vitriol to the wound and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops. Then return to your task of breaking up the stone and use the instruments I mentioned earlier when removing a stone from a man's urethra so that they can assist you with their work. If blood overtakes you again, and this is because the artery has been cut, then place the powder on the wound along with tent and bandage residue; don't restart what was previously started, leave the stone alone without pulling it out as it could potentially kill the patient. Then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	Once the heat of the blood has subsided, and it's possible to proceed, return to your task and continue breaking up the stone until it is removed.
de hernie carnouse	Of fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ramus aqueous is nothing other than a collection of moisture or white serous fluid, which lies beneath the heart of calves and contains the egg; and it is called 'serous fluid', and at times is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that this is another egg; and it is the skin of the calf between the white serous fluid that we have mentioned; and it has no name.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramus is due to weakness that comes from calves, and this matter is spread.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And at times it comes from striking the calves, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a shade tending towards yellow, or it is bloodless, or black, or white aqueous, and more happens; and these are the signs to recognize this collection, for if it is in the white serous fluid that we have mentioned, then the abscesses are rounded, with a shape like an egg, and does not open the calves, for it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the flesh itself, then the abscess has burst along with part of the egg, and for this reason people think it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the hide of the testicles and the white skin, one can feel it well; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, try all the intromittent organs as explained before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the intromittent organ, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, the patient must be bled according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then lay him on his back on something slightly elevated, and place a lot of cloth under him; then sit on his left side, and command the assistant to sit on the right, and stretch out the penis toward one of the two ribs near the heart of the testicles; then take the lead spatula, and cut through the skin between them until you reach the fist-sized spot, and make your incision straight while removing the skin as best you can; then pierce this spot full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water, and then insert your fingers, and stretch out the spot upward; do not touch the heart of the testicles, but only the spot itself; cut it up into pieces especially its delicate side, for if you don't cut cleanly, the water will return; and if the egg should jump from your work, push it back in place when you've finished with the spot; then sew together the two lips of the heart of the testicles in a single stitch, then treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the testicle corrupted by another disease, you must tie the suspending vessels, fearing the flow of blood; then cut away all the supporting tissue, and extract the testicle, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if urine has accumulated in two parts together, know that these are the two tubes; then cut away the other part just as you did with the first, equally, and wipe the blood, and place on the wound wet linen soaked in rose oil; and put over it other wool moistened with wine and oil, and place it on both testicles, and cover with doubled cloths, and bind them all together with a bandage in this manner:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths and fill them with wool charpie in this shape, sew the ends together to form a pouch; one part goes over the base up to the back, and the other to the area of the groin; the other end is placed on both sides, and all is secured by threading the belt loop; sometimes this tube is treated with cautery instead of an iron incision, when you take a fine scalpel cautery, cut through the skin of the testicle, heated as we have said, so that the white substance containing the urine is exposed; then take the cautery in this shape and pierce the sac at an angle, and remove the skin with this hot fine cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And strike the cup in all ways you can, until everything is extracted; be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; know that this work is safer; avoid excessive bleeding and any damage to vital organs such as spleen or liver; if something goes wrong, such as abscesses or heavy bleeding or anything else, treat what is causing complications, according to what was said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	If the patient is afraid and does not want to wait for this treatment due to its horror, then administer perforation as I told you; when you are certain by the signs we mentioned that serous fluid is present, make the patient sit on a raised seat; proceed to pierce the abscess in the area below with a spatula-shaped object of equal width, and insert the perforation deep into the body; let the openings be wide enough for all fluids to flow out; then place cotton on the spot, secure it tightly, and leave some for the remaining fluid to drain, then treat until the wound is healed; if the white cloth does not allow water to exit through the mouth of the wound, you must insert a feather or the instrument used to draw liquid from dropsical patients, whose shape was mentioned before; widen the wound, know that water will return, and it will be gathered after six months or so, when it is gathered as before, thus shall the patient pass their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of abscesses of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	You know that in the treatment of this branch there is fear in many cases, which makes it seem better to leave it alone; and I will tell you about the procedure and similarities regarding abscesses.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come on the body, especially on the testicles; this is due to frequent occurrences.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is known to be caused by excess bile and acid, which spreads to the testicles due to impact; the abscess takes on a colour similar to that of the body; there is no pain felt in this case, it is simply a severe abscess; perhaps also some hard or stony abscesses, with a dark hue, arising from an artery, or by swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is due to arterial injury, it can be recognized by the presence of hot inflammation when you press it with your fingers; and you must not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	He who is afflicted with edema of the vein can be recognized by its manifestation upon touching it with your fingers, and you may perform an incision according to this likeness, as well as on other parts; and that you should cut out the heart of radishes, then stretch the egg upwards, and draw out the white stuff from within, and remove all yolk from the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already hardened with these roots within it, you must therefore draw out the egg and cut them; and if there be air in the white or what is inside of the vessels, then you must remove all that mucus from it, and also scoop it out roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the child is from behind, you must cut it entirely and remove the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is complete, cover the wound with wet wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the buttocks
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a similar manner to the brain, with softening of the buttocks, and the patient becomes severely ill when they defecate; and the treatment for this disease is just as fearful as the one before, yet we will tell you the procedure according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then place the testicle supporter between your two fingers and the vessel closest to the scrotum, holding it firmly and stretching it out strongly; then cut through with a broad sharp spatula across these vessels so they are uncovered; then peel away skin from both sides as we have said in extraction of arteries located on temples; then insert a needle with double thread into place and bind to first location where incision is made and bind again at the other end; then make cuts directly down center according to length of body, removing corrupted ligaments; treat wound so no vessels are damaged that nourish either testicle for this causes no harm; but if all vessels become incised you must remove testicles from both sides lest they lose their nourishment due incision of vessel and dry up without being able to assist themselves.
de la routure dou syfac	Of joint dislocation
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The symptoms of this rupture are caused by the incision that leads to the navel or the extension on the abdomen in the region of the inguinal canal, causing the intestines to descend through this rupture into one of the scrotum's cavities; and this rupture is either of the navel itself or its extension, and it arises from these two types of causes: impact, jumping, straining, lifting heavy loads, and similar activities; when due to abdominal strain, symptoms arise gradually over a long period rather than suddenly; and the abscess becomes equally severe towards the surface as the intestines are pressed upon by the navel.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the symptoms when it is due to navel incision are that there is sudden pain at first, and the abscess becomes visible beneath the skin close by, caused by the emergence of intestines outside the navel.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines descend with the rectum, and are trapped there, causing great pain to be endured by the patient, especially when they are constipated.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments with fear, one must avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Have the patient pull their intestines with their hands through the wound, if it is possible to do so; then have them lean forward between your hands and lift their thighs; extend the heart upwards, and cut all the skin from the rectum's length; then insert the forceps into the wound as much as necessary for opening, making sure that the anus can pass through; after this, remove the flesh that is beneath the white layer of skin on the rectum, until the hard white covering is exposed on all sides; with your index finger, separate what is behind the testicle and between the second covering from the egg's white cover and between the first and second coverings. Then move your right hand inside the rectum cavity and stretch out the white covering upwards using your left hand, lifting the testicle to face the wound opening; ask the assistant to extend the testicle upward and undo what is tied behind it; look with your fingers for any intestines wrapped around the hard white covering, and if you find anything put it back in the stomach underneath; then take a needle with thread made of ten strands and insert it through the rear part of the covering that comes after the rectum's skin toward its tailbone end, cutting four threads from the appearing hair so that they are assembled on top of one another in a cross shape before tying them together firmly at two points. Next cover the threads with fat/flesh and tie this again very tightly such that none of their nourishing vessels can enter or an abscess would form; then place more thread along what we have described as beneath the rectum cavity's heart, which is about one finger length long from its end to its beginning (at two fingers-widths), after these two bindings leave some covering under the heart cavity equal to a large thumb size and afterwards all others according to their circumference. Finally cut into that section below rectum skin so blood and bile flow out as previously mentioned, then apply oil soaked woolen cloth onto wound/abscess followed by binding which we spoke about above
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white skin is cauterized as we have said, after incision, due to fear of blood loss.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens often, and leave the ligament until it breaks on its own; and if it delays in falling off, let it be soaked in warm water, and apply what we have said earlier, until it breaks; then treat the wound with another cure, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	Of hernia cruris.
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch I have never seen anyone who dares to treat it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is formed like a branch which grows together with the vine, in such a way that you bind the vessels, after cutting above them slightly below; then cut in half, and treat the abscess of what festers, until the vessels fall out; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Lorsque les ruptures surviennent dans l'aine, comme nous l'avons mentionné, la peau se détache ; aucun organe interne ne descend vers les testicules et s'il y en a qui descendent, c'est peu, et cela guérit à chaque heure ; mais si le patient reste trop longtemps à ce stade, alors la blessure ou la fistule augmente de taille, au point que l'intestin descend également. Cela se produit à cause de l'extension de la fistule qui est dans l'aine, comme nous l'avons dit, car elle s'étend et devient molle ; la peau se détend et s'ouvre en raison de cette extension. Le traitement consiste alors en un cautère, comme nous l'avons mentionné auparavant, mais il existe aussi une autre méthode : le patient est souvent couché sur le dos entre tes mains ; ensuite tu incises la zone autour de la rupture, qui est gonflée sur les trois côtés, et retires la fistule qui se trouve sous la peau ; ensuite tu prends un fer et l'appliques à cet endroit ; puis tu coupes la première et la seconde couche de peau qui sont apparentes sur le dessus du fer, puis tu enlèves le bout du fer sans rien couper autour de la plaie ni rien étirer, comme je te l'ai déjà fait savoir pour le traitement de la rupture intestinale ; ensuite on traite la plaie.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you treat the wound, clean it thoroughly and heal the injury so it is restored to health.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The incision is constricted, and there is no visible appearance of the fracture, and cauterization is suitable in this place, being closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of softening the tough skin on the calves
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often the tough skin on the calves is softened in some people because the tendons within are weakened and it is visible; and when one wants to treat it, they must make the patient lie on their back, and then cut away the softened skin from the natural skin underneath; then bring together the two lips into a suture, and if you wish, stitch away the superfluous part of the softened skin with three or four firm stitches; then cut between the sutures, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed and remove the thread.
dou chastrement	Chastity.
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	You know that chastity is forbidden in our law, and for this reason, I would prefer not to discuss it in this book; and it is necessary for two reasons: one being that the surgeon should be able to answer when asked about it, and know its cure; the other is because we often need to castrate certain animals to aid us, such as goats, sheep, cattle, and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that castration is performed in two ways: either by attraction or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the method we perform by attraction, we make the animal sit in warm water until the testicles are softened and hanging; then take them with your hand, holding them gently so they are released and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphrodites are according to two manners among men: one is that between the two testicles appears also like the figure of a woman's nature, where there is hair, and sometimes urine comes out.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is in women, and it has on the wrist also like a penis and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for men and women is that you join together all the flesh, and treat it like other wounds; in the second manner, for men whose urine passes through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	Of the contagion.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tentigene is a flesh-adorned part of the natural body, so ugly to behold; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	You must hold the excess of tentigene in your hand or somewhere nearby, and lightly scrape it; do not go too deep, lest blood flow forth, then cure with another cure until it is healed; and to another part that grows at the mouth of the wound, remove it, and perhaps it will be gone, and it appears like a cow, thus the ancients called it "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	You must scrape it, as we said for tentigene, and cure until it is healed.
de erratique	of erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic is when the nature of the woman's passage is not perceived or is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental due to illness that has developed; or it is through an attached chariot, or a subtle device made from silk or similar material, and it exists within the uterus, or on its sides, or underneath, wherever it may be; and it prevents conception, childbirth, and possibly menstruation; and this condition is recognized by observing the discharge.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the obstruction is visible nearby, reach for it with your fingers or with forceps.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a device made from silk or similar material and is close to the two lips, act quickly like this: put your two index fingers together, have the woman lie on her back with legs spread; then stretch open the two lips so that you can see the subtle device and move it past the obstruction; then take wool, dip it in oil, and place it where the device was, and make sure the woman stays at home each day until it does not heal over.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the tumor is hard and thick, you must cut it with a spatoula resembling a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the obstruction is of recent birth, suspend it with a hook and cut it; and have medicines that stop bleeding, such as dragon's blood, incense, mixed with egg white; then apply a wide lead cane so that the wound cannot close; thus let it be long-lasting, and bring him a dressing of dry linen; then treat other treatments until he is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when recent flesh appears in the marrow, it must be cut according to this method, unless it is deep-rooted abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the deep-rooted abscess in the marrow, one must not apply cauterization.
des emorroides	The hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins from which blood usually flows out, and when hemorrhoids become old, they turn into boils; we have mentioned their similarities elsewhere, along with the signs, and I will now tell you those that can be cured.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and boils, when they are perfectly even in the flesh and do not appear to the touch, cannot be cured with iron instruments.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the mouth of the flesh, which can be felt, are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	You must therefore put the woman in a cold house, then stretch the boil with pincers and cut it at its root; then apply powder made of medicines that restrain bleeding, such as dragon's blood and frankincense and similar things; then have her feet against the wall for an hour, after which you put her in cold water; if any more blood comes out, make her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate rind, gallnuts and similar things, then take barley flour and mix it with honey and egg white to form a plaster which is applied on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops bleeding, it is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If it does not stop, make him bleed by applying cups to his back and breasts without causing injury; then take linen, soak it in the juice of plantain or hawthorn with old wine, and apply it to the affected area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess subsides, treat the area with ointment until it heals; and this one called "albathir" is red, similar to rough skin on a head, so you must cut it as I said for "thelul", and then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	abscesses of the womb
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscess come from the womb, such as cancer, stony abscess, herpes, cysts, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in this chapter.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is necessary then that I speak in this treatise of the hot abscess that appears on the buttocks, which is not one of the abscesses that fall under surgery; and if you wish to know the treatment for iron, look to see if the abscess has grown quickly from its beginning, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	So do not hasten to pierce it, but let it die until the pain is eased; and then make the patient sit on a seat, and have two small stools for them to lean on, supporting their back and bringing their feet up to outside of their legs; and let their thighs be spread apart, and put their arms underneath their knees, and bind them well with a good bandage; then suck it out towards the right side, and apply the instrument used to open the mouth of the abscess, from which hereafter comes its shape; and when you wish to apply this instrument, you must first mark out a line to know the depth of the abscess, so that what goes into the instrument doesn't go too deep inside it should not hurt the patient; and if the instrument is larger, then cover the bottom of the abscess with cloth, so that the instrument does not injure them; and let him hold the horn of the instrument on top, while you hold the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess opens up, and you treat it with soft hands, you must cut it at its head, or let it burst on its own accord; once the pus is expelled from within, you should apply moistened bandages soaked in rose oil, or dry bandages soaked in green oil; place the moistened bandage underneath the wound directly against the abscess, and place a clean woolen cloth on top of the abscess and the wound, which has been dampened with water or cooked with mallow leaves; treat it after two days of this poultice until it is healed; and sometimes you should wash the abscess and the wound with warm water and honey, then again with water or roots of lilies and long aristologhe, before returning to the poultice.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is swollen in the abscess, you must be careful not to cauterize with iron, but treat it as we have said in the section on wounds.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	The first duty at the birth is for her to know the shape of natural childbirth, and its signs are when you see the woman pressing down, and wanting to smell air: then the child hastens to come out quickly; thus, you know that these births are according to nature, with the issue coming from above his head, and the midwife assists him; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press on her belly so that the child comes out soon; because as he descends towards his head, so does the midwife assist him, and the woman expels her superfluities through a good delivery; and those who come otherwise do not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For sometimes it comes out from his feet or shoulders and hands, or he may come out belly down, often with head turned towards his collarbone, or in other bad shapes; thus, it is the duty of the midwife to be wise and clever about these things, taking care of errors and disappointments, and I will show you all possible shapes how one must assist her.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child is born on its head by natural delivery, and the woman labours greatly while birthing, and her strength is weak, then let her sit on a saddle or be held by women; and stimulate her nature with oil from fenugreek that has been cooked, and then insert the small spatula of this form between her two breasts:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	Then split the amniotic sac and trim her nails down to their quick so that the fluids flow out; press on her belly so that the child descends, and if it does not descend, then administer an enema of fenugreek powder with sesame oil; make her sneeze by applying condy's crystals to her nose and mouth, and hold her there for one hour: thus draw forth the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if both hands emerge first, you must pull them back lightly one at a time; and if they cannot be drawn in, then place the woman on a chair, lifting her feet upwards; stand up the chair from the ground, holding the woman so she does not fall during this movement; and if the hands still cannot be drawn in, and the child is dead, then sever its hands with the knife that was described before, extract it, and reset as evenly as possible.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	On the birth of the child on its feet.
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child is born on its feet, one must push it upwards; and then turn it over repeatedly until it is level; then take one foot and stretch it gently.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	Once it reaches the thighs, command him to grab hold, and make him sneeze vigorously; if he jumps up, so be it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if he does not jump as we have said, turn him over repeatedly until he is in his natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then he will be lightly born.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if he does not come forth as we have said, take a mixture of musk root, almond oil, and melted gum, grind all together in a mortar; and place this ointment on the woman's nature inside and outside, then make her sit in tepid water up to below the ribs; and when she is softened below, make a myrrh collar for her, and put it underneath, leave it there an hour; then make her sit upon a stool, then make her sneeze, hold her mouth and nose shut, gently press on her belly, for now the child jumps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	On the birth of a child on their knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child arrives in this form, place the midwife's hands there and there; then let her put her hand on his neck, and hang the baby's feet down, and let him lie on the bed; fold his hands there and there, and take the midwife's hands to press on the belly, and remove the pillows from under it until she is prepared below; if he does not cry out, then grasp his feet firmly, then move the stomach up, then put forth all of your hands; deliver the child there and there; tell the mother to hold herself while the baby emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	On the birth of a child with an arm protruding from the wide passage
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I must help to draw back the arm: if you cannot do it, make her stand up and walk; if she can't walk, then have her lie on the bed with legs raised high; bring out the midwife's kit as I described; if she still does not give birth, place her on a seat, then try to pull back the hand; deliver the baby naturally according to its position, make her sneeze, and tell her to hold herself until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the exit of the child upon its neck, and have spread out his hands, and his face turned towards the back of his mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I agree that the physician should hold his hand, then turn it back and forth, and gently raise it; and when it is equalized, apply a natural poultice of alum and oil, as we have said, then instruct her to move it little by little; and once you have done this, make her sit on a chair, and command her to grasp it; and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same manner for all secondary dislocations.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it happens forcefully in this manner for all secondary dislocations, scoop the moisture with your nail until it is emptied; and if the child falls on its face or neck, scoop them from under his nose so they are not obstructed, and clear the child; then push the child inside, until you have placed him correctly, and command the woman to grasp herself once: then gently extract.
de l’issue des gemelz	Of the dislocation of the knees
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born; and this is not a strange occurrence, it happens often.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Such are strange occurrences, and they do not live, if born prematurely; I know this, that they be multiplied, and are separated by the surgeon who divides them, which is tied to fate; and sometimes they are also born naturally like a single child, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they are born prematurely, treat them as we have said, and let the midwife be skilled, and act swiftly and gently in what she does; and do so for their well-being.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	None of the times are formed in the marriage I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or many up to XV, and they are all shaped as children by the measurement of the glorious blood, and it is necessary that the bailiff knows everything, for perhaps similar things happen to him; he should act accordingly.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman for a dead child in her belly, as I said in the previous division, and there is no delivery of the child, and you have to perform manual labor; it is necessary that you know if the woman is virtuous, and has not had any accidents or fears death. The woman should be positioned on her back with her legs lifted, and a minister should hold her mouth open with moist oils mixed with a poultice of althea, fenugreek, and flax seeds, then anoint your hands with these oils and poultices; gently insert them into the womb, until you feel where to position the hooks. Take care if the child is equipped that it descends onto its head; place the hooks in its eyes, neck, mouth, palate, under the beard, or near the armpits, and if the descent is through the feet, hook it by the heel and lower abdomen. You must hold the hook with your right hand and put the curve between two fingers of your left hand, then gently insert it completely into one of these places that we have mentioned until you reach an empty space; this is how the hook should look like:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then insert it against another clamp, or the third if you need them, so that the extractions are equal; and then extend them evenly by moving from one side to the other, to remove (the arrow), and let the clamps be toothed to hold it firmly, as follows:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part of it remains, oil your hands with some oil and push in that part, then pull the other part; and if there are no points left, place this clamp above, and do so until it comes out entirely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	If one hand comes before the other and you cannot pull it back due to constriction, then you must wrap it in a cloth until it is all covered; then cut at the joint of the palm or near the wrist, and do likewise with the other hand and both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the child's head is large and it is stuck during birth, or there is an acute assembly at the crown, you must place the pointed forceps between your fingers, split open the head, and extract the infant; or use the instrument called "almidach", from which its form comes with instruments described in this chapter; do the same if the child has a large natural head; then pull out the bones with tongs, and if the head is released by force and it tightens again, it should be cut open until the moist tissue that was at the narrow passage is exposed; if it cannot come out, sever it into pieces as far as you can reach; and if it swells in the belly or beneath the ribs, you must pierce it there so that the tissue flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is standing on their feet, then the traction is light, and the correction towards the mouth of the uterus is also light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	If it is trapped in the belly or hips, you must extract it with cloth wrapped around your hand; and split open the belly or hips until the moisture that is there comes out; and if other parts are removed but the head remains, place your hand over the uterus and draw it towards the mouth of the uterus; then insert one or two fingers and push them inwards; and if the mouth of the uterus is narrow due to a hot abscess which has formed there, you must not work it, instead apply moist and oily things; use poultices for this, and also soak with softeners that are wet and softening.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is lying on its side, and you can position it evenly, then apply what we have described for a living infant; but if one has no power over this, then pull him apart by pieces, leaving nothing of the afterbirth.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	Once you have done this, then apply what we have described for hot abscesses that come to the surface; and if there is an outflow of blood, it should be immersed in cold water, restraining it, and other treatments will follow.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly a child had died, then another one grew on top of it, and the other died as well.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came to the navel, swelling until it opened up, and began with great suppuration.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat him, and I thought long about it, but could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a plaster of strong attraction, and an [first] bone came out, after some days another one did too.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly astonished for there is no bone in the belly.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it might be bones from a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I opened the wound and pulled out several bones, so that the woman was in a better condition; she lived for some time like this with only a little bowels missing from the place [where they had been], but I have not recorded this chapter except to show that when masters find strange cases, they should know how to treat them.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To bring the marrow to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Here is the form of the pressor, to which one owes the ligaments; and turning back to the second shoulder joint.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the horns should be more slender than those of the restrictor, and they should be made of ebony or boxwood; and the opening in the trunk should be two fingers wide, and the width between the trees is one finger; and at midpoint between the two ligaments are two fittings from this same wood, which are securely attached to each other, having a length of half a palm or slightly more; and these two fittings are pushed into the opening of the marrow to open when you turn the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, similar but more slender and lighter, should be made of ebony or boxwood wood like a pair of tongs; and at the two shoulders it has two fittings, as you see, one palm long and two fingers wide; and when you wish to open the marrow with this whole instrument, have the woman sit on a bed, feet hanging down and legs apart, then insert the two fitted parts together into the marrow, hold the head of the instrument underneath between her thighs; next operate your hand on the whole instrument as you did with the tongs equally, according to the amount that you wish to open the mouth of the marrow until the baby does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all improved upon and their designs multiplied; when the surgeon has prepared them, his work is more efficient and of higher quality to men for their benefit.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Despair not over the instrument you lack, for its necessity is no excuse.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the midwife is held back from childbirth, instruct the patient to hold her breath and then make her sneeze violently, pressing your hands over her mouth and nose; if she faints due to this, it will be for the best.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, take a pot and pierce the lid with holes, placing herbs within it to open up her mouth such as nettle, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia and centaury; cook these herbs or some of them in water over fire, then place one end of the pipe into the perforated pot and insert the other end inside the mouth of the patient, holding this until vapours enter her body; next make her sneeze as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the nurse's aid fails.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if the nurse remains after this treatment and does not leave promptly, instruct her to wet her left hand in oil of sesame or muskroot juice, then insert it into the vagina and grasp the child; when she finds it, grab it and stretch it little by little directly, so that the husband does not hinder its extraction; but she must move it gently right and left, then pull; thus it will come out and disengage.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the womb is narrowed, we have mentioned the treatment of sneezing and herb fumigation; and if it does not respond to all that we have said, beware that you do not force extraction; but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the womb should be tied to the thigh of the woman, then she must be clystered with four-ingredient ointment; this will ripen and reset it, and it will come out; however, when it rips, a bad smell comes from the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	So befits then appropriate fumigations for this: some of the ancients have tried using cress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for retention of her flowers and menstruum is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is of glass similar to a bowl, and one puts the skilled head inside, and the wide ends over the fire; and let the fumigation be above the coals, and leave until wasted, then begin another.
de percier lou fondement	To perforate the fundament
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born without a perforated fundament, instead having it stuffed with a skilled plug: so one must at bathing pierce this plug for them, and not use a pointed spatula, taking care that they do not touch it; then place moist wool soaked in wine and oil upon it, then treat with ointment until healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not heal, place a cork stopper in the hole, and leave it for several days; remove it when the child wants to go outside.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	Sometimes this closure occurs suddenly in a wound or abscess; so it is necessary to cut through the sudden blockage: it should be treated as we said for the cork stopper.
de la fistule dou fondement	Of the anal fistula.
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Anal fistulas that originate beneath the anus are nodules and growths, which come from outside or in the space between the two parts; if there is one or more fistula with old nodules, it can be operated on and even moist white worms or fine worms come out; sometimes these fistulas are penetrating, and they are known by those who have them through egestion or flatulence when the patient defecates, and perhaps some worms fall out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that reach up to the bladder and up to half of the penis's length; they may also extend to the hip joint and even down to the knee cap.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	Hereby we identify the fistula penetrating anus and not penetrating; for this, insert your index finger into the anus and push a fine needle of brass or iron inside the fistula where it is not tortuous.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is tortuosity, insert a slender tent of lead or horsehair until you feel the tent or hair with your finger; and if you do not feel it, and from the opening no feces nor wind come out as we said before: know that it does not pierce; so hurry to treat it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula has penetrated up to the bladder or up to the urinary duct, thus letting out urine, it cannot be healed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it has perforated up to the hip joint, then the ulcer will also reach that place; if there is no tortuosity and the pain is felt around it, then one should wait for it to improve on its own, and medicine or ointment are not effective in healing this immediately; regarding these penetrating fistulas, there is nothing else other than hard work, and the folly of foolish surgeons who get involved.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the case of one that is not penetrated and is not old, there is hope for recovery through iron instruments, as I have experienced; it is such that the patient lies between your hands on his back; you lift his legs until they reach his hips, and incline his hips towards his stomach; then insert a copper probe or tin if there is tortuosity, until you know where the ulcer comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it around the anus, you must insert your index finger there; if you then feel that the tendon has been pierced; and if what you sense between your finger and the skin or flesh is uncovered, know that it is perforated; do not labor here for one cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One says however that one can indeed heal some of these, but it happens rarely; and the aid given here, consists in heating the fine cauterizer according to the width of the fistula as said before; and insert it all hot into the fistula until you reach near the anus; do this two or three times so that you know that the faulty flesh is burned which resembles a bird's feather; then treat it with wet bandages in butter, until that flesh be gone, and finally dress it with healing ointment softening the flesh and welding.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus cured, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If this cannot be cured in any other way, and if it enters but does not penetrate all the way to the rectum, and between your finger and the fistula is a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the opening on the surface of the cover; then cut from the beginning of the fistula and push forward with the tent, and cauterize afterward until you reach the head of the tent. The tent will be relieved and fall out, and beware not to damage those faulty tissues that look like feathers, and leave nothing behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if blood defeats you and escapes between your finger and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or astringent medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For cauterization with fire combines two beneficial effects: namely, the burning of adjacent flesh and the stemming of blood flow along with drying up moisture; then treating damp wounds with butter or pulverized substances until the wound produces little discharge and the burnt flesh turns white; afterwards cure the injury with ointments that induce scabs on hardening rough skin, which are dry medications.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	When it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula reaches up to the anus, and is far from the body, insert your finger into the anus, and feel for it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tumor, and between it are either membranes or sinews or flesh, where it is close to breaking through, do not despair that there is no hope unless one of three methods is applied: cauterize as we have mentioned, or cut down deeply, or if you can apply an ointment and treat as initially; be careful not to cut too deep into the wall which supports the anus, lest waste come out involuntarily; then cure it as said before; perhaps this will heal, or remove that covering and clean once it is cut away from the anus, either with an ointment or another pointed instrument; thereafter soften that hardened flesh which remains in the injury as much as you can; finally treat the wound, and prevent the fistula's return to the area beyond the anus: this would be less onerous for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are formed in this manner: it is when you insert a probe into the fistula, and it lies close to the base of the fundament near the skin above, take a perforated probe with a pointed end in this shape:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And here you insert the thread awry into it [the probe], and insert the probe along the entire length of the thread into the fistula until it reaches the tip.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it perforates the margin of the fundament inside, then withdraw the thread from that hole, just as you would insert your finger into the fundament; and draw out the tip of the thread, and bring together the two ends, pressing one against the other, and leave them there for one or two days; press [the thread] sometimes so that it grips those parts which are between the two [ends], and closes [the fistula]; then treat the wound until it is healed and closed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not break open, make it do so by all means possible if it is not too deeply embedded.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not appropriate to remove what is too deeply embedded by suturing, and then treat it as we have said until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spinal needle used to create a fistula is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other so that you do not cut what must not be cut as you can see here:
des emorroydes	Of hemorrhoids.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two types: they can be found inside the anus like resin grains and come in small or large sizes; they also bleed and may appear singly or in groups, and they emerge from outside the anus at its beginning but those that do have little moisture with some light yellow liquid or a bit of blood; their color matches that of the body. The cure for these types which are found inside the anus is to instruct the patient to strain themselves so as to evacuate their bowels until the hemorrhoids emerge from it, then you hasten and use forceps or hold them with your nail before cutting at its root; if they cannot be held by forceps due to moisture, take a piece of linen, cotton, or chamois leather and extract them using both hands then cut them off, apply hot powder over them as would be done for cauterization according to the chapter on cautery. You can treat them with other treatments until it is healed; if the anus cannot be evacuated, administer the patient a bitter enema that is rough so as to wash out what is inside the anus so it may come out naturally. When patients push hard and these hemorrhoids are outside of the anus then treatment becomes less invasive: take them with your nail or forceps and cut them off before treating them in the way we have mentioned until they heal, and fear incisions made by iron instruments.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you must treat the wound, it's best to do so in this way: take a straight thread and insert it into a needle; pass the end of the thread through the needle from below upward; then turn back both ends of the thread under the needle so that they are parallel with each other. Tie the thread firmly, remove the needle and repeat for all areas requiring stitches; leave one stitch untied to allow drainage of excess blood; place over this a piece of linen cloth moistened in rose oil or cerate, then replace it over the wound and tell the patient to rest until bleeding has stopped completely; cure them with ointments and other treatments so that they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	the drying out of faeces or the fundament 
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is constipation in the intestine, caused by the constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine fails to work.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	You should remove the bark with a spatula or your nail at the point of a sputum ulcer, ensuring it doesn't become moist; then treat it until it is firm as required; and if it cannot heal, increase the strength of the scraping until it heals significantly, and becomes scarred; then treat it again until it is healed.
dou fremit	How it itches.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Formice is a small faulty appearance within the body, which spreads rapidly; sometimes it finds cold and feels just like an itch, spreading throughout the entire body, but more so in the hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a cane made from a goose feather, or a strong vulture feather, and place this cane on the trembling, so that the purple circles touch the trembling all around; then turn your hand over the entire cane such that you cover the trembling all around it, and insert it perfectly, extracting the tremor from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you wish, make something similar with a brass or iron cane according to this form, and let it be subtle below and straight above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not pierce it, in order to hold it with your fingers, and squeeze it; And if you wish, cauterize the tremor, as described before in the chapter on cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	Of the form of an enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never make an enema of silver or quicksilver, or of molten and strained brass; nor should any of these instruments be made small or large, according to what they are adapted for.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those which are used in the treatment of children who are feeble and afflicted should be small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the enema is broad above, where the bellies are fastened according to this method:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And there is a release where the bellies are fastened, as you see, and the head is pierced inside it; and have on one side two holes, and on the other one; and let the belly in which the medicine is placed be made of the bladder of an animal or parchment, and pierced all around with small holes, and between each hole there should be a space of one inch, then push into these holes a strong thread of spun linen twisted crosswise in the form of an X or otherwise round, and sew up the belly like a goat; and when the medicine is inside it, bind it to the instrument before with a strong thread, then enema; and this is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicament be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the catheter with oil or egg white, or something similar, then insert it gently; then have the ministers squeeze with both hands together until everything is out, then remove the catheter, and raise the patient's legs to the wall, and if the medic wants to evacuate, let them as much as they can; and if he sleeps a night through, so much the better.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you catheterize him for the disease of abdominal prolapse, and the medicament comes out quickly, repeat it until he is cured.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are at the anus or abscess, let the catheter be as gentle as for a child; and this is the form of the gentle catheter with which the skin is tightened:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already spoken about the treatment of wounds in the previous section; now we will discuss the cures and medicines according to their application.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, where the wound is located, and what caused it.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	Wounds are caused by various things such as stone impacts, sword or knife cuts, lance or stick injuries, arrows, and similar objects; they can also be classified based on the body part affected, like wounds on the neck, head, foot, stomach, liver, and other similar areas of the body. I will tell you about the treatment for each type of wound, starting with simple head wounds since their treatment methods will be discussed in detail later.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head, and the bone is not broken, take note if it is due to a blow from a stone or similar objects, and the skin is still torn with a large wound, and you have slight doubts about an incipient abscess: then cause the patient to bleed soon through the cephalic vein especially if little blood comes out of the wound, and let this bleeding be on the opposite side of the injured part; and let the sick person abstain from food and heavy meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to bleed, then let his diet be reduced, and let him drink no wine, nor eat any meat; and put on the wound, if hot abscesses appear, moist cotton soaked in rose oil only, or with astringent wine; and if there is no hot abscess, then apply to the wound, while it is fresh and full of blood, and has not been moved by air, powder which I will mention a little later; and if the air has moved it, then put on some ointments until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	Et if the wound is large like a sword cut or similar, and the lips cannot be brought together with sutures, then they are joined by stitching, as I will explain for wounds of the belly, regarding suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed down to the bone, gaping, and holds only by a point, then it should be amputated; afterward treat the wound with medicine, restore hard flesh in place of the skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse meats like beef or pork, as well as grains such as wheat, boiled peas, chicken, and similar foods.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find that the skin is festering but it has not reached bone then cut away all the rotten tissue and discard it, afterward treat the wound with medicine; should there be an artery in the wound or vein that does not stop bleeding even after applying medicines bind it off, and if you find it severed tie it up with a thread; if this brings no benefit cauterize the area.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: it is necessary that you apply this powder which will heal as soon as the ointment has moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	The manner of the powder is as follows: take one part incense; two parts dragon's blood; three parts quicklime, and finely grind the powder, then apply it to the wound, pressing firmly until it dries well and joins with all its blood; then bind it tightly, and leave it without loosening, if there is no swelling; for you remove the medicine only when it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes you only use the quicklime when you lack incense or dragon's blood, but let the ointment heal the wound first.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the fire has caused movement in the wound, especially during summer, do not apply this powder but use some soothing ointments or poultices made from barley flour with water and honey until it flows freely; then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone fracture occurs with the wound, and it is minor, extract it using subtle pincers; I will tell you about skull fractures later.
de la plaie dou col	On the neck wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck and it is straightforward, there is no significant difference between this and a skull fracture; however, if the carotid artery or jugular vein in the neck has been severed.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the black eye, there is no other treatment but to let it heal, and put nothing constricting on it, for it harms the eye and makes it withdraw; and do not apply anything cold to the wound, because the substance of the eyes is cold, and its connection is with the brain, which is the highest organ; but use a soothing medicine, such as lukewarm wash in warm water, and mixed with rose oil, and cooked leek washed also in warm water, and other stones of similar nature, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, cut it and bind with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and full of hair and pus, cut it open at a lower place; and if the artery is cut, and blood flows from it, open it up, clean it, and cauterize if necessary; and if the esophagus of the throat is cut, or the heart, and its ducts are preserved, so that flesh can grow, then cut the heart above the vertebrae of the throat, but do not touch the throat itself, rather reset it according to its natural form; and then hold it firmly, and leave it for a few days, then treat with draining ointments until it is healed; and if the wound has penetrated into the bone, open it up; and if there are pieces of bone, remove them forcefully if you can, and those that you cannot have, leave until the wound rots, and be sure to clean and alleviate the discharge; and if the wound is fresh, apply powder on top of the powder that I mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone and a fistula in the wound, treat it as I have described in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	Of the wound caused by a lance or a knife.
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a lance or knife wound, and the injury is deep, observe if air escapes from the wound as the patient breathes: know then that the injury is mortal. If the wound is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood intact, do not apply powder nor bandage it in the first hour to prevent the blood from clotting inside; instead, return the blood to the heart which would kill the patient. Instead, apply an attractive ointment and bind the wound twice a day. If you have no ointment available, put old cotton into the wound to absorb moisture, then make the patient sleep on their injury for three days or more; this way spasms, bad tremors of the heart nor strange breathing will not occur. When you see these good dispositions, know that the wound is safe.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure it therefore with dressings and other treatments until it is healed; if it cannot heal, and the wound opens up again, then know that it has developed into a fistula; treat it accordingly as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	If the wound is from a sword or knife incision and it is simple, whether on the chest or back, treat what is in front of you first; if it is large, stitch it up; if it is small, use powder; if it has penetrated deep into the bone and broken pieces of bone are present, clean the wound and realign the fragments if they have shifted; if they have not shifted, let the wound suppurate to ease the extraction; for wounds on other body parts, the judgement is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	From a ruptured belly.
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The ruptures of the belly are large, medium, and small; in a large wound, sometimes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines protrude, which causes complications; and the suturing is more difficult. Sometimes, the smaller wound is worse than the larger one, because it is harder to reposition the intestines properly if they are not placed back immediately; therefore, the medium-sized wound is better, as one can easily return the intestine to its place compared to others. And know that there are four types of abdominal ruptures: two common suturing techniques occur in abdominal wounds, and other unique ones are specific to different body parts but can also be used for abdominal wounds. I will explain each type separately.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small and a part of the intestine has come out, which is a difficult thing to fix, it can be done in one of two ways: either because of the size of the wound, as we have said, or due to the intestine being swollen from the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this way: soak a sponge or soft cloth in lukewarm water only, or cook in water with vinegar and cypress and spike, and moisten the intestine until the swelling is reduced; sometimes do this with constricting wine, which helps to reduce the inflammation.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling begin to subside, dampen the intestine with water or let it soak in a decoction of mallows, because this eases its entry and helps reduce any blockage; if nothing can enter, then make an incision in the wound using the same instrument used for treating haemorrhoids. The first treatment is best done by surgery, but one should not cut unnecessarily without great need; these are the instruments to use: it cuts inside along the curve and outside, and this is its shape: [diagram or description of surgical instrument here]
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines have fallen out, place them back carefully according to their natural form in their proper place, if you are able, for this improves healing.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large, and it is located below the belly, you must make the patient lie on their back with their legs raised higher than their head; if it is below the stomach, raise the head and chest higher than the lower parts; also, if the abdominal rupture occurs in one of the two sides, tend to it so that the affected part is higher than the other; thus, you must manage as I say for large and medium-sized wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, apply whatever you have at hand; then, between your hands, use a gentle substance that covers the entire rupture and joins its lips; this is how sutures are commonly done: take one or more needles according to the width of the wound and leave about two finger-widths from its head, where you will insert a strong thread; pierce both sides of the skin with both edges of the siphac (the inner lining), until it comes out on this side, then bring together the four edges; use double thread around the needle in two parts, and join the two sides of the wound neatly, leaving about two fingers-widths apart, then insert another needle; tie up the threads as you did with the first needle and do not stop doing so according to your needs until all the wound is sutured; needles must be medium size between fine and thick, because thin ones cut all the flesh and the very thick cannot enter well: therefore, they should be medium-sized; do not push the needles too far into the flesh or skin as this cuts through and opens up the wound before it heals; then clip their edges so that they don't hurt the patient when sleeping, put bandages over the needle ends to keep them in place, and leave until the wound is healed. This method of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds since you can use one or two needles. The second type of suture is common, it consists of joining together both sides of the skin and siphac with a medium thread; once all four edges are pierced, pull back the needle to where you started in the same way as cloth is sewn; leave about the width of a small finger between each stitch. This kind of suturing serves well for men, I used it on a man's wound on his belly that was cut with a knife and there were intestines protruding more than two palms wide, and the wound measured more than one palm in length
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned the intestine after it had been outside for twenty-four hours, and the wound healed in fifteen days, I treated him, and he was cured.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	The doctor had judged him to be dying, but it became a miracle; and I did not treat him with any ointment, as I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicines; instead, I dressed the wound twice daily with old cotton, washing it with honey water until he was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you the two proper ways of suturing: take your needle and pierce from outside in until it has passed through to the inside; when it has pierced straight through the heart, let the tip of the sphac or cuff where you pierced with the needle pass through, then pierce again from inside out until it comes back to the outside part; the understanding behind this suturing is that you should sew as a peltier does skins, leaving one edge of the sphac on one side and picking it up on the other, until the suture is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of suturing, as Galen accurately describes it, is done in such a way that some people naturally bring the two parts together and approximate one side of the wound to the other in this manner: insert a needle into one side of the wound near the edge, and pierce only that spot, leaving the two sides of the skin flap; then turn the needle back around, piercing from the outer part through to the inner part at the two edges of the skin flap; finally, puncture each of the other two sides of the wound, again from outside to inside, near the edge. This is the best and most common type of suture.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen says this word, and others testify that one must suture the abdomen with two needles, each having its own thread; and one must insert one needle from one side and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew belts; and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the suturing is more difficult than for other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgements of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds: and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, rather than let it be moved by fire, so treat again the intestine, and heal the wound; then apply the powder to healing flesh, and if it has been moved by fire, apply some present ointment until the wound heals; then cauterize the sinews and sutures; then treat the wound like others, until it is healed; and if you don't have medicines, then apply, as soon as it begins to heal, old cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you do not need other medicines in many cases where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound might affect the main parts of the body, then it is necessary to soak light linen in warm temperate oil or red oil, and place it around the armpits and underarms; and if there is pain or infection in the bowels, which often occurs, then give them a cleanse with tepid wine, especially if the infection has reached the intestines; pierce it from within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is lighter to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine which is called 'jeun' cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is due to the fragility of its veins, and because of the delicacy of the whole body, and the closeness of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the membrane jumps out of the wound, put it back in like with the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and has turned greenish or black, you must bind the black part so no blood comes out, for there are veins and arteries present; then cut off what is between the binding, and place the two ends of the membrane outside the wound to aid the extraction when the membrane falls, and the wound bends.
de la routure dou boueil	On the rupture of the rectum.
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is rounded and the wound small, it can be restored in some people, for I saw a man pierced in the belly by a lance; the wound was to the right of the stomach, and became inflamed then developed into a fistula, from which matter and gases were expelled. I treated him as best I could, without ceasing in subtilising until he healed, with his skin rejoined.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him heal, I feared the patient would feel pain in his stomach; but he felt no ill effects and remained well-disposed, eating and drinking; some experimentalists said that for small wounds of the intestine, one should bind it this way: take large-headed pins, then gather together the lips of the wound, and when the pin has opened its mouth, place on both sides so they press upon it; then cut off the head of the pin, ensuring it cannot come loose, and put another pin in the same fashion until the entire wound is clasped shut. Finally close the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	Cil chief si s'aerdent en l'intestine, 
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it heals, is universally called a "fistula", especially when it has healed and become bent over.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is truly a faulty nodule that is hard and white, where there is no pain felt, and it is also bent over like the quill of a bird; sometimes it jumps clear inward, other times it appears thick; at times it has pus, while at others it does not have enough; and I have already discussed in the division of wounds that any wound which has not healed and lacks flesh is due to one of nine causes: namely, the lack of blood or tissue; its malicious nature; the presence of hard matter inside and on the lips which prevents the growth of flesh; an excess of pus; a rotting ulcer; the matter being of poor quality; inadequate medicine in treatment; the corruption being akin to pestilence; the peculiarity of the region where digestion is slow, healing takes time, and it swells naturally; or there are veins or bones present. I have already shown all these causes, their signs, and medicinal cures in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now you must let me inform you of the treatment of a fistula, which is done through manual operation.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas which come to major veins, and arteries, and nerves, or on the skin, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in some of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet; and so that it comes to the particular part of the principle member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are of this nature are of grave illness, and there is no cure but labor, and ignorance; and if there is any fistula which does not reach to its place as I said, and you have trust in a treatment, and you recognize it, then take a probe of brass or iron, if the fistula is straight, so probe it; and if the fistula is twisted, so search for it with a subtle probe of lead, because the lead bends according to the tortuosity; and if the fistula has many holes and you cannot properly search them by probes, then cleanse it through one hole by enema, because moisture moves from one hole to another, and purify it; then carefully probe it as much as possible until you recognize whether there is bone or nerve, and whether it is completely empty, and ask the patient well about the pain that he feels when pressing with your hand, and where he feels it; and when you truly know the place in which it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein, or any of the places I told you about, then treat it according to what I have said, and remove the pus and the corrupted flesh that is inside; and then treat it until it is healed, and if the fistula is very deep at its place, so it must be cut completely as much as possible, then put probes moistened in medicine of vinegar, and insert them up to the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity that remains inside; and after this apply ointments which stimulate healthy flesh until it heals; and if it is not healed by this, so cauterize it as we have said, and if there is a bone corrupted from the fistula, then cut it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If wound or abscess does not harm your vital parts, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, with decay and blackening, then rule until all decay is removed, then treat the emerging flesh until it heals; and if it doesn't heal, and falls sick again as before, know that you haven't reached the bottom: uncover and probe until you are at the depth, and remove all decay, then restore its place; and if it thus healed, that's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the decay is too deep for you to reach; there are other means by which nature leaves it alone; and if there's a small corrupted bone, and you can pull it with tongs, then extract it with suitable instruments, and if there are many bones, draw them all out, leaving none; and if moisture obstructs you, but there is no error or fear, then cut through moisture and flesh, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, apply something that induces putrefaction to the wound, and let it rot around the bones until they become lighter; then they will more easily separate from the bone. If this is a large bone such as one of the leg or thigh, clear away the corruption just so far as the blackness is removed entirely, then restore the wound; if there is much putrefaction in its depth extending even to the marrow, you must cut it off down to the healthy bone and then treat it until it is healed. I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg so that you may take example from it and be assisted for your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man about thirty years old who had pain in his leg due to an internal cause, such that the matter came to the leg and formed a large abscess without any external injury for opening; but these surgeons through their folly worked on it so much that they opened up the abscesses and a great deal of matter flowed out from them until it became fistulous with many openings all discharging yellow thin fluid from his body, thus many physicians treated him over two years' time to no avail. Then I was called upon by the family; when I saw the youth's leg as well as those medicines he had been using and also what came forth in great quantity from those apertures, there would be redness on that young man's body which took on a yellowish complexion.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I placed a tent in one of those openings and then searched all the openings, finding that each came into contact with another from every part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hurried then and cut into one of the openings until I exposed a part of the bone, finding it rotten and perforated, with decay reaching down to the inner bone; I removed all that appeared to me as rotten from the bone and thought there was no other corruption left besides what I took out. Then I started healing the wound with soothing medicine over a long period but couldn't close it properly; I then began again, exposing the bone like before only this time discovering that the decay had continued into the bone itself so I removed some of the rotten parts and attempted to heal the area but failed. However, I still wasn’t able to join them despite cutting around an inch from the bone which turned out to be all soft tissue, after which I filled it with medicine; This healed quickly without further complications though more work remained owing to the patient's frailty who couldn't withstand such treatment and my fear of causing his death.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation he bled often, but he was entirely cured, and in place of the bone grew hard flesh, which was well-formed and caused no harm or side effects whatsoever, neither going nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, you should treat it like this: take a linen thread and tie it to the end of the bone that protrudes, then have someone pull it upwards; attach another larger thread made of linen on top of the flesh above the bone, stretching the head so you can cut away the corrupt flesh beneath, exposing the place where you wish to be clean and uninjured by any sinew; insert a burning ember or a spatula under the bone to sever the corrupted flesh; continue until all corruption is visible and felt, then treat it again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	Et se li os est corrumpus, et n'apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, and then make a silk thread from one part to the other, following the length of the corruption, as we have said. If the corruption is in the joint, cut away the corrupted joint, and cut into bone where it contains the other side. But if the corruption is found on the hand or foot joints this will be much more difficult but you must inquire about how the corruption appears to you then treat it accordingly while avoiding damaging any veins or nerves, also take note that there are different cutting tools for cutting bone depending on how they're placed and what they look like as well as their thickness subtleness size and hardness. Therefore one needs to have a variety of tools suitable for each type of work; know that the work will show you which tool is necessary according to knowledge of this art and the signs shown in different disease symptoms so think about the right instrument needed accordingly
dou feu	Of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The bones rot either from within or from without; and when you have treated that decay with medicine and it does not improve, then you must amputate the limb up to the place where the decay originates so that the patient escapes death, or from the evil, which is worse, of losing a limb; and the sign is that the limb becomes black, as if burnt by fire, and may darken further after the blackening, for this corrosion spreads from one limb to another and covers the whole body; thus you must amputate swiftly, and if it is caused by the stinging or biting of venomous creatures such as scorpions of the sea and snakes and similar ones, then when the decay occurs at the tip of a finger, amputate it, allowing no time for it to spread all the way down to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	Et si ecoulement de sang vient quand tu ouvres, cautérise l'endroit immédiatement ou applique certaines poudres coagulantes; puis reviens à ta médecine jusqu'à ce qu'elle soit terminée, ensuite, lie le membre blessé avec un bandage approprié et soigne-le jusqu'à ce qu'il guérisse. Je vais te raconter une histoire qui s'est passée à un homme sur son pied : il a développé une noirceur qui ressemblait à une brûlure de feu, et cette corrosion est apparue d'abord sur son orteil, si bien qu'elle a envahi tout le pied; quand il l'a vu, il s'est hâté de couper le pied et cela a été guéri. Longtemps après, la corrosion est revenue sur un doigt de sa main et il est venu me voir. Je lui ai appliqué des substances répercussives après avoir nettoyé son corps mais je n'ai pas pu arrêter les corrosions; quand il a vu que je devais lui couper la main, j'ai refusé car j'avais espoir de soigner le problème en répercutant la matière. J'ai aussi eu peur qu'il meure si je coupais sa main à cause de ses faibles vertus et qu'il se désespère; il est rentré chez lui et s'est hâté de couper sa main, cela a été guéri. Je n'ai pas pu vous raconter cette histoire auparavant mais maintenant que le cas est terminé, j'aimerais qu'on fasse autrement dans des situations similaires si besoin est.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Une fois l'abscesse se forme dans un tissu charnu, elle reste longtemps et crée une grande accumulation de pus; puis elle s'ouvre et perce, libérant le pus, laissant la cavité vide, comme un récipient; la peau au-dessus est aussi fine que du papier délicatement plié, et ne va pas jusqu'à l'os ou aux nerfs, une telle maladie est appelée "sain" et non "fistule"; mais si elle s'étend jusqu'à atteindre l'os en profondeur, alors elle est appelée "fistule"; la peau doit être coupée autour, surtout lorsqu'elle est fine comme du papier; sans se soucier de sa corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	Si tu crains que la peau s'infecte, et que l'infection n'est pas profonde, et que la peau est épaisse de chair, soigne-le avec un clistère ainsi: observe si le sein est grand, et l'intestin qui en sort dégage une odeur putride, alors fais un clistère avec de la médecine égyptienne préparée comme suit: prends du soufre, de l'huile, et du litharge en quantités égales, et fais-les cuire dans un récipient sur le feu jusqu'à ce que le mélange devienne rouge et épais comme du miel; puis prends selon tes besoins, et dilue la préparation avec de l'eau et du miel, et utilise-la pour faire un clistère sur le sein, en appliquant une pression sur l'orifice; laisse la médecine agir pendant deux heures, puis retire-la en pressant doucement; fais ceci autant de fois que nécessaire jusqu'à ce que le sein soit purifié et que la puanteur disparaisse; parfois on utilise de l'eau de cendres lorsque cette préparation n'est pas disponible, tu peux prendre des cendres de bois de vigne, ajouter de l'eau dessus, les laisser refroidir, puis faire un clistère avec jusqu'à ce que le sein soit bien nettoyé; si le patient ne peut supporter ni la médecine égyptienne ni l'eau de cendres, fais-lui alors un clistère d'eau et de miel avec une petite quantité de litharge broyée; ou tu peux utiliser du miel mélangé à du vin qui a la propriété de purifier et de laver, tandis que le vin fait sécher l'abcès; lorsque tout ceci est fait, et que tu es certain que le sein est bien nettoyé, fais-lui un clistère avec ce qui favorise la production de chair, prends de l'emplâtre définitif, et prépare-le avec de l'huile de roses et du vin; ou tu peux utiliser certaines autres préparations et onguents dont j'ai déjà parlé dans le chapitre sur les onguents; si l'orifice du sein est petit, et que la canule du clistère ne peut y entrer, élargis-le légèrement avec un instrument métallique, et applique un onguent égyptien ou basilicon jusqu'à ce qu'il soit suffisamment élargi; si la plaie est trop grande, recouse-la en laissant seulement assez d'espace pour que le clistère puisse être inséré, et si l'orifice qui éjecte les intestins est au-dessus, coupe-le à un niveau inférieur.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bowels are perfect, they do not allow meat to be digested; and if you cannot cut out the disease as you wish, prepare it in such a way that the bowel moves down to its lowest point, for when the bowel is perfect, it does not permit meat to be digested. And if you cannot cut out the disease as you desire, arrange it so: that the bowel descends gently and leaves nothing behind; take medicines that solidify to put on the wound, and stretch them over linen cloths covering all of the wound. Then cut into the flesh with force at a point where there is a hole larger than the first one, extend soft ointment onto another piece of cloth according to the size of the opening and place it upon the wound so as to ease the bowel; do not remove the large bandage that lies on top until after many days. He who stands over this wound often removes his own bowels in order to excrete them, and knows what runs from their bowels: whether poison or little or much, digested or indigested; and he must observe whether the patient is painful or not, if there be pus or none, for when thy medicine is thus arranged and thou seest Nature running over the wound, then know that the wound hath closed already.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast emits undigested bile after many days, know that the breast does not heal.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons act after a long time, do not despair of healing, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are men whose wounds heal slowly and some who act contrary to this; and if undigested bile rises from the breast after many days, know that the breast does not heal; and if the breast takes a long time to heal, and is far away (from the body), then apply drying medicines moist in substance but dry in virtue, such as definitive ointment, for there is much vitriol involved, which is its final medicine; take definitive ointment made with rose oil, add equal amounts of old wine, prepare it by cooking until reduced, and use this; or cook something similar thickened (with flour), when definitive ointments are not available: take myrrh, aloes, incense, grind them together then powder over honey while it is still warm on the fire; spread it onto a cloth and place it above the breast. Sometimes it helps to administer long aristologus roots or celestial lily root, which acts like a mixture of vetches and centaury leaves (chebula); use either single herbs or compounds: grind them into powder and mix with the honey as mentioned before, then use this; if treatment is prolonged but not healing through these treatments, know that corruption has occurred, pressing on bones, or hard parts, or ligaments; treat it like a fistula cure, as we have said previously.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of an abscess under the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that forms beneath the nail of the thumb or big toe, or sometimes in other places; and when it becomes old, and no attention is paid to it, then a thick abscess develops, and spreads until it reaches the root of the nail, and even removes the whole nail; and it causes corrosion down to the bone, so that it brings about foul-smelling pain, and the flesh of the finger or toe becomes wide, and its colour escapes.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, then you must remove all remaining excess with iron, then cauterise the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauterizations are of great assistance when the bone is healthy and the nail is sound; if the nail presses upon the flesh, causing it to prick and wound, one must put a needle beneath the nail that pricks the flesh, pushing it upwards and cutting away this flesh carefully and lightly, then apply corrosive medications onto the remaining flesh in order to remove all of it; finally treat with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	If the corrosion has reached the bone, then cut it away and treat with fire, for as long as there is corruption in the bone, it cannot heal; and if you see the finger corrode, then cut it off entirely as mentioned before, then treat until it is healed; and if it is pierced by iron and swollen, causing great pain, one must first treat this wound; then trim back the nail with a sharp spatula, cutting across so that no slice reaches below the nail to the flesh underneath, for the patient would feel far too much pain otherwise; and should this occur, apply something soothing.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of the wrist of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	Some men's little fingers that are born may be very fleshy, and perhaps there is skin or bone in it, sometimes with a nail, and some appear at the root of the knuckle, but these births happen rarely on hands.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those that are born on any part of the finger don't move, but those born at the knuckle of the finger sometimes do move; the size of the fleshy one is small like this: cut it off at its root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those that are born at the root of the knuckle are difficult to treat: you must cut off from there.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In one born in the last night, you must first cut the round flesh down to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable depth for it, and treat it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joints that bring two bones together arise through birth, or the welding of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	You must cut this welding, so that the bones can repair themselves according to their natural forms; then place between them two moistened cloths or oily silks, so they do not weld together; or you may put between them two pieces of fine lead, until the places are welded as they should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If welding occurs to anyone in these joints with the palm, cut this weld as it is fitting.
des vils	From towns
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Worms are veins swollen and filled with melancholic superfluities that come from many parts of the body, and they occur more often in the legs of those who walk, work, and carry loads than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must administer to them sometimes an emetic of bile, and then cleanse it with the basilica's healing waters.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment with iron can be done in two ways: one is to cauterize and drain the black blood from the wound; the other way is that you lift up the vein and draw all of its blood out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The incision should be made in this way: first immerse the leg in hot water very vigorously until its flesh is softened, then stretch out the patient's leg from above the hip down to below the knee; make an incision at one place or two or three places with a large instrument, lift it and drain the black blood by hand from end to end, as much as the patient can bear in terms of its virtues; then bind up the wound, and tell them to eat meat that brings on dark bile; repeat the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full again and harmful to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The alleviations of the injury are as follows: remove the patient's leg, if it is hairy, then place it in a bath, and bathe the leg with hot water until it turns red and the veins swell; if you have no bath, heat it by the fire, and then make an incision over the vein from the knee to the ankle or below the foot; open up the skin with a knife, and peel back the vein on either side until it appears when touched; it will be seen as red and black, and upon entering the skin, it will appear like a white cord; push down along its length so that it is raised from the skin, then cut lightly with an axe, making another incision three fingers above; open up the skin over the vein again until it appears, then raise the vein using a thread as you did before and tie off at another point with an axe as previously done; make further incisions if necessary, raising the vein each time and cutting through to the toe bone, pulling and raising until reaching the second incision; remove from one incision to another until all is cleared, then cut away; if unable to pull or lift it out, insert a needle threaded with strong double thread and tie off and push under the thread, turning your hand in opposite directions until its removal; take care not to cut into it, for should you do so, it cannot be removed or lifted without harm coming to the patient; once fully treated, place moist wool soaked in wine and rose oil over the wound site, treating it until healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the face is contorted and twisted and rolled together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly, but do not chop it off; and pull it as we have mentioned before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron with which one cuts the face is curved, and does not cut, so as not to slice the vein; and it has a thick curve, for if it were thin, it would cut through the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and here is the shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civilian wound.
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This wound occurs in the legs, in warm parts where no grass or trees grow, and on land with little moisture; and it can happen elsewhere besides the legs, such as due to putrefaction that comes from beneath the skin, just as snakes and worms develop inside the body, embedded between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the sign of the beginning of this vein is that a great inflammation comes into the leg, then the colour changes and the vein begins to protrude outwardly, just like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the vein opens, you must wrap it with a piece of lead that is 3 and a half to 2 inches long, tie it, and leave the lead hanging on the leg. Each time it falls off, rewrap it around the lead and retie it. If it is too long, cut off a part, rewrap the remaining, but do not cut into its root until it has fully come out; for if you cut it, it retracts into the flesh, causing abscesses and putrefaction in its place, and a bad illness; therefore, it must be treated gradually from bottom to top, leaving nothing of it in the body. This vein is sometimes 5 palms or even 10 long, there was once a man who came to me whose was 10 palms long, when you cut it, it pushes out one ray or hole and pierces through fully so that all comes out; then drain whatever matter is inside and apply medicines against putrefaction for some days, then treat the wound like abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes this vein is more fragile, especially when it appears in the ankle joint or at the foot, and there are many perforations, from which blood flows freely; treat it then as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Maggots that breed between flesh and skin.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called "ox disease" in our land because it often occurs in oxen, and it is a small worm that breeds between flesh and skin, moving throughout the body up and down, and one feels its movement from limb to limb until it breaks through the skin where it was, and falls out; it is caused by the putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, serpents, and lumbricals are bred in the belly; and its malice is doubted because when it moves through the body and reaches the head, if it goes into the eye, it may destroy it; this often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being cured and drawn out, one cannot resist when it is going: therefore, you must tie the place above and below with a strong tight bond, then cut over it and draw it forth, and if the poison has penetrated deeply into the flesh, and you do not find it, cauterize it with fire until it dies; and its greatest harm is that it runs towards the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming to the head near the eye, strongly tighten the eyebrow underneath, then cut over it, and draw it forth; and the patient must use cleansing medicines for bodily impurities and purging agents to remove harmful humours, and avoid foods that cause putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	From the pain that comes from windiness.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This sickness is called "vakirir" in our land and causes pain that affects certain body parts. It can move from one part of the body to another - I've seen this with my own eyes, exactly as I described it.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to see a sick woman and she uncovered her arm for me. I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm; soon after, it seemed like a worm rising up towards her shoulder, more than anything else, just as when molten silver flows from one place to another. The pain moved away from its original spot, fixed itself into her shoulder and then ran across her entire body so that eventually it came back in the other arm. She told me she thought the pain was now moving around her whole body - this is exactly what I observed.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was amazed at how it moved from one body part to another because I had never seen this disease behave in such a way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Toutevoie, I had wanted many that it be better to move the pain from one place to another, but I did not want it either, just as I saw in the woman; and I thought it was because the woman has a dry body, and her veins are uncovered, so this forced flatulence appears; and according to this reason they do not appear to those who are delicate, and have moist bodies and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see this disease being treated, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then bind it above and below tightly, and then press on it so that all forced flatulence is released; cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes, treat it with what brings out flatulence, such as fetid pills, serapin pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows vary according to their appearance and the parts of the body they hit.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of arrows is such that there are those with large points and small ones; some have barbs while others do not; there are two-edged arrows as well as barbed ones and those made in pieces; the parts into which an arrow may fall can be divided according to two categories: either it strikes a vital organ, like the brain or heart, liver, lungs, kidney or bladder etc.; or it hits some other part of the body.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When an arrow hits one of these vital organs and the signs of death I will tell you about manifest themselves below, then you must refrain from extracting this arrow because death comes in many guises; but if these bad omens do not appear and the arrow is not deeply embedded, pull it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when an arrow falls and pierces the bone, and leaps through the membrane that is above the brain, it shows when there are delirium and stupor and giddiness and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of mind, and vomiting bile; perhaps blood flows from the nose or ears; and perhaps he loses speech and voice; and appears moist white matter resembling pus, and also like cooked flesh; and if these signs appear to you, then beware in treatment, and pull out the arrow unless it is embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the arrow when it falls into the heart is that it is close to the left nipple, and there is also a sensation as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty; and perhaps the arrow moves like a pulse, and black blood flows out, and coldness and cold sweat appear, and syncope: know then without doubt that death descends.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow that has not pierced a nerve is when there is no foam on the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's color changes, and they sigh deeply and desire cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow falls into the chest's covering, it is near the small ribs; it causes great pain and a great shock, and all the limbs from the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow falls into the stomach, it may expel from the wound some undigested meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow falls into the belly and no feces come out through the lower intestine, there is no hope for a cure or the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps out and flows outward, and the patient feels intense pain: know that the wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, like the arm and neck and throat and shoulder and armpit and spine of the back and loin and thigh and legs, and similar limbs, are secure according to many positions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you happened to me so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man that an arrow fell on his clavicle at the root of the neck: I grasped it and drew it out from below the ear fat, and he was quickly healed.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And draw out an arrow that had lodged in the fat of the eye below the paper beneath, and the arrow was bent, and he could only reach its point towards the shaft, and this arrow was as big as a Turkish bow, all made of light iron without ears; the wound healed, and no evil accidents befell him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And I drew out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and this arrow was Arabic with ears; I cauterized the whiskers, and handled it carefully until I extracted it, and the Christian healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And I extracted an arrow from a man's belly that had gone right through and thought he would die; then after thirty days his condition still hadn't changed; so I cut into the arrow, drew it out, and he suffered no evil accidents.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a man with an arrow stuck in his back or shoulder, and the wound has healed over it, and the arrow remains inside without changing its natural position or causing any harm to his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And you see another man with an arrow in his face, and the wound has healed over it, remaining without causing much pain or other significant issues.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And extract an arrow from the king's man which was lodged in his nose, slightly angled towards the right side; and the arrow was bent. I was called to treat him three days after it happened.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found that the wound was very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I sought it everywhere with great care, but I did not feel anything; he felt pricking and pain below his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the tip of the arrowhead. I applied a drawing and digesting poultice to the place, so that the flesh would not swell; and there appeared the flesh of the arrowhead.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I left the poultice on for several days, and the wound healed quickly, but the patient remained ill for a long time until he felt the arrowhead one day inside his nose; that's what he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it opened, and I examined it; I felt that the arrowhead was becoming exposed in this place. Then I widened the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine so much that the shaft of the arrowhead became visible; it took almost four months before it emerged. And then I expanded the wound further to allow me to insert some forceps, and I pushed from one side and another, but they could not get a grip on it. Then I did not cease trying different methods and tools until eventually one day I was able to grasp the arrowhead with some well-made forceps, according to the method described at the end of this chapter; I withdrew the arrowhead and closed up the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	The surgeon judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored: I then restored it, and the wound was sutured, and the patient was entirely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	And I have told you about the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you focus your care on what I do not mention, because books cannot cover everything; but wise masters gather much from little, and for what is present and lacking, they find new work, and new instruments, in response to the strange occurrences that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows exit the body in two ways: either by the path they entered or through another opening; and those that leave through their point of entry, are arrows lodged in fleshy tissue, which sometimes happens.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it doesn't leap now, leave it until the flesh around is rotten and the outlet is loosened; and also if it's stuck in the bone and can't come out, leave it there for some days, moving it each day; then it will jump, and if it doesn't jump, pierce all around with a very thin needle until the tissue around is enlarged, and then pull it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and goes up to one of the brains ventricles, and any of the accidents I've mentioned appear in the patient: don't pull it out, but leave it there until after a few days, for if the arrow comes close to the surface, it's death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not stuck entirely in the bone, and it does not penetrate the skin surface, and the patient remains free of adverse symptoms for a few days, then proceed to extract it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply embedded in the bone and cannot be pulled out easily, then administer small incisions around as I have told you; afterward, treat the wound until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	If the arrow is embedded within the body and cannot be seen from outside, explore all possible directions to find it; if you can feel it, then extract it with an appropriate instrument; but if the tightness of the wound and depth of the arrow prevent extraction without damaging bone or nerves or veins, then widen the wound by cutting until it is large enough. Extract the arrow if feasible, and if there are barbs on the arrow that hold it in place, remove the tissue attached to two sides of the barb so you can reach it with your instrument, then break or bend the barbs until you can extract it; do this carefully to avoid breaking the arrow as this would make extraction even more difficult.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it all at once, leave it until the surrounding tissues are rotten, then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the flow of blood opposes you, so bring about what we have said regarding the treatment in its chapter; and be wary of incising a nerve or opening a vein, and use any means necessary to pull out the arrow without danger, quickly or slowly, forcefully or gently; and place the patient according to the position they were in when the arrow struck them, for this is the greatest aid there can be, and if you cannot, so place it according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	An arrow that comes out from another part, where nothing appears of it, or the skin is swollen in this area if one sees or feels anything evidently: cut above until tongs can grasp it, and then pull it out; it should come out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, then rotate your hand circularly until it enters the bone and widens the bone, after which pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	If it cannot be extracted, then leave it there for now and attempt the extraction again until it comes out; if the arrowhead is inside, push it through the entire shaft; if the head has fallen off but you wish to administer pushing, introduce a tapered tool so that the point of the arrow enters the taper of the tool; then proceed with the pushing, and if the arrow is tapered, insert a tool in the same way with its point facing inward to facilitate extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	If the arrow is poisoned, you must cut away all the flesh around it if possible and then treat the wound appropriately.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow falls on the foot or thigh or in the belly or bladder or in the side, and it is close to the surface, and you can cut above it, then do so; be careful not to cut a vein or nerve, and then extract it, and suture the wound as needed; treat until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows resembles that of a bird's beak, and here is its form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many types: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the driving wedge is like that of a bird's feather, used to push against the tip of the arrow, as shown here in this illustration:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of the pincers to push and to pull is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	the veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are thirty-one veins in the body from which one can bleed, of which sixteen are in the head: two veins that run behind the ears, called "herbech"; and two arteries that appear in the temples; and two veins located on the lower eyelids, known as "aspires"; and a vein in the middle of the forehead; and another at the top of the nose; and two veins that are on the neck; and two veins below the upper lip, which are called "augeherich"; and finally, two more beneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins commonly used for bleeding are five in each arm: one is the cephalic vein, which runs along the left side and is known by laypeople as "the head vein"; the middle one is called "faste," a combination of the cephalic and basilic veins, referred to by laypeople as "the heart vein"; the basilic vein lies on the right side and is called by laypeople "the stomach vein", it sits over the fossa, and this is the one that appears most evidently at the wrist.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	The vein that is between the ring finger and the little finger, and has two tributaries; in the leg and foot are three veins: one is beneath the curvature of the left-side pocket, and the second sphenoid which is at the right ankle bone; and the vein called "nesse", which is located at the other side's ankle. There are also three veins below these in the other leg.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The bleeding of the veins that are located behind the ears aids in treating chronic colds and migraines; and the quality of bloodletting, as I have told you, is such that you raise the patient's head, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then strap the patient's neck with a tourniquet so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two dependent places of the head: seek them out with your finger, and where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, there cut; then take the lancet, and insert it under the vein until it reaches the bone, then lift your hand up along the whole length of the vein, and cut both skin and vein quite through two fingers' breadth, and let out blood until you wish to stop; then release and bind (it), until they are healed. And I have already described incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The bleeding of the two arteries that are in the two temples is effective for an old and persistent migraine, as well as chronic ophthalmia, and for the body of acute tears in the eyes; the qualities of the bleed are such as I say: it must be done with the patient holding his neck rigidly so that the two veins show clearly; feel their pulses under your fingers, then bleed above this; then raise the heart high over the vein by resting your index finger on top, insert the lancet underneath and lift up the vein, cutting it like you have done to the other two veins, and let the blood flow according to your need; release the patient, put your finger upon the wound for an hour, and then cotton wool on top of that; next bind it firmly and leave it until it is healed; we have already spoken about its incision and extraction at the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The bleeding of the vein in the forehead is as valuable as the bleeding of the cephalic vein for ancient ailments of the face, and for migraines, and redness; and its quality is such that the patient must strain their neck by twisting it until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called a "fosseur", of which this is the form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Place the point of the instrument over the vein and press it down with your hand or something else, and let out blood according to the quantity you desire; then release the patient's collar, and bind the wound until it is healed and do not apply a wide flame at any time.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, the flame must not be too sharp; and do not bleed across [the wound], as the bone is close by, and it may break the instrument if it is delicate.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The draining of the two veins that are in the two temples aids the eyes, and for tinea, redness, and swelling in the eye, and diseases of the face; the quality of their drainage is such that the patient must twist his neck while being held tight by someone else as before; then drain them, and let the incision be across, a little above the length of the flame, a little wide because there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are thin, they might break; then let it bleed until you have enough blood, and then bind it with cotton, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The draining of the vein in the nose is beneficial for fever, sudden severe headache, and diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that appears on the face, especially when it is chronic; the quality of the drainage is as follows: have the patient twist his neck, then grab your left hand's nose, take a thin long flame, and insert it between the lips in the space between the two nostrils because the vein does not open very well there, and the blood will begin to flow now; do not go too deep, and let it bleed according to your need, then bind it for one night, as it heals quickly; this is the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The draining of two pints of blood helps with the narrowing of the windpipe, and at the beginning of a hernia, and for many illnesses, pleurisy, gallstones, herpes, and tumors; and the quality of the bleeding is such that the patient stretches his neck underneath from one side to another, as we have said; and let the master stand over the head of the patient, and let the patient sit on a chair, then open the vein of the arm widely for a short time, then draw off blood in moderation, or as much as is necessary; then do likewise on the other arm, then undo the bandage, and press firmly around the veins moderately so that the patient does not choke; and let him remain like this until morning, until the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	The bleeding of the gums
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The draining of blood from the veins of the upper lip helps with glue in the mouth, and with the decay of gums, and cracks on lips, as well as sores and inflammation around them.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of bloodletting is to have the patient sit in front of you, and hold their neck as I said; then turn the lip and look at the two veins, one on the right upper lip and the other on the left, which are known for being dark and having small black veins around them: so cut both, and if you don't know or doubt it, cut the thicker one from each side, and do the same with the two veins above and below, as they are of the same kind.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	Of bleeding beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Bleeding the veins beneath the tongue aids after bleeding from the temporal vein, and it is for narrowing of the throat, and diseases of the eye, and illnesses of the mouth; and the quality of the bleeder should be such that the patient sits between your hands facing the sun, and they lift their tongue, and look underneath on each side a black vein: so bleed one and then the other, but do not go too deep, for beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the neck that are commonly bled are bled in two ways: either by making an incision with a rather wide flame-martinated knife, or with an olivewood subtle one as sharp as you like, and this is called "anesil"; they are broad and thin according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame marten is highly renowned, and it is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the swollen veins full of thick blood, and containing troubled thick blood; and this is the form of the olive flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more pointedly subtle, and it is for bleeding thin veins, where there is subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The bleeding of the basilica, which is one of these veins, aids illnesses that are below the throat, and near the neck, and under the armpit, and in the abdomen; and it is important for the bleeder to bleed carefully, and avoid the artery that lies beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it pierces the artery, and a flow of blood occurs, then it must be staunched, as I have said; and the flame should not be pressed upon, but cut like a lancet.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilic vein does not open clearly, then you must extract it and change to another one; or take a segment of it, or heal in its place the vein within the arm: it opens clearly; and cut it with a lancet as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you want to know the place of the wound, then it is necessary that you stretch out the arm and touch the place until you feel the pulse; then mark this spot with a sign, then bind the arm, and cut into the vein with a lancet as we have said; watch over it so you do not strike the artery when you see the place swell up, for that is the artery: avoid it therefore.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it rise up like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is arterial blood: therefore hurry and place your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, which often happens; bind his arm, and leave it thus, and let not the patient move; and be in fear, and do not move him until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the bleeding is not stopped, and you faint, and no medical practitioner is present, then cut the artery where it appears, for this will stop the blood flow; and stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Take a piece of fig bark, split it in two and take one half, binding it well until the next day; if the bleeding has stopped, that is good; if not, then treat him as we have said, with powders to stop blood flow; and this method of stopping bleeding is not dangerous in many situations due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm's binding.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The draining of the vein in the middle helps draw blood from both the head above and the body below, as it is composed of both the basilica and cephalica veins, as we have said; and the surgeon must take care not to pierce too deeply near the nerve that lies beneath, for if they hit the nerve and cause swelling, the patient will be grievously harmed, and may even fail to heal; this nerve is often visible but due to its subtlety sometimes remains unseen in some people, so you should drain it with a thin instrument; avoid piercing the nerve as best you can.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is an open wound between the two nerves, then make a long incision.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The draining of the cephalica vein is helpful as it draws blood from the head and aids the eyes; you should drain using an olive oil flame or a myrtle flame cautery, for this is the safest method among all wounds, as there are no nerves or arteries beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, it is necessary to seek the lightest position and not cause any harm if one fails at first, and they can start again; sometimes, some people's joints may swell when this happens for the first time, but that does not matter much.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the bleeding is according to your judgment.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you should know about bleeding is that it is not performed for any other purpose but to maintain health and prevent future illnesses; this bleeding can be done in one of the three veins which are known as cephalic, median, and basilic; the bleeding must take place at the beginning of Lent while fasting, and during autumn and winter after eating when signs of fullness appear; it should ideally take place on the first or third day, a couple of hours or up to three days later.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The bleeding that is administered for illnesses has no specific time, but rather when the need arises, day or night, at all hours and in any season; and it is not advisable to bleed children until they are fourteen years old, nor a woman carrying a child before the fourth month up to seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	They should not bleed the elderly who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when anyone wishes to bleed themselves, in whatever manner, they should first cleanse their intestines with a light enema, if there is an excess of feces retained, so that the veins do not draw from the intestines harmful superfluities that would be detrimental to the principal members; nor should you bleed one who is over-sated with meat, or drunk, until such time as they are sober again, nor those suffering from dropsy; and beware bleeding after a colic attack, vomiting, diarrhea, excessive intercourse for women, hard work, lack of sleep, fasting, and any other exertion either physical or mental; then thin the humors if the blood is thick due to meat consumption and drinking and by medicines, if you have them at your disposal; then take a bath, should nothing hinder this, to thin the blood, and bleed from the vein on the inner side of the elbow as we have said before; and guard against exertion, strain, lust, and suchlike that day; be calm and happy, and let the bleeder be higher than the one being bled, and let him rub the arm twice or three times with his hands, then tighten the ligature moderately, for if it is too tight or narrow, blood cannot flow through it; and then rub the place with your hands until the veins swell up and are felt; then moisten the bleeder's flame with a bit of old oil, then put your left thumb on that vein below the place where you wish to bleed so as not to allow the vein to escape or break when struck.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that leak like cords to the wound drain, and some are full of windiness, so that when one places a flame upon it, it retreats from the flame, and cannot open the vein; thus it is with these [veins]; if one opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, for this reason, the wound-draining surgeons must be mindful in such cases.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the wound opens up the first time, it is good; if not, try again a little below that spot or above until you find a suitable place, if the spots are not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the spots are swollen and the patient is afraid, leave it for one or two days, do not bind the arm: perhaps hot abscesses will appear; do not enter the bath, then restart the wound-draining procedure if you wish; and if the opening is small, or the blood flows out subtly, and you doubt that it won't drain as much blood as you want, direct all of your flame straight onto that same opening; work a little above instead, unless the spots are swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the place inflamed, do not restart the surgery, and apply a poultice of oil, for it alleviates the body from blood, and is friendly to this place the poultice that has oil; and thus administer the poultice of oil in each surgery that you treat the veins, to stanch the flow of blood; and the same does triacle and bowels when placed on the place; very subtly it draws out and separates the blood if it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if a large abscess occurs there, which happens many times, especially when it has not been operated on before except for that time or the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and apply to the place a sponge moistened with warm water and salt, and compress it for an hour; and you must do this after the blood flow from the wound ceases, and if it remains at the place after some days any blackness or greenness, then it does not harm; and if you see it, apply something of aloe or myrrh mixed with gallium juice, mastic, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there is an abscess and appearance in the wound of the basilica: therefore place your hand on it, and if you find the spot soft upon compression with your hand, then that is a bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore make sure you do not put anything on it from what we have said before, for perhaps the cut is too close to the artery; but apply a dry poultice to harden the spot, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw out blood from each person according to the quantity of their strength, and according to the colour of their blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and if you see that it is thick, leave it be until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for the one who is full and robust, requiring bloodletting, that you make a larger wound for him, with wide flames; and for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and you should bleed them little but often, and you must do so by cutting across, not piercing; this manner of bleeding is safe from excessive blood loss and nerve damage, and it is better than long or wide incisions.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for the one whose body requires bleeding, give them bread soaked in pomegranate juice; if they are hot-tempered, take three or four times out of blood; and if they have a cold complexion, let them eat moistened bread with musky syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints during the treatment, after the loss of a great deal of blood, it is necessary that he drinks meat broth, and subtle aromatic syrup, and uses other things we have mentioned in the section on syncope, for the evacuation of the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to open his arm and bleed it again, when he is weakened by excessive bleeding, it is necessary that he bleeds little by little, according to the amount of his remaining strength, continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if he wishes to open his arm again after the first bleeding, and he has a strong constitution, then he should bleed seven hours after the initial bleeding or after nine hours have passed since the first one.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if he wishes to bleed in another place, it must be done on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For he has much blood within his body that is already heated, and causes fever; it is necessary to draw out a great quantity, and widen the opening until it ceases in proportion; then, when you attend all conditions of healing, place your hand on his pulse as he heals, lest death come into the place of proportion, and this happens many times when healers are negligent; and it is not fitting that when you wish to unbind the arm, and make blood flow a second time, and the opening is closed, you press forcefully upon it; nor if it is crooked, should he extend his arm hastily, for this would be harmful; but leave it until it heals a second time; or, prick at the end of the vein so that the congealed blood flows out from the wound, and apply some wet flaxen cloth, and press lightly upon it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the wound is swollen, leave it alone and do not restrain it until the abscess has subsided.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, then do so from the same place or from another vein in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein between the arms is used for bleeding instead of the one on the head because it is easily accessible.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	The method of bleeding is as follows: the patient immerses their hand in warm water until the nails turn red; they are then tied loosely so that the vein becomes prominent, and bled from across its width rather than length; the opening should be wide, with the bleeding occurring close to the wrist joint; if blood does not come out, immerse the hand again in warm water and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough; for those who are cold-blooded, do not re-immerse the hand in warm water as this is done more often during winter than summer; bleeding from this vein is safer than any other veins because it does not contain arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The bloodletting of the right hand's vein is effective for all liver ailments: take hold of the hand and immerse it in warm water until the vein swells if it can be seen; and if the bleeding occurs transversely and you cut straight across, there will be no harm; do not go too deep, as the nerves are directly beneath completely bare of flesh; then return the hand to warm water if the blood is frozen in the wound and cannot exit.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drawn as much blood as needed, apply oil and flaxseed to the wound to seal the incision, and do likewise with each vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	Bloodletting of the left hand's vein is beneficial for disorders of the spleen, and perform everything just as I told you regarding the right hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The bleeding of the saphenous vein is beneficial for all ailments that are below the waist, such as diseases of the uterus, retention of urine, kidney disease, thigh and leg pain, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its bloodletting is that the patient soaks their foot in hot water, rubs over the vein until it breaks, and binds it above the ankle joint; this vein is located at the ankle, extending up towards the kidney; bleed from whichever kidney is closer or from the ankle as you see fit.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you bleed from the foot, beware of the nerves below it and cut across them as well; let the blood flow freely without stopping.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot escape, then put the foot back into the water, and let it thoroughly drain the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the incision fails the first time, then make a second one slightly above it, for the location is salty; do not be concerned about nerves, as we have said, and treat the other foot similarly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The location of the sciatic vein is at the ankle bone, and its incision is beneficial for relieving hip pain when it is hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	The quality of this incision is such that the patient must enter the bath, and then stretch above the ankle for four days by twisting, because otherwise the vein will not open; and if it does open, treat the wound in every way you can, and with crossed legs; it is better to cut than to drain, as the location is salty, and it is very responsive to manual treatment.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it, then squeeze any vein that appears on the back of the foot, towards the little toe, and be careful to avoid nerves; make sure blood flows freely until you see it, then release the binding, apply cotton, and compress; she is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	bloodletting using cupping
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping instruments are made of horn, or brass, or glass; and cupping is performed in two ways: either by wounding and drawing out blood, or without wounding.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping method without wounding is done in two ways: either with full heat or without heat; and the cupping that involves wounding and blood extraction is performed at fourteen places on the body, of which one is entirely on the head; another is at the nape of the neck; others are on both sides of the neck; the cup below the chin; those on both shoulders; those over the hips; those in both arms; those on both legs; and cups for ankles. And this type of cupping draws out only a small amount of blood, just from the minute veins scattered across the flesh, so you will not weaken anyone by it as with vein bloodletting. It must never be administered either heated or unheated to any illness that comes about through overabundance until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if due to the necessity of illness it is required to ventose [a form of cupping therapy], or for familiarization, we administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or towards the end, and in between and all times; because there are those who when they need to be ventosed have a heavy head; and some find fullness and redness on their face, and on their head, neck, and darkening around the eyes; and others find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, coughing up blood; and still others experience dreams, seeing through the night blood, bruises, death, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially when it is in the middle of the month, we instruct to be ventosed after three hours during the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The bleeding of the nose helps with the itching of the head ... that affects the eyes, and it should not be done after evacuating all the body's blood; this venesection takes the place of bleeding from the head, and it is not suitable for those of a cold constitution or who have catarrh, as it does them great harm; therefore, the elderly should not use it, nor those with cold ailments in the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often bleed in this way become forgetful, so it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little further down due to the fear of oblivion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	Bleeding in the middle of the neck takes the place of bleeding from the head and from the basilic vein, and for this reason it is useful for narrowing of the throat, ruptures in the diaphragm, coughs, and fullness; it should not be applied with too much force because if it holds tightly, it causes forgetfulness or stomach/heart pain.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventilation at the two ribs of the neck is useful for headaches, eye inflammation, migraines, choking sensations, and toothache pain; it replaces bloodletting from the basilica vein; you should instruct the surgeon to press their hand lightly so they don't sever an artery or cause bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	Ventilation below the chin is useful for mouth diseases, gum inflammation and similar ailments that affect the mouth, it replaces bloodletting from both lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Ventilation of the shoulders is useful for diseases caused by heat and excess moisture.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	Ventilation of the armpits is just as effective as the three veins of the arm, because it draws blood from these large vessels; instruct the surgeon not to press too deeply, since this area lacks muscle and contains nerves and arteries beneath it.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup that is placed on the buttocks is useful for treating hemorrhoids and diseases below [the waist], and it must be large, made of brass, so as to have a strong pull; and perhaps if it were thin, it would break; and it creates big wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	Suction cups placed on the legs visibly drain blood from the entire body and are useful for treating old pains in the kidneys, uterus, and bladder, and help heal abscesses; they can be placed at the two hips or two ankles, but over time their use weakens the body and causes fainting in many dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the suction cup is as follows: first place it on an empty area and apply it quickly, press down firmly, move evenly, and do not stop until you see the skin reddening and swelling up, indicating that blood has been drawn from deeper layers; then remove the cups, being mindful of individual bodily constitutions since some have dense tissue while others are more porous: thus one must strike only once and create wide but shallow wounds; suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to thin out the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very dense, it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we wish to draw out little by little, we are content with only one blow.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we wish to draw out a lot of blood, we start again often; and if the blood is dense, strike perfectly, and let it end so that the heart is suddenly pierced, and for those with thick and hard skin, and who have narrow veins, you must grease the cups' openings with an aperitif and dissolving oil: if it is in summer, violet oil, almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if it is in winter, cress oil, lily oil, chamomile oil, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess [matter] is large and cold, take almond oil or balm oil, aniseed oil, and similar oils.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one being treated has tender flesh and large pores, no oil should be applied; instead, it should be washed after ventilation with rose water, cold water, morelle water, cucumber water, porcelain water, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And for those with excessive moisture, apply myrtle water or sumac water, and similar substances.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And for those with large excess matter, use old wine or suet water, aniseed decoction or chamomile infusion, and similar remedies; one should not be bled with cupping before a bath nor while in the bath, but after the bath by one or two hours; one must remain awake after cupping and must not sleep during the treatment.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And watch out if the patient is choleric and has too much sharp and inflamed blood; they should take cold things like pomegranates and endive and lettuce in moderation, and similar foods; and eat little pork, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And for those with a cold constitution, give them syrup of honey and moderately fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and eat little pork and mutton, and small birds like pigeons; and on the day they are cupped, they should drink more than eat; sometimes you must give some men treacle or nutmeg before or after cupping to strengthen their principal members; be subtle with the blood, but those who are hot should not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The cups which are applied without causing injury are those placed on the liver, and on the spleen, podagra, on the belly, hips, and kidneys, for these members do not tolerate wounding at all; we only employ them to draw blood from member to member, just as we place them on breasts when a child is nursing; to remove the viscosity which accumulates in the member, such as applying cups to the abdomen and hip to diminish the member; and it removes pain, where there is obstruction or stones, possibly by its attractive virtue removing the obstruction, or ridding the stone of its location; thus does it act also when placed on the liver and spleen when there are retained flatulencies, and these cups should be applied empty in order only to suck; and sometimes they are administered with fire, and some filled with tepid water, such as in diseases of pleurisy, and in that way one fills the cup with warm water alone or with water where suitable herbs have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The method of applying the cupping glass with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	It has two inches of width and half a palm in depth, and on its side, towards the middle, it has a small hole like that for inserting a needle, and let it be made of brass so as not to hurt the patient when placed on the limb; and at its centre there is an iron or brass bar across which a candle wick can be inserted, and there are large and small ones according to the illnesses and ages of those who take them; because cupping glasses for children are different from those for old people, and those for thin people from those for fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	One must thus insert this cupping glass onto the limb: take a candle of wax or a wick soaked in oil and place it across the bar inside the cupping glass such that the flame is at the bottom of the cup so as not to burn the patient; then put the cup on the limb, with your two fingers over the hole we mentioned, so that when you want to, you can let out some vapour, and remove the cupping glass; take the wick as before and relight it often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the cupping glass that is applied in pleurisy, for all acute cases, there is no pipe or opening, and it is only used when full of water, being placed solely on top of the affected limb; its form is as follows:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	They are only applied to limbs where cupping cannot be used due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; also on parts devoid of flesh, like the tongue or nose, and other similar ones; and the quality of their use is that when you find leeches which are in clear clean water without mud, take them out; place them one night in pure water until they become familiarized and have nothing inside their bodies; then bleed with a lancet and cupping glass, afterwards rub the limb red-raw, and put on the leeches; and when they are full, and drop off, if this is where you can apply a cupping glass, do so because it is very beneficial.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, lift the place of injury slightly, then with water, very well, and then press it; if the wound heals too close to the body after this, moisten a linen cloth in cold water, and apply it until the blood is stopped; and if the blood flow increases, put powdered vitriol or galls and similar things on it, until it stops; or you can place half of some peeled broad beans over the injury, leaving them there to dry out at the wound, which will now stop bleeding; and should more be needed, take additional compresses.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	If the compresses cannot be applied, rub the place of injury with fresh blood, or prick it with a needle until some blood comes out, and then apply the compresses; as soon as they feel the blood, they will dry out; and when you see them getting wet again, sprinkle on some powder of aloes and ground psyllium, or ash, and they shall now cease.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with the resetting of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that the foolish surgeon who ignores this chapter will never see any of the ancient medical books, nor read their letters; and for this reason, knowledge is lacking in our land, for I have never found a good one; and I know nothing else except through the science of these ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have acquired knowledge from them, as well as through experience and the practice of my life; and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained within it, and have summarized it at the end, clearly showing the forms of the instruments that are used, just as I have done in these two previous chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is necessary then that we say in the prologue of this book the summary of the words and chapters where the sage puts his understanding, and remains on the truth so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	When fracture or dislocation or torsion or rupture occurs in someone, you must hasten to bleed the patient on one side and the other, unless something prevents it, such as weakness of the body, children, or old age; or if the weather is too hot or too cold; and avoid cold foods, that is, cold porridge, goat meat, and sheep's flesh, and do not drink wine, nor eat fatty meats, and do not fill up too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of a warm abscess, or an outflow of matter from the member; then the patient returns to his first usual diet.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the patient be fed meats that cause quick growth, or something viscous, such as wheat boiled in water, and rice, and eggs, and feet, and cow stomach, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For if quick growth is taken away, healing and the breaking of bones occur more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the broken bones of the elderly and those decrepit cannot be well healed or fused according to their nature due to the dryness of their members; nor can those who are too young, such as small children; but they will heal, apply on either side of the break large splints which bind and join the member together, so that it is strengthened like before; do not remove them from this work at all, and for this reason you must nourish them with rich meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the skull is different from that of the spine, or a leg bone, and I shall tell you in this chapter all the types of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	As there are fractures that require traction, and others by sharpening, like the slit of a quill to write with.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it is fracture with wound, or a complete fracture with slight crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And for each type there is its own instrument and tool in the restoration process, according to how it remembers its place; and the fracture of bone can be identified by the twist in its line, clearly evident from the outside, and resonating when pressed with hand; and where there is no twisting or resonance on touch, and patient feels little pain, then perhaps there is no fracture; but could be a twist, crack or slight break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You shouldn't move it by hand; instead, apply the following medicines listed below and then hold [the shoulder] now gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Know that a fracture which goes around the entire bone, and where the two parts are disjoined, they must now be brought back into alignment equally, lest hot abscesses form there; and if hot abscesses come, leave it alone for one day until the abscess has healed over; then bring it into position as closely as you can without causing pain or damage and know that its recovery will be easier than that of one where pieces are missing; hold [the bone] as described below.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if there are pieces broken in the bone, stretch it out across two supports, whether that be hand or foot, or with both hands if a small limb is involved, or with two cords, or one cord and your hands; put the member back into its natural position so that when the parts of the broken member have been brought together, bring all add-ons into their places as closely as you can without causing pain or damage and take care not to cause injury or pain through your work; and align well the two heads of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And he feels it well with his hand if it seems to you that it is not well: so treat it gently, and do not strain or press it too much, for such actions cause hot abscesses and contractions in the limb, as we have seen many times before.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is in place, caution the patient well to not move it, neither while awake nor asleep, or during any other movement; and ensure that the limb is secure so that they feel no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when they feel no pain, it is not yet in place, and you must put it in such a position that they feel no pain; and be careful that it is set straight, so that no crookedness comes when it is restored; and the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs differ in their size, length, and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small limbs, such as arms and fingers and similar: one must wrap them in soft and fine linen cloths; and for those that are large, like thighs and legs: one must wrap them with a wide and strong bandage, for the wide bands embrace the whole of the large limb, and constrict it evenly from all sides, so that there is no pressure; then bind with light rolls of gauze, three or four turns according to the size of the limb, and tighten your hand slightly on the entire bandage, then go above the fracture and tighten less, allowing the fracture to separate a little; and loosen the bandage bit by bit, until you take up most of the healthy part, then take another bandage, and wrap it again over the broken area; then return to the part below the fracture, and bind moderately, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first binding above; then place between the bandages rolls of linen or cloths until they are all even, then tie everything with a strip above, and finally put on your splints well-made, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is inflammation or an abscess, apply soothing ointment for abscesses that is hot and reduces swelling, leaving it there for a few days; then strap on your stars, and let them be made from half of a wide cane cut lengthwise, or from the wood used to make shingles, or from palm ribs, and let them be shaped like this:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	but the star placed over the fracture should be a little thicker and wider than the others; it must also be as long as is suitable for the size of the limb; then strap tightly onto the stars, just like you did with the first bandage, then bind on top with an appropriate thread, like in the first binding for the fracture; make sure it is tighter above and looser below; the thread should not be too thick nor too thin, but rather medium thickness, and made of soft flax; because if the threads are thick, as I have seen the work of fools who use coarse linen cords for their bindings, this is a great error, for the bandage cannot be even if it is too fine, and make sure there should not be more than two fingerbreadths between each star.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is injured by the head of the shoulder after being immobilized in a cast, place pads made of linen or woolen gauze beneath it to prevent injury.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by a fracture, and the heart is broken, I will speak of its treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And remember, it is not advisable to immobilize the shoulder immediately after a fracture of any limb on the same day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limb is large, one should not apply a cast until five or seven days have passed, or more depending on your assessment of the level of inflammation present; and here you will find an ancient method of poultices to treat fractures, dislocations, and sprains: take flour that sits against the millstone wall, mix it with abundant egg, and apply this mixture, neither too runny nor too thick, using it as follows, which is a common way to treat fractures in various positions, especially for women and small children, as it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Autre maniere d'emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Autre maniere d'emplaustre que vaut a torsion: take mullein and marshmallow root, each 10 units; myrrh and aloe, each 9 units; acacia bark, 6 units; Armenian bole, 10 units; grind well, and mix with water or egg white, then apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take new wool, boil it in ash water and oil, then apply to the injured area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not restore, but they are good for soothing hot abscesses and properly alleviating pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dry fig leaves and earth-pine leaves, grind them together, then make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another manner of poultice for the restoration of bone fractures and to reduce the remaining abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of mallow, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of vetch, of each one part; grind and mix with wine, and if the limb is hot, mix with moist coriander water or plain water, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another manner of stronger poultice than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of mallow, and flax seeds, pomegranate rind, melilot, and sanicle, with flowers of violets and chamomile, all in equal parts; grind and mix with salted water, or fresh water, or wine, depending on the warmth of the limb and its condition.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken limb to restore it except for ointment made of wax and oil, and no other thing more, he says this must be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And Galen believes that one should apply to a broken limb, for restoration, dry things slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar items, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another plaster that is good for injury and pain: take mugwort and chopped human hair, or feathers of a bird, and viscum, and equal amounts of each, grind them together and make a plaster and bind it in place.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then you remove the binding a little while later and check if the patient feels no pain nor has there been any movement of the bone from its place, do not loosen it too soon by hand. And if pain comes to this spot or itching, restlessness, or swelling appears then hurry up and take off the plaster now; grab light fabric like silk, and a sponge moistened with sea water, dip in some warm water and apply at the site of discomfort until any itchiness ceases and there is relief from pain. Then let it rest for an hour afterwards, put dry cloth on it soaked in water or rose oil, and wrap up gently each night until you are sure there is no abscess. And reduce inflammation around the limb, easing away any pain then restart gentle binding and a small amount of plaster, without tightening as much as before; do this gently until it has healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess has ceased to suppurate and turned red, causes pain and is swollen, take away all of it, and then apply an ointment and bandage; repeat this as often as necessary just as before in the same manner.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	If none of what we have mentioned works for the limb, then do not dislocate it until after three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes leave it alone for twenty days, depending on what you see, until the fracture heals, and the flesh approaches the bone; then restrain it more than before, and thicken its flesh as I said earlier; and if you see that the place is drying up too much, know that nourishment cannot come there anymore; therefore bathe it in warm water every time you dislocate it, and do this every three days, loosening the bandage slightly; by doing so, nourishment returns to the limb, and improves what the foolish doctors do, who restore the limb crookedly: this is bad, and such operations are fearful, and I see nothing else but to leave it be and work on it properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	The diverse ways of breakage.
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many types of fractures and various forms, and their causes are distinct; for there are fractures caused by the strike of a sword, and the blow removes all the bone up to the marrow that lies beneath the bone, just as an axe or a pole does; and thus this type of fracture is called 'axing'.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called 'absolute'; and the wound from these two fractures can be large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded blow or splitting from the impact of a stone, or falling on stone, or other similar causes.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a piercing fracture that reaches close to the membrane underneath the bone or upon it, and this wound can be large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound that pierces the bone as subtly as a hair and has a small fracture which is why this break is called "capillary", and if the wound is made by striking with stone or falling or similar, causing a piece of the bone to fall inwards leaving a gap like that made by blacksmiths when they strike pots; so does the bone go inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more often in those with moist bones like children's heads and occurs with all these types of fractures where small fragments are torn apart like stars, I will speak about them when the time comes.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all manners of fractures through their dislocation, and examination by touch, and the corrupted flesh that is upon them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of the hair is known for this reason: when the bone is exposed and one rubs it, the black fracture becomes visible.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In treating the fracture, take heed of the patient's accidents and illnesses; if you see any ill accident such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, convulsions, fainting, a fever that comes in waves, their eyes turn red and bulge, or other similar things across several dispositions, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you see no terrible accidents and expect recovery, begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the wound first comes to you, and it is in winter, you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day so that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, lest the membrane beneath the bone become corrupt, and the accidents we have spoken of occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the bone fracture reaches the membrane covering the brain, you must split the affected part in this way: take hold of the wounded person's head and uncover over the bone in every possible manner, especially above the shape of the wound; should bleeding occur upon uncovering the bone or a hot abscess develop, then apply the necessary treatment, filling its place with lint moistened in rose oil; let the wound rest until the hot abscess has cooled down and you are sure there is no further bleeding. Then proceed to remove around the bone by either of two methods: one method being that you cut narrowly in front - which will be the shape..
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then he makes another incision larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	The second method is to have several different blades, some narrow and others wide, all with points, made of thin iron; use them gently so you do not injure the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and solid, you must drill around it rather than using blades with awls because they cannot fully penetrate the skull bone. The tip of the awl should have a margin or circle to prevent over-penetration; you will need several of these so that each fits into its place on the type of bone, ensuring you have awls for all parts of the skull; this is what the three types of awl are used for:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities to pierce around the broken bone are that you place I tarere on the bone, and turn your fingers until you know the bone is pierced; then move the tarere elsewhere a little after, and do so all around, then cut with the incisor knives the space of the bone between the openings, doing this as finely and lightly as you can, as we have said, until you extract the bone by hand or with any of the instruments such as pincers; make sure not to touch the brain or the meninges.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and extracted the bone, it is necessary that you use an awl to remove any leftover bits of bone with all other instruments similar to an incisor knife, but they must be more slender and finer than the other knives; if there remains anything from small bones or scales, remove them lightly with some instruments; then treat the wound with dressings and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of treatment is that which Galen describes, which is safer; he praises it strongly, and this is his saying:
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	You must first expose a part of the bone, where the fracture is visible, so that when you have uncovered this area, you will place beneath it the head of this lens-shaped cutter; here is its form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side only, as the cutting edge has two sides, so that the sharp edges face towards the bone; then strike gently with a small mallet above it, so that you lightly chip away at the bone all around, and be careful of the membrane beneath; if it is attached to the bone, remove it slightly, for it can be removed without harm or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not pierce through to the membrane, and the bone is merely cut above it, with small pieces present, you must smooth over this roughness, and remove the scales using a fine scraper of varying sizes which you should possess, to accommodate each place with what is most suitable, according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Place large scrapers before it, followed by finer ones, and do not cease until it is well-done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other fine scalping and delicate fractures, you must provide a reason according to its direction; this is something that cannot be fully explained by one who has devoted their study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; 
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take heed therefore, if any bad accident befalls the patient, as we have said, it is undoubtedly doubtful.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if blackening occurs only due to the medicine applied, with such a powerful effect, you must take some honey and three parts of rose oil, mix them together, and apply this mixture as a dressing; then treat it in the manner of cures that is appropriate until it heals.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes both parts of the clavicle are broken or just one of them, for these are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, it does not break but only dislocates or twists, then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, you must reach your little finger into the space where the clavicle sits and place this broken part equal to your index finger inside and push from below until the clavicle regains its natural shape; do this gently, and take care that the patient does not feel pain because of your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is above the nose and cannot be reached by hand, it must be set level with the head of a slightly thicker nail.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the fracture is in two parts, do likewise and hasten to reset it on the first day if you can; otherwise, after seven or ten days, when the hot abscess has cooled down, then use fine linen bandages at the head of the nose for a fracture that is not complete.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	In another place you use other bandages if there is a fracture there; these bandages should be so thick that they fill the cavities of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	Some doctors claim that bandages should be moistened with butter and changed daily.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem good to me, but they should be moistened in a preparation of egg white and flour powder; then leave the tent so that the bone hardens and the cartilage becomes stiff.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes goose feathers are placed instead of tents, and if you have soft cloth, wrap it around, and hold the breakage, and let the patient blow through it; do as you wish.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess forms in the nose while you are working on it, apply a plaster or cotton moistened with rose oil, or a piece of diascordon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess does not form, apply a plaster from the outside made of ground flax seeds and incense powder mixed with egg white, then place light tow on it, but do not tie up the nose; and if the breakage in the nose is small, and it breaks into tiny pieces, extract them with suitable instruments for this purpose, then clean out the wound, cure it with things that join flesh together, soldering it like plasters and ointments appropriate for such a case; and if there is no injury inside the nose, treat it with tents, placing thin canes until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the breaking of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is broken from below, and there is no external wound, with the fracture being only outside, not splitting into two, nor bending inward; one knows it easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is on the right side, you must insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; if it is on the left jawbone, insert your right-hand index finger and push the fracture in slightly, and fix it from outside with your other hand, making it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jawbone fracture is split into two pieces, you must apply extension to both parts until it is levelled.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movement or fracture of teeth occurs, tie them with a thread made of gold, silver, or silk; then apply cerote on the broken jawbone, and place double cloth over it; put over the cloth a large well-made starched pad or an equal piece of leather that is long and wide according to the jawbone, and bind it as tightly as you can manage. Instruct the patient to rest and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	If you notice a change in the shape of the jaw, untie it after three days, and then reset what has shifted; apply an ointment made from flour with egg or sesame oil over it, after removing the cerote (bandage); put a light linen cloth over the ointment. If the dressing dries out but the patient's condition does not change, leave it until healed. Healing often occurs in three weeks' time.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if a warm abscess forms, apply what we have said many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture with an accompanying wound, remove any broken pieces of bone; do so carefully using appropriate instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with a flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Once you have removed all the broken pieces and there are no remaining fragments, clean the wound if it is wide, and apply suitable dressings to promote flesh growth until it heals.
de la forcele	Of strength.
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The collarbone breaks multiple times in front towards the shoulder and does so in three ways: either it breaks into two separated pieces which is the easiest to repair; or there are fragments; or it involves both fracture and wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the operation is such when there is a fracture without a wound, you should have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder that feels the fracture; and the other extends the neck towards the affected part; then align the fracture with your hands, so that its form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor conclusion.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place under the patient's shoulder a round sphere of cloth or wool, and make it thick according to your needs; stretch and lift the fracture, and press the sphere with your hand, so that you align the break as required.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the fracture outwards, because it is too close to the surface, then the patient must often lie on their back, and place a medium-sized pillow under their shoulder; the assistants push the shoulder downwards until the bone of the fracture is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then attend to the fracture with your hands, and if you find it broken, you must split it further; draw out the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot be joined by any means, break it using one of the cutting instruments you have; but put pressure on the forceps underneath, to prevent necrosis.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and it should resemble a spoon, and is not very sharp, and be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and have two heads, as you see, with one being wider, and the other narrower, just like the rupture of the wound that you made when drawing out the bones; and once you are sure of a hot abscess, cauterize the wound, and if the rupture is small, or if you suspect a hot abscess, pack the wound with cloths and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if a warm abscess arises, soak a cloth in rose oil and vinegar and wine, then place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	Bind the bone when it is wounded and fractured by applying an ointment of mill powder and egg white on top; add light swabs, place a soft wood stick beneath the armpit if needed, then take a very wide bandage one palm in width, place doubled cloth over the swab, smear on ointment, then take a thin rod three fingers broad and long and wrap it inside that bandaged fabric so its end hangs down; insert the rod into the fracture and roll up the bandage around the neck, under both armpits – unhealthy and healthy - gently tighten until you see the splint stabilizes the bone. Check often whether the ties are tight enough to keep the splint in place over the broken bone. Reward the patient each day, retighten whenever ties loosen; make them lie on their back with a small pillow beneath the armpit at night so that the shoulder is elevated above heart level – this eases any strain on the brachial plexus by aligning the shoulder or tie arm to neck until day twenty without unbinding unless some bad incident occurs, then redo the ointment if you see it's necessary and restrain again for as long as recovery takes; most heal in twenty-eight days but for some less.
de la brisure de l’espaule	For shoulder fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Until the shoulder is healed or put back in place, do not touch it; adjust it according to the shape of the break and restore it according to its natural form as best you can; then apply fine flour with egg white and light compresses on top and cover with a double cloth; then fix a broad bandage of soft linen over this, a little wider than the shoulder, and if there is any hair under the bandage use lint swabs so that the bandage lies evenly; and bind it tightly all around with a large bandage so that the splint does not shift from its place, and check the binding every day; and whenever it loosens, tighten it up again, and adjust the splint if it is out of place, and have the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder will be restored in 20 days or 25. When this number of days has been completed, remove the bandage and take care to avoid any further displacement since bones do not heal lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a part of the bone juts forward and pierces below the heart, make an incision above it, remove it, and do as we have said for treating a broken rib to cool the hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	Of the breaking of the spine
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The spine is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; it often breaks outward.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it bends downward and the patient feels great pain, lacks movement, coughs, and may even vomit blood; the ends of the bone are exposed through the skin, which can be easily felt.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	The restoration process involves having the patient lie frequently on their back, and placing a cushion between their shoulders; then pressing the shoulders together while bringing the ribs of both sides closer with your hands in order to align the bones correctly. Afterwards, apply poultices and cover them with fine salt or some other light substance like a bandage that you wrap around the broken bone so it cannot move; tie this roundly at the back and fasten tightly but not too much, undoing it every hour and tightening again if necessary; especially if loosening is required due to corrosion, itching of the wound, pain, or abscess - in which case be quick about it. Remove the poultice and clean the area using appropriate treatments before reapplying a new one until healing occurs.
de la brisure des costes	Of rib fractures
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Knows that rib fractures only occur in the back part of the ribs, towards the spine and head, and they do not bend because they are thin and fragile; one feels it well upon examination by touch.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatment is that you set the fracture evenly, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply a plaster cast, and restrain with a splint if needed.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	If the rib fracture is inwardly displaced, the patient feels great pain, and pricking, like a prickle, because the bone pierces the flesh; they also have difficulty breathing, cough up blood clots, and it can be fatal if not treated quickly. The elderly often suffer greatly from this injury.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And so there are those who say one must administer foods that swell the belly to push the rupture outwards.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not cause this, for hot abscesses arrive there if they have come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have arrived, then treat them with cautery.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some of you say to apply cups to the site to draw out strongly, and this seems reasonable; nonetheless, there is doubt that the cup may attract superfluities to the location due to its weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some of you say to cover the site with moist wool soaked in hot oil, and apply tents between the ribs to equalize the tension around it, then be cured by treatment for pleurisy, meat, and medication.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear due to the bone pressing against the skin, and there is doubt in their case, then one must cut above the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put an instrument beneath to protect the soft parts; and then one should cut into the bone, and extract gently, and then sew together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a hot abscess forms, place moist rags soaked in rose oil on the site, and apply it to the area; treat the location according to what is needed for an abscess, and let it rest frequently on its side where it should be, until it heals.
de la brisure dou col	Of the broken neck.
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes fracture occurs to the bones of the neck, and thus it bends; likewise with the backbone.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will recover or not, observe if their hands become soft, swollen, and lifeless, unable to move or extend, and when you prick them with a needle, they feel no pain.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is deadly in many situations, and if they react and feel well when you squeeze and prick them, know that the bone joints are saved, and the patient will recover if treated properly.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if similar happens to the backbone, and you want to know their recovery chances, observe if their feet are weakened, and if there is any injury in the hands or on the back, along with windiness and involuntary defecation; when they are turned onto their stomach, it should also cause involuntary defecation.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is reminded of it on his back and wants to get up, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is mortal; do not labor in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not befall him, then the matter is more slight.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	The cure for it is that you apply a warm oil, either rose oil or new olive oil, until the area cools down; then place on one of the drying and strengthening poultices, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and let him not sleep upon that part where he feels pain, until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is severed, you must cut above the heart; and remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then treat it with ointment that promotes flesh growth until it heals; and if the vertebrae are broken, which are called the "vertebrae of the neck", place your fist from your left hand against them, and make it equal to the other hand with your strength, then apply poultice and splint as needed; then hold it in place, and if there is a severed bone, do so above, remove it, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the broken bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Before the bone of the hip is broken, and if it happens, there will be a little loss at the head; and it makes sounds along its length, and bends downwards, and comes to the patient pain in the place, and tenderness, and swelling where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is such that you extend your hand above it, so that you are over the break; and know where the break is and its shape; and if the break is only at the head, make this break even, so that it has a natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is along its length, or it bends inwards, then make the patient lie on their belly, so that the restoration of this break can be seen by you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it equal, apply the plaster on top, then place a piece of wood or heartwood above it, and secure the fracture so that it does not move; support the area below the ribs until the ligament is aligned.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if a hot abscess forms there, do not touch it until the hot abscess has cooled down, and apply what we have previously mentioned; then return to the restoration process, securing it as required, provided no adverse event occurs; this is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of shoulder dislocation
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, and if it is broken, you must restore it according to one of the two methods. The first method involves taking a piece of wood of suitable thickness in this shape:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two shoulders with two straps, and pull them upwards, then place the patient on a seat. Next, throw their broken arm onto the wood until it reaches the elbow, and put in a piece of curved wood beneath; then pull something heavy or have the ministers push downwards. Finally, the doctors align the fracture to match the hands together so that the bone sets as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	The other method involves laying the patient on their back and tying their hand to their neck; then command two ministers, one to hold what is above the fracture with their hands, and the other beneath all the straps, stretching each part outwards.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, then bind the rope below the break and above it, and extend each of the assistants to their respective parts.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, then you must put a rope in the middle below the acromion, and another towards the blade, beneath the break; also, if the break is towards the blade, it is necessary to place a ligature slightly, without effort, until the broken part is level with its place, and on the blade; then make the fracture equal, as it should be, and bind it, unless an abscess appears.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess appears, do not bind it for seven days, and place upon it a moist lint with easy oil and rose petals, until the abscess is pacified; then bind it, and the way to bind it is that you put plaster on the fracture, then bring together the arm on the support, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and apply a bandage, binding over the support and over the arm, so that the arm remains in place without moving, unless something hinders this, or if the bone has moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone will move, use splints, and place a wider and stronger splint over the fracture, leaving two inches of space between each one; let each splint be large enough to pass three inches beyond the break on either side; then draw it up tightly onto the splints as I have said at the beginning of this chapter regarding fractures, more strongly but less distant.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the placement of splints and their tightening, as we have said when restoring a broken limb, and you suspect hot abscess formation, leave it bandaged until the seventh day, as we have mentioned; then check every three days to ensure that no itching or swelling develops in the area, or that circulation is not compromised by being too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the address, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if none of these accidents occur, one must not release the limb until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back with hands over stomach; place under the injured area an even wool-filled cushion, and check every hour day or night that position of broken limb does not change nor relax its bindings; if the treatment succeeds through medicinal virtue, give them food we mentioned earlier in such a way that at first this nourishment is subtle; and as they recover let it be coarse.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the splint and leg should be removed after forty days in total, at which point one must undo it and administer bath with medicinal ointments to realign its place.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stricture is ugly and tight, it takes one day or two months to loosen.
de la brisure du bras	On l'a bien remise en place. Mais si le malade est resté longtemps dans cet état, il faut la remettre en place, et alors on ne saurait trop dire combien de jours ou de mois cela prendra. Car il y a des gens qui ont les os très durs, d'autres très mous; l'un mettra plus de temps que l'autre.
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the 'duo foscil', one small, which follows the wrist, the other large, which is below towards the little finger; perhaps only the larger breaks, or the smaller, or perhaps both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bone is broken, its restoration is light, and its healing; when the large one breaks, healing is difficult and more serious than if they both break together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small bone that is broken, you should lightly extend it a little, and set it evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bone that is broken, you should bind it more tightly; extend it on a cushion, and hold the wrist of the hand higher than the other, with the little finger lower than the others, and have the patient cross their arms over themselves, with the cushion in front of them at a higher level so they do not exert any effort; then the assistants should stretch their arm to the part below the patient's hand or elbow, while another assistant holds the other side above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	Then place the mirror evenly according to its best shape.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it is broken into pieces, place each one in its correct position, and if there is any that cannot be restored to its place as it grips the heart, then leave it and remove it, just as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with a broken wound I have spoken about it in the singular chapter, so take care of its treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the healing warm abscesses appear, so glue I cloth made from rose oil and white wax, that is neither too hard nor too soft; and bind the cloth above subtly, until the warm abscesses are calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	Then remove the wax, and apply the plaster of the mill powder with an abundance of egg, then place the stars, and let the star closest to the fracture be slightly stronger, and a little wider than the others; and know that there must be six stars or arms in various positions: whether the fracture is in one bone or two; and bind more firmly above the fracture than elsewhere, always less so as you move away, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the cloths which are on top of the fracture be soft and moist, not hard nor rough; and let the thread with which it is bound be made from linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And after a few days, treat the limb and its connection.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident occurs in the limb, such as itching which comes to the limb, you must wash the limb with warm water until the itching is soothed; and let the limb rest without tightness.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Then restart the binding, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones dislodged, or similar, then treat it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you fear that the nourishment cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you must soften it a little, and leave it like this for a few days until circulation returns, and then bind it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said come to pass for the patient, then do not release them until twenty days have passed.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Wherever it is around, then bind their hands to their neck, and let their necks be even, and guard against movement and agitation, and let them sleep on their back; know that this fracture will be healed in thirty or thirty-five days, perhaps even twenty, according to the compositions and the constitutions of virtues.
de la brisure de la main	On the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that at the back of the hand and on the knuckles there are few fractures, but rather bendings often occur.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is fractured or bent, it is necessary that the patient should lie on their side, and sit upright facing them evenly; then place their hand on a stretched cloth, and the ministers must extend the broken bones, setting them in line with each other until they are well-aligned; apply the plaster and bandages, unless abscesses appear, and then put a splint according to the size of the place; let it be wrapped in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is around the front of the ankle, make a circle of cloth, and instruct the patient to tighten it onto their broken ankle; then take a long strip of cloth, and let the heart-shaped sole be as big as the palm of your hand, and tie it tightly, just as needed.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is on the outside, you must place a sole above and another below the ankle, so that the feet are open and straight, then bind everything around the foot, and stop the bandage between the toes.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture comes to any of our toes, be it the big toe, place it evenly as needed; and bind it with the foot, and if you wish to put a small straight sole to raise the fracture, and prevent movement; and if the fracture is on other toes, like the index or one of the others, treat them equally, and bind them with the next healthy toe; either bind them all together in an 'I' shape, which is better, or place above a sole as for the big toe; and take care during the restoration and placement of hot abscesses, help those who come, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of a broken thigh.
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The thigh bone is often broken, and it can be easily seen when the limb turns forward or backward; its restoration lies in binding a splint above and another below the break.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	The patient lies on their face, then each assistant stretches out their ligature to an equal portion of the limb; this is when the break occurs in the middle of the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	If the break is near the hip joint, one of the splints should be towards the wrist and the other below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	If the break is close to the knee joint, then the splint should be placed alongside the knee and its extension below; thereafter, have two assistants grasp the bone with both hands in its natural alignment before applying a plaster cast and bandaging it tight so as to avoid abscesses forming later on.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down before you return to your work and treatment; the procedure is carried out in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	You must wrap the fracture with I hard bandage doubled in II or III, and leave the excess, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the groin, and pass I long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and bring the end of the thread above; then return the bandage over the leg and the thigh, then place stars on the fracture, and put a star on the bone of the leg; then fill the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths to make the tightening even, then start tying strongly III turns or IV above the fracture; and as you go up past the fracture, tighten it less; then take hold of II ends of the thread that you have passed between the leg and the thigh, and tie III stars that are on top, then return below at the end of the thread, until you come near the foot; and tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this, so that there is no abscess or swelling or other similar thing.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, then release it and address what comes next, as we have said many times; and if there are fragments of bone that catch, you must remove them if possible; and if not, then the site must be split open and pulled apart; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	In some cases, the thigh is fractured and treated with splints, like in the shoulder or arm; however, despite this restoration being done properly, the patient still feels discomfort.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	Know that the thigh is restored in approximately 50 days, or a little less or more, depending on the variety of constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	Of the knee joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that there is little breakage in the knee joint, but it bends often.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is but a crack or an opening, and this happens with all wounds, both felt and unseen, causing great discomfort.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	The restoration is achieved by placing what is round evenly on both sides until it is assembled as much as possible; then apply the plaster, and insert a round rod if needed, securing it accordingly, then follow all steps we have mentioned for other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar cases; provide each accident with its appropriate treatment until healing occurs.
de la brisure de la jambe	On fracture of the leg,
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is rightly named 'shinbone', and the other is called 'calf'; they both have similar fractures as those occurring in the arm, and therefore their restoration equals that of an arm's bone fracture, with identical procedures involved. If the two bones break together, it leads to a leg-wide torsion.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the fine bone is broken, it twists forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, one experiences severe pain, which is easily noticeable; it twists below.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then provide traction and align it equally, and bind the splints evenly; however, if the fracture is severe with multiple fragments, make the traction less intense and more gentle; adjust as per your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, and le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the broken bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, no fracture occurs; fractures of the bones of the foot and toes are common and can be found in various positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	If there is a fracture of the foot bones and you see these bones overlapping each other, have the patient place their foot on the ground, as if they were about to walk; then put your foot on theirs, where the bones are raised, press them until they return to their places; then apply a poultice and dress it, placing underneath the belly of the foot a small board with two curved ends, then secure it to the foot appropriately, wrap it all around with bandages and other materials you may need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, untie the bandage, for you will find the bones equalized, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	If there are any fingers broken, reset them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place a peg in the broken finger according to its length, and slightly wider, then put beneath it that board I mentioned, and strain it appropriately; if there are two or three, or more, broken, so place on each finger a peg according to its size, wrapped in a piece of linen cloth, and secure the board beneath the foot; and let it extend over the head of the board from outside the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things I mentioned for other fractures, just like we have said; and help each accident as it is required.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Of the fracture of the bone in the wrist
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's pelvis is fractured, make her sit with legs spread apart, then lean towards her back part and be held from behind; fill the vagina opening, which is nature-made for the patient, with cotton as big as your thumb; get the woman stand up and lift her spine slowly and gradually and the bone will come out along with the stool; when she wants to urinate take away the cotton, but put it back after that. Do this process seven days or so: this fracture would be cured and if you want do another trick as follows: make a goat's bladder attached to one end of a tube at the vaginal opening then blow through the other end with all your might until the bladder swells up inside; the vagina will be restored back, fill it again with cotton and let it stay there for some days till healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the wrist of a man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said for the hip bone; and these fractures are not hidden from one who puts his study and use into it, and understands my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fracture indicates to many its proper path of restoration; understand this then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose quill and insert it into the penis; then wrap cloth around it, and leave for three days thereabout, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	If the fracture is accompanied by a wound, take a clean bone from an animal that died naturally and has not been slaughtered; then break this bone to fit into the hole of the broken one, and fix it in place with wax. Apply hot oil on the outside and keep the patient warm for three days, and he will recover swiftly.
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with an open wound, especially if it is large, such as the bones of the thigh or shoulder, that he be bled now, so that the bleedings we have mentioned may bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, apply some vitriol to it; and if you have nothing else, begin again to restore the fracture that very hour or day, so that no abscesses come of it.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if an abscess does come of it, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, so that the abscess may subside; and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause a bad outcome to occur.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible through uncovered skin, you must set it gently with your hands in small movements.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not equipped to align with your hands, use this instrument made of iron which has VII or VIII doits in length and its width depends on the size of the wound; it's necessary for the surgeon to grip III or IV, depending on what is needed for each bone fracture treatment. It should be round and a little thick so that it doesn't bend when compressed against the limb during your work and sharp at one end with a wide base leading forward like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	It is called a "palainche", so it's important that the curved heads are placed on top of the exposed bone, push it in one swift motion until it returns to its place and make sure they're aligned with each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle and the instrument cannot grasp the bone properly, you must cut away some of the head of the bone until the instruments have a better grip on it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot realign the bone as we have said, then cut it with an appropriate instrument, either a cutter or a saw, to your ability; then remove what remains in the bone of roughness and small bark-like pieces.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is realigned, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not yet in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	Do this until it is in its correct position, then moisten a cloth with black styptic wine and apply it properly to the area if appropriate; do not place any ointment or other greasy substance on the wound as this will cause it to fester and corrupt; afterward, administer stars when you have restored the bone, leaving the wound uncovered, and cut away the covering all around according to the size of the wound, taking great care that the wound is not constricted by the break; many times foolish surgeons have done this, causing their patient either death or corrosion in some cases; and be aware that these constrictions are softer and gentler than other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is severe or large, and you fear bad accidents may occur as we have mentioned, and you find pain at the site, then do not place needles on it; instead, wrap it tightly with hard bandages, and tie them securely.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound is becoming inflamed, remove what you have placed on it entirely, and apply healing ointment to it, such as four-herb ointment and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you must stretch the limb twice daily, in the morning and at night, until it is firmly attached and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And the limb must be supported in such a way that the inflammation flows downwards gently.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many die, and it cannot heal but returns crooked, know that there are small bone fragments, which is why you must search the wound thoroughly, and remove all those loose fragments that cause this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula forms in that place, or any other kind of corruption occurs, you must treat it according to what he states in the aforementioned chapter.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and protruding from the limb, such as the thighbone or shoulder blade, and other similar large bones, do not extract it, for many times this leads to death. Leave it until it rots; perhaps it will fall out on its own after twenty or thirty days. Then treat the wound if you can; otherwise, leave it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	Wounds that come above the suture
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come after the healing of fractures, especially when it is close to the joint, and it is an ugly sight for the appearance of the limb; and sometimes the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care then if it is fresh: administer styptic medicines such as aloe, incense, myrrh, sarcocolla, galbanum, and similar others, so that you take any of these things or all together, and mix them with a styptic wine or with egg white glue or with soap; put it on the night in swabs, holding it tight, and do not release by hand for several days; then remove it, and start another one until the nodations are removed; you can also restrain it over a well-made piece of lead; for the property of lead is that it removes all swellings from members; if the nodation has already hardened like stone, and must be removed, so cut above it, and open the superfluity present; or shave it with a razor until it is removed, then treat it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	Of the member which is weak after treatment
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the broken bone is set and afterward the limb remains weak and feeble, this occurs for many reasons: one being that it was bound too tightly and wasn't tied as it ought to have been; or because there were too many ties and nourishment couldn't reach the limb; or due to excessive leeching; or from too much movement, not at the right time; or because there is little blood in their body, thus they are weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you must make the patient eat and soften their body so that blood multiplies within them; bathe them and provide joy and comfort; then apply ointment to the limb such that the ointment attracts great nourishment, frequently bathing it with warm water until the nourishment reaches the limb; and return it to its natural form.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	Of a limb twisted after injury
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration and the broken bones are clearly visible, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the fools who say that the limb must be broken again completely, and many a fool has done this in our land; these procedures are condemned and cause great harm, even death; however, if the swelling and pain are fresh, they should be treated with hot water, or softening herbs that have been cooked, such as leaves of mallow, roots, marshmallow root, and similar things; then apply a softening plaster, such as well-made diachylon, and take the mucilage of mallow, and mix it with goose fat or sesame oil, and make a plaster out of it; alternatively, you can take fatty figs, grind them with bran of wheat, and other medicines that reduce inflammation.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And at times, the swelling is reduced by constantly and for a long time rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And provide gentle movements to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisting and hardening is like stone, and it needs to be removed with an iron tool, then you must cut down to the bone, using a delicate and light incision device; and apply cauterization and give careful attention to its treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs to someone, you must now reset it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	If you delay, the joint will swell, and it may be set back in place painfully; therefore, one must not move it when it is swollen: many times this causes abscesses and other pains; nevertheless, when this happens, make the patient bleed, then leave them alone until the abscess subsides; afterward immerse the limb in warm water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each member as the cure becomes evident.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered chapters on dislocations of the head down to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jawbones.
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, 
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns through many positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is complete and perfect, you must reset it quickly without delay; in such a way that the assistant holds the patient's head, and pushes one of their hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation involves two parts; and the other hand should be outside to provide balance; instruct the patient to loosen their jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the practitioner places it evenly until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is difficult to reset, especially if both jaws are involved, bathe them in warm water and oil until they can be gently moved back into place; do not delay the resetting process as we have stated.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back into place evenly, and the patient's wound is well closed without softening, apply wet compresses made of rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with soft bandages; let the patient sleep on their back, with their shoulders supported by two pillows, so that they do not move them to the right or left, nor strain themselves trying to eat, but take light food until the pains are gone, and the jawbones are relaxed; thereafter chew what you wish lightly, and make no effort to open your mouth widely when eating or drinking, until the jawbone is well healed.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jawbones cannot be reset at once and are not restored to their places, then fever and customary flux will result, possibly a discharge of the belly, perhaps vomiting pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, know that it is destruction; and many times the one who experiences it dies within nine days.
de la forcelle	From a fork or cleft.
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The fork cannot be dislocated from the side within its structure and is rarely dislocated externally; one can feel this well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is such that the patient often lies on their back and stretches out their arms; then press the place firmly with your palm, and it will return; then apply a plaster and bind it, and hold it in place; and the head which faces the cut cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it dislocates again, then reset it to its place as we have said; then put on the plaster and bandage, and hold it tight, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed; similarly, the shoulder head is restored when it is displaced from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder dislocation occurs in three ways: first, it dislocates at the lower part of the socket; secondly, at the back part; and occasionally, it dislocates upwardly, which is rare; it never dislocates backward or inward towards nerves. It often dislocates downwards toward the socket, especially in those with less fat because it easily slips out; for those with sufficient fat, it barely dislocates and returns barely.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And occasionally it happens to some men that they suffer from a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells due to a hot abscess, and they believe it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	You must therefore test it until you are certain; then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	It is recognized as dislocation when it falls towards the armpit, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find an obvious disparity between them; and at the head of the shoulder, you will see a hollow, and below the armpit on top of the shoulder joint, like an egg; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose nor move in any way; and if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you can feel it clearly upon touching; and this kind of dislocation is not difficult to reset when it is recent or if the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the assistants lift the patient's hand upwards, then place your palms underneath the shoulder blade, and raise the joint forcefully to its proper position; the assistants lift the hand and extend it upward before placing it beneath the arm pit again; this will cause readjustment.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come about as we have said with hands outstretched afterward, then the patient must be bathed in warm water; and the assistants should apply a softening and soothing ointment such as a decoction of altee, fenugreek, and mellilot in water, which is to be administered; then the patient should be remembered on their back, and place underneath the shoulder blade an equal piece of woolen cloth, neither too soft nor too hard; then let the assistants place one's heel on the cloth and lift the shoulder with care, pulling the patient's hand; while another assistant holds the head steady so it does not move downwards. This will reset the shoulder immediately, and if you wish to proceed in this way: ensure that there is a man present who is larger than the patient; they should stand upright beside them and push their shoulder underneath the patient's armpit, then raise the armpit upwards so that the patient hangs from the air; another assistant pulls the patient's hand downward towards the stomach.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, you can place something heavy on them, and the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And one resets it also in another manner: take a long stake and fix it in the ground so that its head is as level as possible with the shoulder; let it not be too thick nor too thin; then place the patient on top of it, but cover them with soft material first and let the arm of the affected side hang down along the length of the stake; then stretch out their hand downwards from the other side very carefully, so that the joint is gently eased back into its original position. If after all this the dislocation will not go in again, one may try this operation: take a stake two yards long and four inches thick at the head, which has a rounded end for insertion deep down under the shoulder blade; follow this procedure:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lie upon the head of the wounded man a soft cloth so that the wood does not hurt him; then put it under the sick person's armpit; and extend his arm along the length of the log, and bind the shoulder to the log, and the arm at the head of the hand; then place the arm on one step of a ladder with the wide side down, and let the hands be extended downward, and leave the body hanging on the other side: now the joint will come back in place.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is there, in whatever way, you must put under the armpit a round pad of equal wool; then apply the plaster prepared with flour powder, with incense and egg white, over the entire shoulder and around, then strap underneath the armpit appropriately, and turn the bandage back onto the plaster, and embrace the hand to his neck, and let the hands stay like this.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And he must eat little, until the limb is strengthened, for it will heal faster; then eat more after five or seven days, and move it; if it remains firm and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is dislocated due to moisture that has entered it or for any other reason, you must apply cautery at three points as described before in the chapter on cauterization.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this and it dislocates again after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot raise his arm above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is either severed or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint will never be properly reset.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation towards the armpit and breasts or behind is caused by a push or pull of hands and should be treated elsewhere; treat it until it heals.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing process, there is cracking in the limb and delayed movement, let the patient bathe frequently until this cracking is alleviated and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	Of shoulder dislocation:
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the shoulder joint is repeatedly dislocated and returns with difficulty; if it's dislocated from all sides, especially front and back, and the dislocation isn't reduced properly because it's visible and felt; this varies according to each person.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick person's wound with healthy flesh, you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	Because the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm or reach their shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must reset it before any abscesses form, because if abscesses appear, it would be difficult to reset; and perhaps it cannot be fully reset, especially when the dislocation is at the back; this is worse than other dislocations, causing even greater pain, and possibly leading to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is as follows, when it can be reset, extend their arm with both your hands; spread their arms out, and hold their wrists according to where the cut is above and below, then push the joint back into its socket or at the root of the palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it occurs when one's hand doubles over their own hand, and you should fix this by firmly grasping the root of the palm where it has been dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	If it does not want to return to its place, perform a strong extension; with one minister extending the arm and another pulling it, so that it is not moved during this extension; then turn the arm from side to side, after you have wrapped around a thick piece of cloth which is long and wide; and when the physicians join the joint back together at their hand, anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then push on the joint firmly until it returns; once it is in place, apply dry plaster along with egg white, straining it tightly, and tie the arm up close to the patient's neck, leave them this way for a few days, then release.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in place, untie the bandage and let it be; but if you see that the joint does not heal properly, reapply the poultice and bandage, and leave it for a few days until it is securely set; then untie it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels soreness after the joint is reset, and it changes, bathe and gently rub him, and press until it is soothed; or place over the joint a dressing of greasy sheep's wool, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and put him in a bath; when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then apply the dressing again, and put him back into the bath; do this two or three times until it is healed; if you wish, apply warm moist cow manure mixed with butter, and strap it on; he will return to his normal state.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The knuckles of the hand dislocate easily, and they return lightly more than other joints. However, it is necessary to relocate them to their place immediately, in that very hour that they are dislocated, unless the place is swollen or an abscess appears there.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the relocation is such that you place the afflicted hand on a table, and have the assistants stretch out the hand, and arrange it so it is even, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and push until it returns. However, one must look to see if it is in its right place; then let the patient put the back of their hand on a table for extension and relocation.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, have the patient place their palm-side down on a table and let the physician place his/her hand over the affected joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it dislocates again now, then it is well. If not, apply soothing emollients for hot abscesses and leave them there without reapplying.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if they cannot bear it and you are unable to relocate the joint after several days, then leave the joint deformed. It does not harm them while their hand is numb, preventing them from grasping anything; therefore know that either nerves or arteries have been severed. There exists no other mechanism beyond cauterization near this case, nor any other remedy worth pursuing.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, apply the plaster we mentioned above, then strain it and let it sit for five days; then unwrap and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move properly, and there is no crack or wound, then bathe it with warm water, and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	On the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the fingers of the hand dislocate in every direction, sometimes on the back of the palm or on the inside; then extend the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns to its proper place, then support the head of the finger and bend it towards the side where it is dislocated; leave it there for two days, and then straighten it that day; at night bind it as we have said, and unwrap it by day, make it move, and rewrap it at night; do this often until it is secure. And also do all of these steps if it is dislocated on the inside of the hand, and act in a similar manner to what you did before, until it is healed; and also do likewise when it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Of dislocation of the spine from the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine from the back or neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no cure for it, as death swiftly comes to the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that gas escapes uncontrollably, and they cannot hold it in, and often certain limbs go limp, be it both thighs or arms, or at four places; this curvature which goes to the back is called "gilbositez": its cure is that you must turn if gilbositez came from childhood: there is neither a cure nor full recovery.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from a fall or blows or similar things, the old ways of cure had many words but little benefit overall; I have shortened them according to my intent and made instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the humpback condition that occurs on the chest in front, no one knows of its cure; and also for that which directly affects both sides, and only the one that specifically comes at the back can be cured, as I said; it is necessary that the patient lies extended face-down in a level place, and has padding beneath them so they do not harm themselves; then stick one iron rod into the head firmly in the ground, and another by the feet, tying a cord over the shoulders of the patient, and another at the hips, knees, and ankles; two assistants should hold these cords, one at the head and the other at the feet, each between the two rods; these must be very secure, both the rod as we have said and the assistant's hands pressing on the spine with their palms until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return with this treatment, take a board of three arm lengths long, place it beneath the wall, and let the patient lie on their side. Push the head of the board under the wall, then put the middle of the board over the spine; have the surgeons place their feet on the other end of the board, pressing hard until it returns to its place. If you wish, do it with a turning stick that turns toward the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	Drive two stakes into the patient's head one arm length apart, and towards their feet insert two more, with each stake separated by a span of about an inch in every direction; have a hole bored through each stake where the turning stick passes, and let these be firmly planted so as not to move. Between each pair of such stakes place another single turning stake above which sit two smaller stakes one span long used to turn said stick; then bind that binding-string from among the axle to this turning stick near the head and likewise attach the other string around the feet to the opposite turning stick, wherein every assistant turns his stick through the whole length of said cord while the master adjusts the spine evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	When it is equalized, apply a desiccative plaster with an abundance of egg white, then place some cotton wool, followed by a wooden strip three fingers long to support the area where hunchbackness occurs and the part of the spine that remains healthy; bind this with a bandage as we have described, and let the patient take nutritious food until he is healed. Should anything happen at the end of his recovery, administer softening and soothing medicines along with the wooden strip we mentioned earlier. Sometimes an area behind the last vertebra in the back swells up, resembling dislocation; but this is a bone that has pushed through so there should be no concern because it may lead to death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; 
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the recognition of its dislocation is as follows: when you join the sick leg with the healthy one, it will be longer, and the sick person's knee will appear more prominent than the healthy one; they cannot bend their knee properly, and the area nearby is swollen with a hot abscess due to the thigh bone being out of place.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign for someone who has recovered is as follows: this improvement is contrary to what was mentioned before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs for someone who has not recovered yet are as follows: they stretch their leg according to its length; however, bending the knee causes pain, and if asked to walk, they cannot do it properly, and they retain urine, with swollen testicles, and when defecating, they have to support themselves on their heels.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of the one who experiences this behind them are that they cannot extend their knee or bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, the tendons are softened, and the head of the thigh bone is in place beneath the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	We treat this type of recurring dislocation by resetting it if the dislocation is old and remains in its position without any treatment; there should be no assumption made about its severity.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	In the case of a fresh dislocation, there are four types of dislocation, so hasten to return the joint and stretch it inside and out, moving it right and left; perhaps it will go back, needing no other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong helper and grasp the leg firmly with both hands, or use a ligature tied above the knee; another assistant should place their hand over his shoulders, pushing their hands under his armpits, then bind him with a soft ligature around the thigh; another holds the head of the ligature; and all together they pull upward and downward at once, lifting the patient off the ground in one swift motion, leaving them suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, you must treat it in the following way: when the dislocation is to the outside, place the patient on their healthy side and apply a ligature above the root of the thigh and below the joint; another assistant should grasp his arms and embrace the affected limb firmly from behind, then extend forcefully outward: this will return it to its socket now; and this type of dislocation is less severe than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot secure it in this manner that we have described, then you must bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft bandage over the heels and knees, with the diseased leg extended twice as much as the other; then suspend him from the head of a pole, so that he is about two arm's lengths above the ground; then instruct one attendant to embrace the head of the thigh, while another attendant hangs alongside the patient, firmly embracing the thigh, because now the joint will quickly come back into place.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	When the dislocation is outside, let the patient lie down as we have said for one with curvature, and bind his healthy leg tightly, and also his foot; then place two rods, one at the head and another at the feet, then insert a rod between the thighs of the patient through a slit; and have moistened cloths planted around it so that they do not hurt the patient, then stretch each attendant towards him, and let the surgeon place himself level with his hand where the dislocation is.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place it on a board, i.e., a table, and press as we have described for the hernia, and let the patient lie on their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the affected leg until it hurts, and according to what I have said; place your weight on the healthy side of the patient's body, then press with the other hand, and extend it downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	If the dislocation is on the outside, it should not be stretched downwards or lifted off the ground, but rather, it should be positioned as if the hip were dislocated outwards, just as we have described for lying down on both hips; let them lie on their face, and apply the binding as we mentioned earlier, and press on the joint with a board; when the patient can stretch their legs out evenly, and they are aligned, adjust the thighs, and apply the plaster, and strap it up with a bandage so that the hip does not move; let them rest for three or four days, then loosen the binding, and put the plaster back on; if you see that the legs remain equal in length, then bind as before, and leave it for another three days; afterwards, release the binding, and have the patient walk gently until their limb is strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of knee dislocation.
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knees are dislocated in three ways: namely, inwardly and outwardly, and behind; it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend their leg towards their thigh, and if it does not reach their thigh, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all such cases is that you make the patient sit upright, and stretch their leg if they can, and place your back on their face, and put their foot on your feet; then take their knee in your palms, and push between your hands, then bend the two sides of the knee sharply; and another assistant stretches their foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it easily reaches their thigh lightly; and apply a plaster cast on it, and make the leg rest against the thigh, and bind them together strongly for three or four days, then release it; and do not allow the patient to walk until the limb is strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not broken, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	Of the dislocation of the heel.
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	Sometimes the heels are bruised, sometimes fully dislocated, inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and more so on the part where it is dislocated: the resetting is light, and one must gently stretch it with their hands when it is only bruised.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	When it is fully dislocated, you must have the patient sit straight, and hold their ministers aside with one hand by the leg, above the ankle; then draw the foot towards yourself with your right hand, and twice to the left, then stretch it upwards, and push the foot upwards gently; do this twice, as we have said, pushing and drawing the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, begin the work again, for it will return; and if it cannot be returned thus, make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and firmly insert a stick into the earth between their thighs, tying the cloth around it so that it does not hurt the patient; then have one minister hold the thigh, while another stretches the foot with their hands or a cord tied above the ankle; both ministers should stretch equally, and let the stick be held between the patient's thighs to steady them when they are stretched; then place the healers' hands evenly on the dislocation, while another minister holds the healthy leg underneath, and the dislocation will return speedily.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is at the right point, apply the plaster and pads on top, pressing firmly, and bind the foot to the leg, taking care that the ligaments above the ankle from behind are not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, if the binding loosens, press again; then release it on the third or fourth day, and prevent the patient from walking for four days; and if they walk before this term is over, it is not safe that it will dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if hot abscesses appear there, you must treat them as we have said elsewhere until they are healed.
des dois	twice.
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the thumb is dislocated, it should be gently stretched without work, and this is an easy matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any of the joints of the foot or back, you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or a straight table, and place your foot on what appears to be these joints, then press firmly with your foot until it returns; once it is aligned and nothing seems amiss, place beneath the sole of their foot a two-foot long board, strain them firmly, and leave them for three days; afterwards, undo the bandage, and let them rest until they heal.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wounds and dislocations together:
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound occurs alongside a dislocation and one wishes to restore it, many times the patient dies: do not be presumptuous in your cure if you are not wise in this art and have long practiced it, and if you are not merciful and compassionate; and use at first soothing remedies for hot abscesses, leaving the patient in God's hands should you see no hope of health; but when there is a chance of healing, restore now the limb to its place even though hot abscesses may arise; once the limb is restored, administer soothing medicines for hot abscesses and treat the wound as befits it with drying ointments; if alongside the dislocation there are broken bones or small pieces of bone displaced, remove them, and do what we have said in simple illnesses; take care to not fall into fear's path, according to what I've said, because this will lead you astray from your Creator, and towards harm for both your soul and body.
Amen	Amen
