of scrofula (or similar tubercular swellings)
In the middle of the head, small abscesses appear, and they are like knots that are in clusters, like the wattles of a hen, and there are many similar ones.
There are some that are fatty and some where there is moisture like pus; and there are some that are hard and stony when cut, and there is no danger unless an artery is involved.
And the work of cutting is such that you examine with an instrument called a "probe," whose form comes later, what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, it is lanced lengthwise.
And when the moisture is emptied, scrape without leaving any of the skin that contains that moisture, because it returns as soon as something is left; then soak cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is available; if not, in water and salt, and fill the wound, and leave it until the next day; and this will consume what remains of the core.
And then repeat with the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you are sure that none of the core remains; then treat the wound with a suitable ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess holds a fatty core, cut it lengthwise in this way; and throw in your hooks, and scrape it on all sides, and put all your effort into pulling out the sac where it lies; and if the artery opposes you, do what I told you later.
And do the same with the abscess if it is stony, both in cutting and in treating it as I have told you.
And the cut on a stony or moist abscess is slighter, because they contain little blood.
And some of these abscesses have a head where there is no moisture, and among these was an abscess I cut on the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess like a rough stone, hard and white, and it could not be broken; and if one had struck it, one would have wounded it as if it were a stone. 
In other abscesses appearing on the head, except for those that appear on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should always be at the most dependent place, to allow the pus to drain; and treat them as appropriate.
