of the fistula of the anus/rectum
Fistulas that occur below the anus are swellings, and growths that appear near the anus outside, or in the space between the two buttocks, where there is one fistula or several; and when this swelling is old, it opens, and releases a whitish watery fluid or thin pus, and sometimes these fistulas are perforated; and they are recognized because there is a discharge or gas when the patient defecates, and perhaps a worm comes out.
And there are fistulas that penetrate to the bladder, and to the middle of the penis; and reach the hip joint, and even to the base of the spine. 
And thus one recognizes the penetrating fistula in the anus, and the non-penetrating one: you insert your index finger into the anus, and insert a thin needle of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity/winding path.
And if there is a winding path, insert a thin lead probe, or a horsehair, until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger; and if you don't feel it, and no excrement, gas, or worm comes out of the opening, as we have said: know that it is not perforated; so hurry to treat it.
And when the fistula penetrates to the bladder or to the urethra, urine comes out of it, and it cannot be healed by medicines.
If it is perforated to the hip joint, the probe will reach the place; if there is no winding path, and the origin of the pain is around it, then pus constantly comes out of it, and neither medicine nor healing by ointment is effective; and in these penetrating fistulas there is no cure other than work, and the vanity of foolish physicians who meddle with them.
In one that is not perforated and not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and the patient should lie on their back between your hands; and lift their legs up to their thighs, with their thighs bent towards their stomach; then insert a brass probe, or lead if there is a winding path, until you know where the probe reaches.
If the patient feels it around the anus, then you should insert your index finger, and feel if the probe has pierced through; and if it is exposed where you feel the tissue or flesh between your finger, then know that it is perforated; so do not work on it because it cannot be healed. 
It is said however that some can be healed, but this happens rarely; and the help that one gives, is to heat a thin cautery according to the width of the fistula, as mentioned before; and insert it hot into the fistula, until it comes close to the anus; and do this two or three times, until you know that the diseased flesh is burned, which resembles a bird's feather; and then treat it with tents soaked in butter, until this flesh comes out, then treat it with ointment that generates flesh and heals.
If it is thus healed, that is good. 
If it cannot be healed otherwise; and if the probe enters, but does not pierce through to the finger which is in the anus, and there is a thick covering of flesh or tissue between your finger and the probe, and you see the fistula at what covers the opening; then cut it from the beginning of the fistula, and insert the probe further, and then the cautery after it, until it reaches the end of the probe; and the probe will be released, and will fall out; then clean the diseased flesh that resembles a bird's feather, and leave nothing remaining.
And if the blood overcomes you, and flows between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or a sharp medicine.
For the fire cautery combines two good things: that is, the burning of the diseased flesh, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture; then treat it with tents soaked in butter or in mashed things, until the place oozes pus, and the burned flesh comes out in the pus; then treat the wound with healing ointments generating hard flesh, and these are dry medicines.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula goes deep into the anus, and is far from the opening, then put your finger in the anus, and investigate it.
If you feel the tent, and between the two is the lining or the blind passage or flesh, or it is close to piercing, if there is no other way than a path of trust and hope, through the application of one of the three methods: either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can, put tents there and treat it as before; and do not go too deep, so that you do not cut the tissue that holds the anus, and the excrement comes out involuntarily; then treat it as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering and clean it after it is cut next to the anus, either with a tent or another suitable instrument; then clean the diseased flesh that is in the wound, as much as you can; then work to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the part outside the anus: thus it will be an easier thing for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas are like this: that is when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is on the side of the anus next to the skin above, so take a tent pierced at the end in this way: 
And put a twisted thread in two, and push the tent with the thread into the fistula until it reaches the end.
If it is piercing the edge of the anus inside, then pull the thread from that hole, so that you put your finger in the anus; and pull the end of the thread, and bring the two ends together, and tie one to the other, and leave it for a day or two; and tighten it sometimes, until the thread cuts the flesh that is between them, and it falls off; then treat the wound until it is closed and healed.
If the fistula does not pierce, make it pierce by all means that you can, unless it is too deep.
For it is not appropriate to make the thread cut so deep, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the pointed scalpel with which one cuts the fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting; and not on the other, so that one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
