Here begins the second book of surgical treatments.
We have told you in the first chapter every illness in which cautery by fire, or burning medicine, is necessary, and the reasons and the causes and the instruments and the forms of cauteries; and I have arranged this chapter from head to foot, and I will go in this chapter by this same path so that one finds more easily what one wants.
And before I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first on cauteries, and therefore greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to undertake folly.
For many kinds of people come for treatment.
Some come who are so angry with their illness that they die easily from the fury they find in their disease, and from the greatness of its malice; and of these one must be wary. 
And of these there are some who deceive you, saying, "Wait, I am cured"; and the illness is treacherous.
You must not agree with those who come to you with this attitude, but put more emphasis on your honor than on your greed, and do not act foolishly but wisely in what you are certain of, and from which you can gain reward and praise; and use prognostication and indication in the treatment of your patients, to whom health is restored; and this will help you to acquire a good reputation, and glory, and a memory of praise.
Very dear son, May Our Lord give you good understanding and righteousness, and may he inspire you with the holy inspiration of his hand, amen. 
Now I have arranged this chapter by dividing it into chapters, according to what is before in the chapter on cauteries, which I have described to you from head to toe, so that you can more easily find what you need.
