The chapter on abscesses
There are many kinds of abscesses, according to what is recalled later in this book, and they differ in perforation and in size; and this is in two ways, one of which is in its appearance, and in the moisture it contains.
And the second way is due to the places on the body where they are located.
For an abscess of the head is different from one of the anus, and an abscess in fleshy areas is different from one that occurs in the joints, and each has its own treatment in practice.
And there are abscesses that one should not pierce, until the pus is ripe according to its maturation; and there are some that must be pierced when they are grown, and do not ripen according to their maturation, such as abscesses that are near joints.
For when an abscess develops near a joint, and it is left until it rots around it, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb.
Or if the abscess is near a principal limb, and you delay the perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the principal limb; or if it is near the anus, it is pierced before it is ripe; and you should not pierce a raw abscess without complete digestion, except for one near the anus, so that it does not rot deeply inside and extend within, and a fistula develops there; and cannot heal for a long time.
And you must know the time for the perforation of the abscess that is ripe according to maturation, and that is when the pain is appeased, and the fever subsides, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and of the throbbing and the pointing of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and you must make the perforation in the most dependent place of the abscess, and where it appears soft; and the perforation should be along the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in the joints and near the nerves and arteries, and in all similar places where there is no bending.
In those that bend, according to the limb.
And when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. 
For if you pierce it before that, the body of the venom from it will spread, and be full of much filth; and perhaps the edges and the depths of it will harden.
And there are some abscesses that are pierced across the width of the body, according to the needs of the limb.
And you should make small openings in small abscesses; and in large abscesses, large openings, and many incisions according to the size of the abscess; and there are some such abscesses where you must shave the core, and cut; when it has become like a rag, and is dead, it must be done as with buboes: and there are some that are cut in three angles, and some that are cut like a myrtle leaf, such as abscesses of the groin; and there are some where a round cut is made, and other cuts and similar incisions.
Those that have no head, such as a soft superficial abscess, you must pierce it completely; and when the abscess is large, and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus at that time, but draw out a part; then plug the abscess until the next day, then draw out some again; do this many times, little by little, until all the pus comes out; especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or a decrepit old man.
For the spirit sometimes leaps with the exit of the pus, so that perhaps the patient dies, and you don't perceive it.
Therefore, approach this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, wipe the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a full incision, apply tents of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, you must put a tent in each one so that they touch each other; and if you have cut a part of the skin in the abscess, and you have shaved around it, you must fill it with old cotton or lint from linen cloths without moisture, and bind it until the third day; then remove it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs in your work, apply cold water and vinegar, and wet a cloth, and place it on the bleeding area many times.
And if the bleeding persists, apply treatment and care, and the powders that I have mentioned in many places in this book, and if it is in winter, and the place where the abscess is is very sensitive, then you must put on tents and cloths soaked in warm wine and oil; and if it is in summer, and the area is fleshy, then you must put on cloths soaked in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then unbind the abscess and wipe it and treat it, as appropriate, until it is healed.
And this should be known universally in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how one should proceed in the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
