of the fracture of the ribs
Know that the fracture of the ribs only occurs in thick places near the back, and at the end inside, and they only bend because they are slimy; and one can feel it well on examination with the fingers.
And the restoration is such that you set the fracture evenly, as is necessary.
And then apply the plaster, and secure it with a splint, if you need to.
And if the fracture of the ribs is pointing inwards, the patient feels very great pain, and a pricking, as if from pleurisy, because the bone pricks the lining; and breathes with difficulty, and coughs and vomits a large amount of blood, and it is a serious condition, and the ancients have applied great ingenuity to it.
And there are some who say that it is necessary to administer foods which swell the belly, to push the fracture outwards.
We do not do this, lest hot abscesses develop there, if they have not already.
And if they are there, then treat them.
And some of them say that one should place cupping glasses on the area, to draw strongly, and this seems reasonable; however, there is concern that the cupping glass may attract excess fluids to the area due to its weakened state.
And some of them say that one should cover the area with wool soaked in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to make the place even all around, then it should be treated with the treatment for pleurisy, with food and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that pierces the tissue, and there is concern for the patient, it is necessary to cut over the location of the broken rib, and it is necessary to place an instrument underneath to protect the peritoneum; and then one must cut the bone, and pull it gently, and then sew the two edges of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with plasters, until it is healed.
And if hot abscesses develop, then apply cloths soaked in rose oil, and place them on the area; and meanwhile treat the area as appropriate for an abscess, and let him lie often on the side where he should, until he is healed.
