Of the pain of the hip
When pain comes in the hip socket, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is treated as we have said in the section [on dislocations] and the treatment is not effective, and the illness is old: then you must purge the patient of the thick humors with foul-smelling pills, or other similar good pills.
Afterwards, make a cautery; and the method of cautery is according to two methods: that is to say, with burning medicines together, and fire cautery.
Fire cautery is of many kinds, one of which is as follows: that you cauterize on the hip socket three triangular cauteries in this shape, and make them good and deep, and have between each cautery a space the width of a finger, and let the cautery be olive-shaped; sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle on top of the hip, which makes four in this shape:
And if you wish, cauterize it with the circular cautery that we mentioned earlier in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circle contains the whole hip, and all the thickness of the flesh is burned.
And this is the method used in sciatica, when the pain is in the hip, and does not reach down to the thigh or the leg.
And if it reaches the thigh and leg, make two cauteries where the patient says the pain is, and one cautery above the ankle by four fingers, slightly to the left side; and let the cautery be knife-shaped, and let the thickness of the flesh be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the toes of the foot or almost there, cauterize it where they feel the pain, three or four points with the cautery called "points".
And if necessary, make more; and if it is known that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, make a cautery with the knife-shaped or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauteries not to leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and the large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient further harm and contraction. 
And I myself have seen several who have made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and left it so long that the leg was all swollen, and the foot too, and the whole foot was pierced and corrupted.
After a bowel movement from which he died.
And if the pain is in two places together, make a cautery in one and the other, in this manner.
And the wise men said, regarding the cautery of the hip, of which here is the method: make such an iron, and let it be at the tip as thick as a fingernail, or a little less, and let it be between notches, and from one notch to the other the distance of a thumb joint; and let the notches be open on two sides, and be like knots, and let there be a well-made iron handle; and this is the form:
And let it be heated until it is all red and throws sparks, and then place it on the joint of the diseased hip, and turn it toward the healthy side; and cauterize once in a round cautery and leave it for three days; and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open a long time; then treat with ointment until healed.
Albucasis says that we use this cautery little because of fear of its appearance, and we see few who use it; and yet it is one of the good cauteries, for those who can bear it, and where it is appropriate.
The cautery of burning medicine is that you make an instrument with notches into which the lip of the opening descends, and it should be of brass or iron with a long side, and at the top have two knots, and between each the distance of the thickness of a finger; and let them be open below and above, and join together according to this form:
Then place it on the hip joint of the patient lying on his healthy side, and press your hand firmly on the hip joint; then pour between the two circles hot water that has been heated a little on the fire, and leave it for an hour, and let the patient endure the heat and the burning from it.
For it will find there a bite as if from fire; and when the burning has passed, remove your hand with the instrument and wash the hip with fresh water, and leave it thus for three days, and apply butter until what is black from the burn is removed; and leave it three days so that the rot comes out; and this should be the last resort after treatment with ointments until healed.
And if the pain extends down to the thigh or to the leg, make an instrument for it that holds water just as you made for the hip; and this is the method of hot water, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicine.
Take alkali and quicklime, equal amounts of each, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
where there is a small hole below so that the point of a razor can enter; and place on top of this pot another well-sealed pot, and put alkali and lime and fresh water on top, until there is a finger's width above the powders when you have pressed it well with your hand; and leave it thus until sharp water descends and falls into the sealed pot, then take all this water, and pour it over lime and alkali as before.
And then it will be very sharp and is administered in many medical procedures and in cauterizations of other limbs. For it acts like fire, and there are other medicines with which one cauterizes the hip well, such as copper sulfate and anacardic honey and lime with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galen tells us of a cure by which a man was cured of hip pain and sciatica, and praises it highly, and says that no other treatment was done, and that he was healed at once when this cure was performed, and he had bathed as he instructs below.
And he says in this way that you take fresh, dry green litharge, and grind it well with a little grease, and put it on the hip and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain is, and bind it; and leave it for three hours or for as long as the patient no longer feels the burning.
And then have him enter the bath until his body is a little moistened, and have him go to bed, and the pain will go away completely and he will be healed.
And know that no one should use cautery with such medicines, unless it is after purging the body.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat dung, it helps a lot; and the cautery should be done in this way.
Take wool and soak it in old oil, and put it on the hollow that is between the big toe and the next one which is called foscile. 
Then take dry goat dung, and light it on fire until it becomes coals, and put it on the wool, and leave it until it is extinguished; and do it again like this, and do not stop doing this until you think by reason that it reaches the hip, and that the pain has ceased; and this type of cautery is called "goat cautery".
