of scrofula
Many times these abscesses occur on the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they appear elsewhere on the body, and are numerous, and are connected to each other.
And each scrophulous swelling is properly within its membrane, like the node and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrophulous swellings are many.
There are some that contain moisture, and there are also malignant ones that do not respond to healing.
In the one that you find has a good disposition to the touch, and is similar in color to the body, and moves freely in every direction and is not attached to the nerves of the neck nor to the artery nor to the trachea, and is not deep; you should cut it from above, and peel it back on all sides, and spread the two edges of the wound with hooks, if you need them, as we have said for abscesses of the head; and pull it little by little, and be certain that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and the spatula must not be sharp or pointed, lest the hand slip, and it not go too far, so that you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or the artery, and this prevents you from working, put ground vitriol in the wound, or some powders that staunch blood, and compress the wound; and leave it until the abscess is calmed, and the wound is softened, and begins to suppurate.
And when the blood is stanched, then return to your work, until you have completed it; then search with your index finger if there remain any small scrophulous swellings, then cut and clean them.
And if at the root of the scrophulous swelling there is a large vein, you should not cut this swelling at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall off by itself, without harm; then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then treat it.
And if you cut the whole scrophulous swelling, then you must bring the two edges of the wound together, and sew them immediately, since nothing superfluous has remained due to the size of the swelling.
you must therefore aim to cut the root of it, and pull it out, and sew it as we have said.
Those scrophulous swellings which contain excess fluid, pierce them where they appear ripe; and pierce them like the aforementioned one, downwards, then administer tents with ointment and similar things, so that it dissolves what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, treat it with flesh-generating ointment, until it is healed.
