of the hair that pricks the eye
Sometimes it happens that the eyelashes turn inwards and prick the eye, and for this, cauteries are made in two ways: namely with fire, or with a burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then place the patient on your lap; then draw on the eyelid a figure like a myrtle leaf, and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs; then put cotton moistened with egg white and psyllium mucilage on the eye, then heat the cautery which has this shape:
Then cauterize the figure you have drawn little by little many times, so that the flesh is burned there; and the sign of the success of the procedure is that you see the eyelid retract, and the hairs raised at the edge of the eye; then remove your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then put cotton moistened with butter until the burn is healed; then treat it with ointment until it is healthy.
And if after this the hairs return and the eyelid is softened, then repeat the cautery on the same spot, as you did the first time; and if the hairs are destroyed, cauterize it until the eyelid is raised to its natural position, and is even, and the hairs do not prick the eye.
The cautery of burning medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a myrtle leaf shape out of parchment; then take French soap and quicklime, one ounce of each, and grind them together well; and do it quickly, so that it does not cool, then spread it on the shape you have made like a myrtle leaf, and place it on the eyelid; and if the patient has it in only one eye, you should work on one, and if in both, likewise; and place cotton moistened with egg white under the eye; and let the patient's head be on your lap and put your index finger on the medicine, and press a little and move it every time the patient feels the medicine burning, because it feels like fire.
When you have done this for a while, remove the medicine with your finger.
And when the burning sensation has passed, lift the spot with water, and look to see if you see the eyelid raised as if it had been raised by the force of fire or by incision; and if it is so, it is good.
If not, then apply more medicine to the place where the medicine has not worked, until your work is even and your eyes are aligned; then apply cotton moistened with butter until the burned skin falls off, afterwards treat the area with the ointment called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
And you must take great care in your work, being very careful that none of the medicine falls into the eyes.
And if the eyelid becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick the eye, reapply the medicine to the softened area of the eyelid, just as you did before; then treat it until it is healed; and this is the shape of the myrtle leaf:
And know that people's eyes are different in size, and your restraints should be adjusted accordingly; and the right way is not revealed to one who is studying this art.
