Oh, sons, because I have completed this book for you, which is the culmination of the medical science, and having reached its end in it, and exposited and explained it, it seems to me that I should also pass on to you this treatise, which is a part of the practice with my hand, that is surgery.
For the practice with my hand is almost entirely extinct in our region and time, so that the science of it is nearly lost and only remains in some small descriptions within the books of ancient writers, which have been altered by later hands leading to error and confusion such that their intentions are hidden and the force of the art has been weakened.
And it seems to me that I should revive the practice of this treatise by way of exposition and explanation and abridgement; and may it come with illustrations of the forms of cautery instruments and other tools of the craft as well as an added explanation, which is necessary for its preparation.
But the reason why a good practitioner with his hand cannot be found in our time is because the art of medicine is complex and its doer must first be trained in the science of anatomy as Galen teaches that one must know the uses and forms of the members, their junction and separation; and have knowledge of bones, nerves, and tendons, their number, and their exits; and of pulsatile and non-pulsatile veins, and their places of issuance.
And for this reason Hippocrates says that a name is one thing but the work little, and even less so in the craft of the hand.
But we have already said this in the introduction of this book; for whoever is not learned in what we have said about anatomy, it is not to be expected that he will not fall into error such that many men will die, as I have seen too often, for some are trained in this science and yet throw off their knowledge and experience.
For I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor who attempted to lance an abscess in a woman's neck, and cut some arteries of the neck such that great blood flowed out and the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who attempted to extract a stone from a man's bladder, and the stone was large, it came out but with a piece of the bladder, because of which the man died three days later. [Anatomical terms: peyra (stone), vesiqua (bladder)]
And I myself was called to extract that stone, and saw by its size and the condition of the patient that he would die. [Anatomical terms: peyra (stone)]
And I saw another doctor who was paid by a duke of our land to practice surgery, and he operated on a black castrate who had a fracture in his thigh; and the doctor, through his ignorance, treated the fracture with padding and splints very tightly, without allowing the wound to breathe. [Anatomical terms: crastrat (castrated), coyssa (thigh)]
And he bound it according to his desires, and wrapped it up, and left it alone for several days and ordered that it not be unbound; and it remained so until the thigh and foot became abscessed and led to the patient's destruction. [Anatomical terms: coyssa (thigh)]
And I was called to the patient and prepared to unbind him, and this brought peace and an end to his pains. [Anatomical terms: coyssa (thigh)]
But gangrene had already set in the limb, and I was unable to stop it, and the gangrene continued to spread through the member until the patient was at risk of death. [Anatomical terms: membre (limb)]
And I saw another doctor who lanced an abscess of cancer, and it became ulcerated for several days until the malignancy was greatly increased in its master. [Anatomical terms: apostema (abscess), cancros (cancer)]
The reason for this is that the cancerous growth is pure black bile, and it should not be treated with iron from head to toe, but only in the member which can accommodate it entirely.
And for this reason sons, it is necessary that the practice with my hand be divided into two categories: one which is associated with health and another in which there is danger even in the best conditions.
And I have already mentioned this in all places of this book where there is error and fear in operation; it is necessary for you therefore to beware and avoid such things so that the pages do not find a way to speak against you and dishonor you.
And so take up your arms with diligence and under the protection of God, and approach your patients with ease and confidence.
And use the best approach by the grace of God for health and praiseworthy success, and leave behind terrible illnesses which are difficult to cure, and hold back your weapons from that which makes you afraid, so that doubt in your faith and your name does not overcome you: for it is left for your glory, and it will remain in this world and after in your sanctity.
Galen also says in some of his monitions: "Do not treat bad illness with bad medicine, lest you be named a bad doctor."
I have divided this book into three chapters.
Here begins the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter is ordered from the head to the feet, in the forms of instruments and in the ironwork of cauteries, and that which is necessary for operation. [Medical terms: cap (head), pes (feet)]
The division of the second part. The second chapter is about dryness and perforation, and cupping glasses, and wounds, and the extraction of arrows and similar things, all categorized and ordered according to the forms of instruments. [Medical terms: ventosas (cupping glasses), plaguas (wounds)] [Anatomical terms: sagetas (arrows)]
The third chapter is about restoration and dislocation, and treatment of twisting and similar things, all categorized from the head to the feet, and ordered according to the forms of instruments. [Medical terms: torcio (twisting), partida (part)][Anatomical terms: cap (head), pes (feet)]
It is necessary that I say something about the benefits and harms of this cautery, and in what condition it should be forbidden.
Therefore I say that the discourse about the benefits and harms of cautery is long and prolix, subtle with knowledge, and hidden in meaning; many wise men have spoken about it and they disagree about it, and I will only take up a small part of their discourses lest I prolong my discussion too much. [Medical terms: cauteri (cautery)] [Anatomical terms: membro (limb)]
And so I say that cautery is beneficial in all universal conditions with or without matter, except for two conditions which are dry and without matter. [Medical terms: cauteri (cautery)] [Anatomical terms: membro (limb)][Medical conditions: compleccio caudas ses materia (dry and without matter condition)] [Medical substances: materia (matter), medicina aguda (sharp medicine)]
In the dry and cold condition with matter, there is disagreement; for some say that cautery is beneficial to this condition, while others say the contrary, that it is not suitable in a sickness which is caused by dryness and cold, because fire has heat and dryness as its nature, and it is unsuitable that a sickness which is dry and cold be healed with something hot and dry. [Medical terms: cauteri (cautery), caliditat (heat)][Anatomical terms: membro (limb)][Medical conditions: compleccio cauda e secca am materia (dry and cold condition with matter)] [Medical substances: medicina aguda (sharp medicine)][Medical qualities: caliditat (heat), siccitat (dryness)]
And I say that those who argue the contrary are mistaken, because cautery is beneficial for every cold and dry sickness which appears in human bodies, because when you compare human bodies and their humidity to fire, you find that the bodies of humans are much more wet. [Medical terms: cauteri (cautery), cauda e secca (cold and dry)][Anatomical terms: cors (body)] [Medical conditions: compleccio del foc (condition caused by fire)] [Medical qualities: caliditat (heat), siccitat (dryness)][Medical substances: medicina aguda (sharp medicine)]
And I say by the discourse of that person, that I have experimented with this many times and discovered it to be true. [Medical terms: cauteri (cautery)] [Anatomical terms: membro (limb)][Medical substances: medicina aguda (sharp medicine)]
However it is not necessary to go into detail about this in the chapter on cautery, which has already been proven and practiced many times, and one who has experienced and known the diversity of human constitutions and dispositions of illnesses, and their causes, and accidents, and the time frame for these things. [Medical terms: cauteri (cautery)] [Anatomical terms: membro (limb)][Medical conditions: compleccio del foc (condition caused by fire)][Medical substances: medicina aguda (sharp medicine)][Medical qualities: caliditat (heat), siccitat (dryness)] [Anatomical terms: cors (body)][Medical concepts: disposicio (disposition), causa (cause), accident (accident), espasi del temps (time frame)
However in other conditions, there is no fear for you, especially in cold and wet illnesses, for all doctors agree on these things, and they do not disagree about the benefit of cautery in such cases. [Medical terms: cauteri (cautery)] [Anatomical terms: membro (limb)][Medical conditions: compleccio del foc (condition caused by fire)][Medical substances: medicina aguda (sharp medicine)][Medical qualities: caliditat (heat), siccitat (dryness)] [Anatomical terms: cors (body)][Medical concepts: disposicio (disposition), causa (cause), accident (accident), espasi del temps (time frame
And know, sons, that the secret of healing with cautery using fire and its goodness lies in cautery using sharp medicine, because fire is simple and its action does not go beyond the member which is cauterized, but only affects the adjacent member slightly. [Medical terms: cauteri (cautery)] [Anatomical terms: membro (limb)][Medical substances: medicina aguda (sharp medicine)][Medical qualities: caliditat (heat), siccitat (dryness)] [Anatomical terms: cors (body)][Medical concepts: disposicio (disposition), causa (cause), accident (accident), espasi del temps (time frame)
But the action of sharp medicine goes beyond this member to those which are connected, and it easily causes illness in the affected member and makes healing difficult and brings quick harm. [Medical terms: cauteri (cautery), medicina comburent (sharp medicine)] [Anatomical terms: membro (limb)][Medical qualities: caliditat (heat), siccitat (dryness)] [Anatomical terms: cors (body)][Medical concepts: disposicio (disposition), causa (cause), accident (accident), espasi del temps (time frame)[Medical substances: medicina aguda (sharp medicine)]
But fire, by its sublimity and substance, does not do this but rather superfluous matter is expelled, and this has been known to us through experiment and the length of service in studying this art and understanding the truth of causes; and so I am excused for the length of this discourse. And if it were not that it would be hidden from you, secretly with fire, and its quality of operation on bodies and expulsion by which it expels illnesses, explained with philosophical demonstration which would be useful in your studies, then I would pause here. [Medical terms: cauteri (cautery), foc (fire)][Anatomical terms: membro (limb)][Medical substances: medicina aguda (sharp medicine)][Medical qualities: caliditat (heat), siccitat (dryness)] [Anatomical terms: cors (body)][Medical concepts: disposicio (disposition), causa (cause), accident (accident), espasi del temps (time frame)
And know, sons, that they disagree about the time of year in which it is appropriate to perform cautery and prefer the best time in spring. [Medical terms: cauteri (cautery)][Anatomical terms: membro (limb)][Medical substances: medicina aguda (sharp medicine)][Medical qualities: caliditat (heat), siccitat (dryness)] [Anatomical terms: cors (body)][Medical concepts: disposicio (disposition), causa (cause), accident (accident), espasi del temps (time frame)
And I say that cautery is suitable in all times, because the harm caused by accidental time is subsumed by the benefit of what is brought about with cautery, and especially if it is necessary for pain or painful necessities, strong and urgent, which do not allow delay, and therefore there is fear of damage from those things which would bring greater harm than that caused by the time. [Medical terms: cauteri (cautery)] [Anatomical terms: membro (limb)][Medical substances: medicina aguda (sharp medicine)][Medical qualities: caliditat (heat), siccitat (dryness)] [Anatomical terms: cors (body)][Medical concepts: disposicio (disposition), causa (cause), accident (accident), espasi del temps (time frame)[Medical conditions: compleccio del foc (condition caused by fire)] [Medical substances: medicina aguda (sharp medicine)]
And this should not concern you, sons, but rather only the common people and foolish doctors think this way, that is that a sickness which can be healed by cautery cannot always be reduced to it, and they leave aside its consequence. [Medical terms: cauteri (cautery)] [Anatomical terms: membro (limb)][Medical substances: medicina aguda (sharp medicine)][Medical qualities: caliditat (heat), siccitat (dryness)] [Anatomical terms: cors (body)][Medical concepts: disposicio (disposition), causa (cause), accident (accident), espasi del temps (time frame)[Medical conditions: compleccio del foc (condition caused by fire)] [Medical substances: medicina aguda (sharp medicine)][Medical qualities: caliditat (heat), siccitat (dryness)] [Anatomical terms: cors (body)][Medical concepts: disposicio (disposition), causa (cause), accident (accident), espasi del temps (time frame)
And the cause is not as they think, because cautery is not a substitute for medicine; rather, it alters the complexion and dries out the dampness, which is the cause of pains coming on.
Nevertheless, cautery is used in excess over medicine due to the willfulness of its value and virtue, as well as the greatness of its master.
And it is possible that the patient's illness may return at some point in time, depending on their constitution, the location of their ailment, their vitality, and what has accumulated in their body through the addition of excesses, as well as what they have acquired in terms of food and similar causes; unless the ailment for which cautery is administered is subtle and located in a member with few excesses and moisture, such as toothache or similar ailments. In that case, it is possible that the pain will not return, but only to a small degree.
And common speech holds that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and this is true, not in the sense that I understand it, for I believe that there is no cure more beneficial than one using medicine or another means besides cautery.
And the reason is to the contrary; the idea that cautery is the last remedy of medicine does not mean that it should be administered only when all other methods of treatment have failed in certain illnesses, but rather when those medicines are unsuccessful, and as a last resort at the end of the cause, it proves beneficial. And so it is clear that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, but not in the sense understood by the common people and many foolish doctors.
The ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this without reason, but rather because of the equality of gold and the nobility of its substance.
The ancients said that the location of cautery does not matter, but this is not entirely true, as I have proven and discovered that it matters in certain cases. Cautery with gold is good and better than iron, as they said; however, when using fire and gold for cautery, one must be careful, as the gold heats up according to the amount of heat applied due to its malleability and softness. If too much ignition is applied, the gold can melt due to the heat, causing some layers to separate and fall off, which can hinder the work of the practitioner.
And so, cautery is performed with iron because it allows for more precise and controlled heat application during the operation.
I have organized this chapter on cautery according to the topics, and specifically addressed the section on the head down to the feet, in order to clarify what you may be seeking from me.
Here is the first chapter:
This type of cautery is beneficial for dampness and coldness, which are the two causes of scrofula and various types of rheumatic fluxes, known as corizza, that affect the head and flow from the eyes and ears, causing excessive sleepiness, toothaches, migraines, and generally any illness caused by coldness. This includes paralysis, scrofula, and apoplexy, among other conditions.
The method for this type of cautery is as follows: first, the practitioner should instruct the patient to undergo a laxative treatment to cleanse the head and purify the body by taking the appropriate medicine for three or four nights, depending on the patient's vitality, age, and habits.
And then the practitioner should instruct the patient to shave their head with a razor and perform a specific exercise by placing their hands on a slanted bench, resting their chest on the bench, and placing their hands under their armpits. This exercise is called "sezer" and helps promote blood flow and prepare the scalp for cautery.
And then the practitioner should place the edge of their palm over the bridge of the patient's nose, between their eyes. This gesture is called "razit" and is used to help relax the patient and prepare them for cautery. However, when the practitioner reaches the desired location, they should mark that spot with ink and then ignite the olive-shaped cautery tool, which has the following form:
And then the practitioner should place the cautery tool over the marked spot, applying gentle pressure to gradually constrict the skin, while rotating the tool in a circular motion. This helps ensure that the heat is evenly distributed and reduces the risk of damage to surrounding tissue.
And then the practitioner should gently lift their hand and check the area to see if any bone has been exposed due to the cautery process. If so, they should elevate their hand again and continue using the cautery tool until they can see that the bone is visible. If the tool becomes too cold, they should replace it with another one that is still hot.
And then the practitioner should take a pinch of salt and dissolve it over the area, leaving it there for three days.
And then the practitioner should apply a soft, damp cloth over the area and leave it there until the burn scar has been destroyed by the heat of the cautery tool. And then the practitioner should care for the area using a four-ingredient ointment until it has healed.
And they have said that when the wound remains open, the arm gets better, therefore it is more beneficial and advantageous.
And they have said that a abscess should be cauterized in the bone within the bone, and the cautery should be held there until some part of the affected bone becomes attached to it.
Then remove what is attached to the bone, and let it be healed.
And others have said that with the cautery, it should reach the rear until it enters the bone strongly, and this is the method of small abscess: And they consider that from that location expire the vapors of the head.
And let the wound remain open for a long time, and let it be cured until it is solidified.
But I have not seen these two types of cautery in all places, but only in some men for fear; and let that be enough, it is better to be healthy as long as possible, since the head is weakened by the dissolution of its continuity, just as we have testified in other members, especially when the patient's head is of a cold nature.
And the first type of cautery is safer and better in my opinion, and with that one let it be done with safety.
Chapter Two.
About the cauterization of the head.
When chronic and long-term pain occurs in the entire head, and the patient uses helmets, bandages, hair treatments, ointments, wigs, and similar things, and especially if they have already been cauterized with a cautery but it has not helped them with any of those causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution in its nature, and not weak, and there is little swelling. In that case, cauterize with another cautery just below the first one slightly. And then cauterize on top of the crown of their head with a cautery until the bone is divided. Incise the bone and expose the amount of bone that we have measured, and cauterize it with a cautery in the rear part of the head in the location called "vas", which is where a cupping glass is placed. And lift your hand in this way, and do not expose the bone, because the patient experiences a great deal of pain that is different from the pain caused by all other cauterizations on the head.
And I say that this cautery should be used in its place, because it is necessary to use a more subtle cautery for cauterizing the horns of the head and the occiput than the one used for cauterizing the middle part of the head; and this is the method.
Chapter Three.
About the cauterization of non-ancient migraines. [(Note: The translator assumed that "emigranea no-antiqua" refers to recent or new onset migraine.)]
When a severe headache occurs, or throbbing pain inside the ear, evacuate the head with purging medicine and administer the other cure, which I have mentioned in the sections on illnesses; and if it is of no use, cauterization should be done in two ways: either cauterization with a sharp burning medicine or with iron.
Cauterization with a burning medicine is when you take a twig of aloe, scrape it, and burn the ends of it at both ends. And then make an incision in the temple at the location of the pain with a lanced lancet until it is in the correct place behind the ear, until it is hidden.
And then apply pressure to it with a stopper to reduce constriction and leave it for the space of three hours; and then remove the aloe, and leave the wound open for two or three days, and then place a compress soaked in hot water on it until the area becomes warm.
And then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, do so with some burning medicines which I have written about in the two treatises on burning medicines.
But cauterization with iron is done in this way: the form of the cautery for fire is as follows:
and it is called "clavus calamus", because the tip of it is shaped like a nail with some curvature, and in its middle there is a small prominent part.
And then place it on the location of the pain, and hold your hand so that the arch (of the iron) which is below does not get burnt, and rotate the iron slowly with speed.
And if the amount that is burnt by the tip of the cautery is as much as the size of it, then lift your hand so that the arch (of the iron) which is below does not get burnt, so that the artery which is beneath it is not burnt and there is no flow of blood.
And then soak a compress in salt water and place it on the area, and leave it for three days; and then place a compress soaked in hot water, and then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, then cauterize with the tip of the knife like a cautery, and be careful about cutting an artery in this modern type of headache.
Chapter Four.
About cauterization for ancient migraines.
When you treat migraines with what we have mentioned in the previous cure and what we have mentioned in the sections on illnesses, but the treatment is not effective, and sometimes due to the severity of the disease it does not suffice for what we have said about cauterization with medicine or fire, then it is necessary to burn the knife-like cautery until it turns white, because this indicates the location of pain with a line of length equal to the size of your finger or even smaller; and then place your hand on it once and press it so that you cut the arch and reach the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to be careful about the continuation of the jawbone which moves due to chewing, and that the tendon does not get burnt and the nerves which move it, and that there is no spasm.
And about the precautions and caution for the flow of blood from the cut artery, because cutting it is dangerous, especially for those who are unaware of what they are doing and are not studious or experienced; and leave the operation to someone else at the beginning.
I will come back with a reminder of the regulation of blood flow from an accident of the arch in its own way, in its own place in this book.
And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for this illness and you see that the patient's body can tolerate it, then cauterize in the middle of the head as we have mentioned, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cautery which we mentioned in the chapter on stretching of the arch with two knives, and this is better and more effective cauterization.
Chapter Five.
About cauterization for earaches.
When there is pain in the ear due to cold and it is treated with laxative causes and with the other cure which I have mentioned in the section, but the pain is not relieved, then use fire cautery, and this is called puncture, and its shape is as follows:
And then make the puncture and burn it around the entire ear like a wheel rotates, or in the circumference of any part if the pain is in one place. Bring yourself closer to the cautery of the edge of the ear little by little as you have marked the location with a probe.
And if you make ten punctures in the entire ear, and even more if necessary, and then cure the areas until they are healed.
Chapter Six.
About cauterization for swelling.
Swelling which is cured and does not require cauterization is of the types that come by vein, as we have said in the sections on illnesses.
Avoid cauterization of the type that comes by dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you treat this type of swelling with herbs such as jerry, caper spurge and guarguarium, and your treatment is not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first at the edge of the ear, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And place the cautery on the opposite side of the affected area, because softening will only occur in the healthy-looking part.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cautery at the top and a little above the highest point of the ear, on the temple, the length of which should be the same as the width of your finger, and then place your hand with the cautery until the amount of the tip of the ear has been burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, which is a type of knife, and its shape is in front of the table. But it is even more subtle than that, like you can see; and it is necessary that the knife in it has a little less excess.
And then cure the place with what comes before the process until it is healed.
Chapter Seven.
Chapter Seven: On Cauterization for Ancient Apoplexy
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it with what we have said and your medicine does not work and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize them with four cauteries: above all the corners of their head; and with a cautery in the middle of their head, as we have said; and with a cautery on the neck. And the method of cauterization is done as previously mentioned.
And (the cautery) has already been performed on the mouth of the stomach, and it is more severe; and let it be cured with what proceeds (in the treatment).
Chapter Eight.
Chapter Eight: On Cauterization for Forgetfulness Made by Flame
It is necessary that large herbs and cleansing pills be given to the patient at the beginning.
And then shave the patient's entire head and apply a plaster of wax described in the treatise on plasters to their neck.
And place that on several times, because that is the way to use cautery. And do that in the same order which I have already said.
And so if the person is cured by this treatment, but if not, then perform three cauterizations on the back of their head, with the cuts extending from the highest part of the head down to the lower part of the neck. And place the width of a finger between each cauterization, and then heal the cautery with the appropriate method.
But if the patient is tolerant to this, then perform a cauterization in the middle location; and if there is more need, then cauterize on both ears (or horns).
Then heal the one that has been cured, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped as previously described.
Chapter 9.
On the cauterization of parazilis (possibly a term for a medical condition) and on the softening of the entire body.
It is necessary that you proceed with the cleaning of the head using jerras and what we have mentioned; and then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize it in the middle location on the head, and on both ears (or horns) of the head, and on the back part of the head, and with three cauterizations on the spondylis (possibly a term for a medical condition) of the neck.
And if it is necessary for the treatment of softening of the body due to excess moisture in patients who are tolerant and the disease is severe, then cauterize with four cauterizations on the spondylis (possibly a term for a medical condition) of the back, and specifically at the spot where the spine protrudes significantly from the body, and lift up the patient's tunic. And then heal the one that has been cured, and let this (cauterization) be olive-shaped.
Chapter 10.
On the cauterization of epilepsy.
The epileptic should not be cauterized unless the epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
And so it is necessary to clean the brain of the patient at the beginning with jerras and the other cure that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is severe and tolerates the exception of medicines.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer laxatives and chewable substances that cleanse the servant (the body), for several days, with good quality food.
And then shave the patient's head and cauterize it with one cautery in the middle location on the head, following the previous method, and with another cautery on the back of the head (occiput), and cauterize on each ear (or horn) of the head. And if the patient is severe and tolerant, then cauterize with several cauteries that I have mentioned, having paralysis and softening of the body on the spondylis (possibly a term for a medical condition) of the neck and back.
And let the cautery be olive-shaped as previously described.
But if the patient is a child, then use a subtle cautery in this manner.
Chapter 11.
On the cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize with the cauteries that I have mentioned for paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess that leads to melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then give them something to drink that cleanses the brain, as has been described previously in the division.
And then shave the patient's head and make a proper tourniquet from linen to place on their forehead in the middle location of the head.
And let the patient be 60 years old and be held on all sides (i.e., kept still).
And then apply a liniment; and it is more worthy of an old sheep's wool. And warm that (liniment) over a fire with tempered heat measured by the patient's tolerance when it is applied to them. And then apply that (liniment) in the middle location of the head on their forehead, and let it sit until it has cooled down.
And do this with the patient once a week, following their other good regimen until they are cured; or if you wish, cauterize with small points according to their needs, as long as you have a cautery prepared in this way: this is a type of cautery that moistens the brain with equality.
And then apply that piece (of cloth) soaked in linen or woolen fabric.
Chapter 12.
On the cauterization of water that descends (i.e., flows) in the ear.
When you have identified the signs of water in the ear that I have described previously in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that cleanses their head, and protect them from all moisture.
And make him sweat in a hot bath for several days.
Then order him to raise his head, and cauterize the spot on his head with a cautery; and then cauterize the spot with two cauteries above the two temples if it is the beginning of watery discharge in both nostrils, or with one cautery if it is the beginning of watery discharge from one nostril.
Incise all the veins and arteries that are located below the nape of the neck; and let the cauteries be in that area, at the width of the temples.
And be careful not to cause bleeding when cauterizing; and if you see that there is bleeding, stop it with some kind of medicine that is available to you.
I will come with wisdom in the extraction of arteries and the removal of abscesses, as well as caution regarding bleeding.
And sometimes it is necessary to cauterize the area below the two bones in the neck with two properly prepared cauteries.
Chapter 13.
On the cautery of ancient tears (or: old teardrops).
When the tears from the eyes have become old and are excreted through the veins and arteries that are located in the visible part of the head outside, and it has been determined that this is due to excessive and inflamed flow, then cauterize the area with a cautery as described in the chapter on the beginning of watery discharge from the eyes, and also cauterize the spot in the middle of the head and above the two temples, and above the two bones in the neck with two cauteries. And if it is necessary to add more treatment, then cauterize the area at the outer corner of the eye, above the edge of the eyebrow, with a small cautery.
Chapter 14.
On the cautery of foul smell from the nose.
When you treat someone with the method that we have described in the division (or: section) and your treatment is not effective, then prepare and give to the patient to drink the broth of chickpeas for three nights; and shave their head, and cauterize it with a medium-sized olive-shaped cautery. And then cauterize the area with a nail-shaped cautery, using two cauteries above the eyebrows, just below the hairline.
And be careful not to cut the artery.
And this is the shape of the nail-shaped cautery.
Chapter 15.
On the cautery for softening the eyelids.
When the eyelid has become soft due to illness or moisture, then cauterize it with a crescent-shaped cautery, and this is its shape:
And if that is not effective, then cauterize the area above the eyebrows with two small cauteries on both sides, and let them be elongated from the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but only until about a third of the eyelid has been cauterized.
Chapter 16.
On the cautery for the eyelid of the eye when the eyelashes have become ingrown and are causing inflammation in the inner corner of the eye.
When the eyelashes have become ingrown and are causing inflammation in the inner corner of the eye, there are two ways to use cautery as a treatment: either with fire or with a burning medicine.
If using a cautery of fire, instruct the patient to read their eyelashes as if they were cleaning them, extending and shaping them until they are long and curved; and if they become inflamed at the base, then you should strengthen the eyes of the patient with a bandage so that they do not become damaged while the lashes are growing back.
Once the lashes have grown back and are curved, then place a bandage over the patient's eyes and apply a sign on the eyelid of each eye with a tentative mark in the shape of a myrtle leaf, with the beginning of the sign located near the base of the eyelashes.
And then place a soft pad soaked in egg white or mucilage made from pith on the eye.
And apply fire with the following shape of cautery.
And cauterize along the marked figure, gradually, in small strokes, until the surface of the skin is burned and appears like a myrtle leaf, entirely consistent in appearance.
The sign of health for this procedure is that you see the patient's eyelid already contracted, and their hairy skin raised around the puncture on the eye.
Therefore, lift it up and leave it for three days, then place your hand over the wound until the scab forms. And treat that with ointment until it heals.
But if it returns around the hairs for any reason and the eyelid becomes softened, then perform cautery on that area again just as you did before.
But if the hairs are on the lower eyelid, then cauterize that area until it rises to its natural position and is healed, so that the hairs do not irritate the eye.
But use a burning medical cautery that you command the patient to pull out their hairs until they are elongated and healed, and then make a myrtle leaf-shaped patch from paper or cloth.
And take known soapwort and fresh cow dung in one ounce. That is, Or what is the same thing, mix those ingredients well and quickly so that they are not chilled; then spread that mixture on the paper shaped like a myrtle leaf and place it over one or both eyes; and place a cup of warm egg white below the affected eye, and have the patient lie down in your presence.
And place the poultice over the eye and press gently on it, but do not cause pain; keep it there until the patient feels a stinging sensation from the medicine, for this stinging is like fire.
And so, when you perceive that the stinging sensation has begun, then remove the poultice and apply your hand; when the stinging ceases, then replace the poultice and rinse the eye with water; then consider whether the eyelid has risen as it should be due to the constriction from fire or incision, for then it is well; but if not, return to that place on the eye where the medicine has not yet been applied and do not degrade your operation until it heals and the eyelid contracts.
And treat that wound with bandages until the hardened skin of the abscess is removed; then heal it with ointment or another treatment until it heals completely.
And it is necessary for you, during your procedure, to be vigilant and ensure that no residue of the medicine falls into the eye; if the eyelid remains softened for several days, and some hairs irritate the eye, then repeat your treatment on that area of the eyelid that has become softened, just as you did at the beginning, and continue to treat it until it heals.
And this is the shape of myrtle leaf.
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and shape, so therefore adjust your treatment accordingly.
And it is not hidden from those who study this art.
Chapter seventeen.
On the cauterization of fistulas in the lacrimal duct of the eye.
When you cure a fistula with what we have said in the sections on diseases and do not pay attention to your treatment, it is appropriate that you cauterize that in this way: command the patient to place their head in your presence, and hold their head with some assistant in such a manner that they are neither harmed nor agitated by moving their head.
And place a compress soaked in egg white or in a paste of bread on the patient's eye.
And apply fire with the following shape of cautery:
which should be concave, like the shape of a reed or a vulture's feather, at one end where the cautery is made.
And if you want, enter the other extremity. (I'm assuming "extremity" here means limb or end part of the body) And if you wish, let it be as taut as a tent. (Here, "tenta" might be a typo or an old word form for "tenda," which means "tent" in modern Catalan.)
However, the one that is concave is better for this task. (I'm assuming "tieua" is an old word form for "teva," which means "your" in modern Catalan.)
And then press the fistula if it's open and draw out of it pus and dry up that area. (Here, "lu" might be a typo or an old word form for "li," which means "it/its" in modern Catalan.) And if it's not open, then open it and remove the pus from it. (Here, "lu" might be a typo or an old word form for "li," which means "it/its" in modern Catalan.)[
And then place the hot cautery over it, making sure it's fully lit. However, keep your hand a little distance from the cautery at the edge of the nose, to avoid burning yourself or causing discomfort to the patient. Then apply the cautery to the grooves of the nose and destroy it (the fistula).
And so, if at the beginning of your cauterization, it reaches the bone, that's good. If not, then reapply the cautery once or twice more if necessary, and leave it in place for three days. Then apply a bandage and a drying ointment to the area until it is healed.
But if it hasn't healed after 10 days, then apply a corrosive medicine to the bone until it is exposed, following what is appropriate in its chapter. (I am assuming "xi" is a typo or an old word form for "deu," which means "ten" in modern Catalan.)
Here's another method for cauterizing a fistula: understand the location of the fistula and open it up. Then place a very fine instrument in the opening, which has the shape of a plummet (a weight with a pointed end used for measuring depth). The amount of lead used should be about one ounce, melted down. Hold your hand firmly around the instrument so that it doesn't harm the patient and the melted lead doesn't reach their skin. Place a cloth or sponge soaked in egg white or water on the patient's wound, as lead adheres well to the location of the fistula and heals it through miraculous healing.
If the fistula has healed through the cauterization method I described earlier, that's great. But if not, then it is necessary to administer nasal traction and pull the fistula into the nasal cavity when its turn comes in due course. (I am assuming "trauc del nas" means a medical procedure involving the nose, such as pulling or extracting something from it.)
Chapter 18. (It is customary to name chapters with Roman numerals in medieval manuscripts, but some scribes used Arabic numerals instead.)
Chapter 18: On the Cauterization of Wounds on the Feet. (I am assuming "potz" is an old word form for "peus," which means "feet" in modern Catalan.)
Many times it happens that fissures occur on the lips, and more often on the lips of infants. (I am assuming "veguadas" is a typo or an old word form for "vegades," which means "times" in modern Catalan.)
Therefore, when you treat those fissures with what we discussed in the previous sections and your treatment doesn't work, then use a pointed knife for cauterization, following this form that I will teach you:
And let the concavity of it match the shape of the knife blade. (I am assuming "lu" is an old word form for "li," which means "it/its" in modern Catalan.)
Then place the tip of the knife carefully into the fissures, so that the cautery reaches the bottom of the cracks.
Then cure it with ointments until it is healed. (I am assuming "cerotz" is an old word form for "cerots," which means "ointments" in modern Catalan.)
Chapter 19.
Chapter 19: On the Cauterization of Fistulas in the Mouth. (I am assuming "boca" means "mouth" in modern Catalan.)
When an abscess forms on the edge of the uvula or on the palate or gums, and it breaks open and becomes old and corrupted, forming a fistula, and your treatment doesn't work, then you must apply cautery according to the size of the fistula. Insert the heated cautery into the opening of the fistula, holding your hand until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it. Do this once or twice more, and then cure it with what we discussed earlier in the treatment, until it is healed.
If the pus has been drained and the wound is healed, then that's good. But if not, then it is necessary to expose the area, clean out the corrupted bone, following what is appropriate in its chapter. (I am assuming "loc" means "location" or "wound" in modern Catalan.)
Chapter 20.
Chapter 20: On the Cauterization of Teeth and Softening of Gums. (I am assuming "dentz" means "teeth" and "mollificacio" means "softening" in modern Catalan.)
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are painful, and you treat them with medicines but they don't work, then place the patient's head in your lap and quickly heat up the cautery in this shape: (Here, "quanula" might be a typo or an old word form for "quanella," which means "chisel" in modern Catalan.)
Then lift your hand and reapply the cautery several times as you wish. (I am assuming "alcunas" is an old word form for "algunes," which means "several" in modern Catalan.)
Then have the patient fill their mouth with saltwater and hold it for an hour, and then rinse it out, as the painful tooth is now firm and the softened gum has strengthened and the corrupt moisture has been dried up.
Chapter 21.
Chapter 21: On the Cauterization of Tooth Pain. (I am assuming "dent" means "tooth" in modern Catalan.)
When tooth pain is due to cold or there is a crack or worm in it, and treatment with medicine doesn't work, then you can cauterize the tooth in two ways: either with a cow dung cautery or with fire. (I am assuming "fregiditat" means "coldness," "boder de vacas" means "cow dung" and "comfereys" is an old word form for "confereix" which means "works" in modern Catalan.) [
Cauterizing with cow dung means that you take cow dung and heat it in a pot of iron. Then take a piece of cloth, wrap it around the end of the heated cautery, and immerse it in the hot dung. Quickly apply it to the painful tooth until it becomes cold. (I am assuming "tenta" means "handle" or "end part" of the cautery in modern Catalan.)
Then reapply the cautery several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth. (I am assuming "veguadas" is an old word form for "vegades," which means "times" in modern Catalan.)
And if you wish, immerse a piece of wool or cloth in the cow dung and place it on the painful tooth, then place the hot iron on top of it until it reaches the bottom of the concavity of the tooth. (I am assuming "desus dit" means "mentioned above," "conquavitat" means "concavity" and "pervengua" means "reaches" in modern Catalan.) [
However, cauterization with fire requires you to pay attention to the shape of iron or steel and have some roughness in its center so that the heat of the fire doesn't reach the patient's mouth. (I am assuming "quannula" means "shape," "cor" means "center" and "acuitat" means "heat" in modern Catalan.)
Then heat up the cautery according to its shape, and place it on the tooth while holding your hand until the cautery becomes cold. Repeat this several times so that the pain is reduced either on that day or the following day. (I am assuming "veguadas" means "times" in modern Catalan.)
It is necessary for the patient to fill their mouth with good cow dung and hold it for an hour, then rinse it out. This is the shape of the cautery. (I am assuming "bon boder" means "good cow dung" in modern Catalan.)
And cauterize whichever extremity you wish, as much as is possible for you. (I am assuming "extremittat" means "extremities" or "limbs" in modern Catalan.)
And this is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter 22. (The original text uses Roman numerals for chapter numbers, but some scribes might have used Arabic numerals instead.)
Chapter 22: On the Cauterization of Umbilical Hernias. (I am assuming "extrophulos" means "umbilical hernias" in modern Catalan.)
When umbilical hernias are caused by cold and moisture and don't respond to gentle digestion through medicines, and you want to gently digest them, then heat up the concave cautery with two sharp ends so that the smoke goes away from the cautery through the other end. Place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or more if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess. (I am assuming "flecma" means "cold," "humors fregas" means "moisture," "digistio" means "digestion" and "indigeyses" is an old word form for "necessites" which means "need" in modern Catalan.)
If the abscess is small, then apply the cautery according to its size and leave it for three days, placing a cloth soaked in cow dung on top until what the fire has burned is healed. (I am assuming "leyssa" means "leave" and "boder" means "cow dung" in modern Catalan.)
Then cure it with ointments, bandages, and cloth until it is healed. (I am assuming "tentas" means "bandages" and "draps" means "cloth" in modern Catalan.)
Chapter 23. (The original text uses Roman numerals for chapter numbers, but some scribes might have used Arabic numerals instead.)
Chapter 23: On the Cauterization of Hoarseness of Voice and Constriction of the Neck. (I am assuming "rauquiera" means "hoarseness," "votz" means "voice" and "alex" means "neck" in modern Catalan.) [
When moisture comes to the throat, especially when it is due to cold complexion, then it is necessary for the patient to be evacuated at first with laxative medicines, and then cauterize the area at the root of the throat in the depressed location. (I am assuming "comensament" means "at first," "golayro" means "throat" and "depremegut" means "depressed" in modern Catalan.)
And make sure not to bring the cautery too close to the genitals or burn the patient's skin, but only slightly.
And you should cauterize that area with another cautery at the joint of the neck on the patient's last vertebra. And let the cautery be shaped like a keel, as previously described.
And take care of it with what was prescribed before until it is healed.
Chapter 24. (Note: The number "xxiiii" is Roman numerals for the number 24)
Of cauterization for lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are caused by cold humors, and the patient does not have a fever or consumption (tuberculosis) and is an old illness, then you should cauterize that area with two cauteries on the breastbone in the depressed areas like lions' claws and breasts; and another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two nipples; and let the cauteries be shaped like a keel as previously described.
And if you wish, make your cauterization punctate with the cautery called "puncta", the shape of which is described in the section on ear pain.
And let there be small holes in those cauteries; and take care of it with what was prescribed before until it is healed.
And let there be three-pronged cauteries for this type of cauterization, which can be done with one pass: you may make three cauteries according to this shape in one go.
Chapter 25. (Note: The number "xxv" is Roman numerals for the number 25)
Of cauterization for itching, which is the head of the scrofula (tuberculous cervical lymphadenitis).
When the head of the scrofula is dislocated due to slippery humors and does not return in its time of returning, you must first reduce the dislocation before it returns to its normal position, and then gently move the patient's neck upwards so that it returns to its place. And then raise the head which is on the inner side of the scrofula towards the upper parts with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated inward.
And then heat the two-headed cautery; and this is its shape: (note: there are no further details about the shape of the cautery)
And then cauterize the neck so that it penetrates to the other side; and the shape of the cauterization will be formed by four cautery marks.
And sometimes it is appropriate to make them according to this count, and that is why there are eight cauteries. (Note: There are no further details about the reason for using eight cauteries)
And then place a piece of cloth soaked in saltwater over the cautery, and make sure the patient remains still and quiet until the area is healed and the limb is not harmed for any length of time until it is recovered.
And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and this procedure is done late, then cauterize on the muscle with a keel-shaped cautery or with several punctate cauteries, because the joint will be strengthened, the humors dispersed, and the patient healed.
Chapter 26. (Note: The number "xxvi" is Roman numerals for the number 26) [--------------------------------------------------
Of cauterization for the stomach.
When humors accumulate in the stomach and cause swelling and pain, you must first continue with conventional treatments to alleviate the symptoms. However, if these methods do not work, the patient should be positioned on their back with their limbs stretched out. Then, three cauteries should be used: one under the breastbone, about a finger's width in size, shaped like a keel; and two more cauteries below each side of the first one, forming a triangular shape. The cauteries must not touch each other to avoid charring.
And if the depth of the cautery should be two-thirds the thickness of the neck.
And let the shape of the cautery be as shown in the illustration. If you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and let this be a round-shaped cautery as shown in the following illustration:
And let the stomach be cauterized with punctate cautery for those who are afraid of it: and this means that you place small marks on the stomach with the cautery, according to the desired size. Then cauterize these marked points with a pointed cautery. Afterwards, take care of it with the previously described treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 27.
In this chapter, the text discusses cauterization for a condition called "fietge fret," which roughly translates to "cold liver." The author suggests that when the liver is cold and damp due to an accumulation of excess humors, it can lead to various health issues such as indigestion, fatigue, and weakened vision. To address this issue, the text recommends using cautery as a treatment.
When pain occurs in the liver due to coldness or humidity or excessive gas that deviates from its normal composition due to superfluous egression, and if the patient is not cured by the methods mentioned earlier, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back with their head raised, and three cauterizations should be made on the liver below the hypochondria according to this shape and size.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the width of a finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of a straight body part (such as an arm or leg).
And do not press too hard with the cautery.
And if the amount of cauterization should be equal to the width of one-third of the neck and not any wider; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them lie down with their limbs extended and arms raised.
And it is possible for you to cauterize with these cauteries using a scalpel-shaped cautery, when you are skilled and prudent in the art.
And make sure not to overdo it in the cauterization, and let the entire width of the neck be cauterized so that the whole body is affected and it reaches the intestines, since the neck here is delicate; and know this.
Chapter 28.
In this chapter, the text discusses the use of cautery to puncture and drain liver abscesses (apostema). The author provides detailed instructions on how to perform the procedure safely and effectively, including the recommended size and shape of the cautery tool, as well as the appropriate depth and location of the incision.
When a growth or abscess occurs in the liver and you want to know if it is in the liver tissue or the outer membrane of the organ, then if it is in the liver tissue, the patient will experience heaviness and dull pain without increased discomfort.
And if it is in the outer membrane of the liver, then the pain is sharp and can exhaust doctors with its treatment. This suggests that when an abscess or growth forms on the outer membrane of the liver, the pain experienced by the patient is more severe and may require extensive medical intervention, potentially leading to exhaustion for the treating physicians.
Therefore, the patient should be positioned face up with their head raised. Then, locate the area of the abscess using your fingers, and heat the hook-shaped cautery until it is red hot, as previously described on the previous page. And cauterize with that hook-shaped cautery until the entire neck is cauterized, until it reaches the diaphragm, until pus is produced and healing occurs.
And then take care of it with treatment for other abscesses until it is healed.
And it is not necessary to use this form of cautery except for those who have studied medicine extensively and have recognized many diseases; but this should be attempted several times with caution in this operation, but still leave it up to your judgment, and that is better.
Chapter 29.
In this chapter, the text discusses cauterization as a treatment for pleurisy (plaurisi), which is an inflammation of the lining of the lungs. The author suggests that when conventional treatments are ineffective, cauterization can be used to alleviate pain and promote healing.
The ancients used to cauterize pleurisy with the razors of Aristology in this manner, that is, you take a dry razor from Aristology, long and sharp, and of the width of a finger.
And then submerge that in oil and heat it up over the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery tool at the location between the continuation of the breastbone with the neck; and with two small cauteries below the chin, slightly declining towards the area below the beard, and with two cauteries at the location slightly declining between the fifth rib and the spine, declining slightly towards the back; and with another cautery on the middle of the chest; and with another above the stomach, and with three cauteries at the back; and with one cautery at the location between the two shoulder blades, and with two cauteries below the sides of the hips, below the cautery that is between the two shoulder blades.
And it is not necessary to compress your hand with the cautery, but rather in the openness of the wound.
And ancient men used to say that some of their remedies involved using a cautery made of iron in the shape of a ray and applying it to the area between the ribs until it reached the abscess and the pus was expelled, just as we have said in the treatment of an abscess in the groin.
But in this procedure using cautery, there is danger, for one may die or suffer harm if the location of the wound is a fistula that does not heal.
Chapter 30.
On the cauterization of the spleen.
When you cure the illness of the spleen with what we have said about the treatment in division and do not neglect your treatment, then cauterization is appropriate for it in three ways, all of which are correct, one of which is that you make three or four burns according to the length of the spleen, according to the shape of the cauteries of the groin, the shape of which has preceded.
And the width of each cautery should be that of a finger or slightly more, and the method of cauterization should be the same as we have described for the cautery of the groin.
And do not press your hand with the cautery, and let the patient be on their back.
And there is another way to cauterize, which is that you heat the cautery with two turns, causing a burn that we have described in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and raise the ribcage that is over the area of the spleen where it rests on the left side of the patient's body.
And your elevation should be according to the length of the body, so that burns are made according to the width of the body.
And then insert the two turns, igniting them slightly, in the space between the ribs that you have penetrated on the other side.
And then remove the cautery; this will make four burns.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three turns.
And you should cure the burn left by the cautery before too many days have passed, for this is more appropriate than the other causes we have mentioned in the treatment.
Chapter 31.
On the cauterization of hydropsy (edema).
Cautery should not be used in cases of hydropsy (edema) except in specific cases.
When you cure hydropsy (edema) with the methods of treatment that we have described in division and do not neglect your care, then it is appropriate to cauterize with four burns around the navel, and one on the stomach, and another on the groin, and another on the spleen, and two between the vertebrae of the back, and one on the right side of the chest, and another on the stomach. And the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the ribcage.
And let the cautery remain open so that it continues to burn for a long time.
And do not remove the patient from treatment near the cautery until it is necessary, for this may add two intentions (meaning: factors contributing to the condition) that will make their recovery more difficult and hasty.
The shape of the cautery used for cauterizing the abdomen should be like a nail, as we have described previously, and the shape of the one used for cauterizing the back should be like an olive branch, as we have also described before.
Chapter 32.
On the cauterization of feet and thighs.
When the feet are swollen and infected with abscesses in cases of hydropsy (edema) and filled with yellow water, it is appropriate to cauterize the feet on the back of the ankle between the auricular (outer) and anular (middle) bones, and raise your hand with the cautery without twisting it, and then raise your hand without returning it completely, for the yellow water will ooze out.
And the cautery should be in this shape: and make two burns on each thigh, and on each thigh make a burn with the tip of a scalpel-like cautery. And let the cauteries be according to the length of the thigh, and place one below the knee and the other above the middle of the thigh, and on each thigh two burns.
And leave the wound open for a long time without treatment in order that some yellow water may ooze out of it.
And you should treat it with the causes that we have mentioned.
Chapter 33.
On the cauterization of the abdomen.
When the abdomen is weakened and made vulnerable by dampness and humidity that impairs its digestive and retentive functions, which are located in the stomach and intestines, then it should be treated with the methods of treatment that we have described earlier, and sometimes a patient can tolerate a cautery with strong heat-generating power, in which case you should cauterize them with a large cautery on their stomach as described previously for treating the stomach, using a circular cautery and four fine burns around the navel, and a nail-shaped cautery; or two burns on the alcatin (a term that may refer to the bladder) in cases of severe water retention.
And sometimes when there is excess humidity and the patient can tolerate it, then you should cauterize on the pudendal area (genital region) and the lower abdomen, and gently place two fine burns on the stomach and near the inguinal areas, for this is a perfect cure that will not fail.
Chapter 34.
On the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
When hemorrhoids are of a gross or corrupted nature due to excess humidity, and have been treated with the methods we have described earlier without success, then you should cauterize with three burns below the small triangular spine at the base of the back, and with two more above the navel.
And if you suspect that the stomach is congested and food is not being digested properly, and the patient's face appears swollen or infected, then cauterize with a large cautery on the stomach as described previously; and use one cautery on the groin, and another on the spleen using a nail-shaped cautery, leaving the burn open for some time to allow for draining, and treating the patient until they are fully healed.
Chapter 35.
On the cauterization of athlete's foot near an abscess in the toe.
When you treat athlete's foot, then heat the cautery that has the shape of a ray. Then insert the heated cautery into the incision made in the athlete's foot and place your hand firmly until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows.
And do this once or twice, for if there are many blisters then cauterize each one as we have described, and treat them with dressings until they are healed.
And if you use a large cautery on an abscess, it will be more effective.
Chapter 36.
On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the lower body near their separation points.
When the body does not respond to the treatment that we have recommended for its specific location, and the patient is frightened by this, then use cautery as a cure.
Therefore, when you see a fistula in the lower body that is old and produces pus and corrupted humidity, then it is more appropriate to treat this with subtle probing and cauterization at a depth corresponding to the previously mentioned technique.
Apply the cautery which resembles a ray of light. Then apply that heated cautery to this fistula, according to the depth at which it penetrates the wound.
And repeat applying the cautery until the corrupt flesh is burned away, either once or twice or three times, depending on the extent of your need.
And be careful not to burn nerve or vein, or if the fistula reaches the bladder or bowel, avoid those areas entirely; only proceed when the fistula is in a fleshy and non-penetrating location.
Then heal the wound until it has healed completely.
And if the wound is sealed and the pus has been drained from it and remains like that for a long time, then know that it has healed completely.
And if the pus is not drained from it, then know that the wound is penetrating or infected with corrupt matter, or this is caused by one of those factors that will be mentioned in its place.
Chapter 37.
On the Cautery of Tumors.
When tumors cause pain due to inflammation or swelling, and as a result the patient's condition worsens, it is necessary to cauterize each of those tumors with a pointed cautery that has been heated to a degree appropriate for the situation.
And cauterize with a gentle touch using the second degree of heat, resulting in three linear cauterizations, which will be more effective in providing relief.
Chapter 38. [Please note that my translations are not intended to replace professional medical advice and should only be used as a general guide.]
On the Cautery of the Bladder. [Please note that my translations are not intended to replace professional medical advice and should only be used as a general guide.]
When an abscess causes debility and softening due to inflammation and moisture, such that the patient is unable to retain urine, then cauterize the area below the bladder with a heated cautery at the point where the pubic hair begins. Cauterize on both sides of it with one cautery on the right side and another on the left. [Please note that my translations are not intended to replace professional medical advice and should only be used as a general guide.]
And the length of each cautery should correspond to the size of the abscess openings, and then cauterize the area at the lowest point on the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And let the cautery be pointed according to what is appropriate for the procedure. [Please note that my translations are not intended to replace professional medical advice and should only be used as a general guide.]
Chapter 39.
On the Cautery of the Liver.
When the liver is inflamed and moist, and intercourse is prohibited, and menstruation is corrupted, and its onset is delayed, and there is pain during menstruation, then it is necessary to cauterize the area around the navel with three pointed cauteries along the circumference of the umbilicus, as previously mentioned in the treatment of bladder cautery. Additionally, cauterize the area below the back with a pointed cautery or two, if necessary. [Please note that my translations are not intended to replace professional medical advice and should only be used as a general guide.]
Chapter XL
On the Cautery of Dislocation of the Ankle.
When moisture-filled swellings are infiltrated in the ankle area and cause fluid to accumulate in that location, a sign of which is one thigh appearing longer than the other when compared, then it is necessary to cauterize the affected area with a heated pointed cautery, taking care not to burn the nerves or veins. Repeat the cautery procedure as many times as necessary until the swelling has subsided and the fluid has been drained from the ankle area. [Please note that these translations are not intended as medical advice, and should only be used as a general guide.] And the location of the dislocation is found where the bone has shifted out of place.
Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the ankle area with a circular-shaped cautery, after marking a circle around the affected area using a probe in order to ensure that the ankle bone falls in the middle of the circle. This will help realign the dislocated bone back into its proper position. [Please note that these translations are not intended as medical advice, and should only be used as a general guide.]
And let the form of the cautery be similar to that described in the treatment for stomach cauterization.
If this particular cautery is not available, then use three large olive-shaped cauteries instead.
And make the cautery according to the thickness of the entire limb, and then care for the wound until it heals completely.
Chapter XLII:
Quan le malaute es dolent per freg o per humiditatz en lo cors dela vena sciatica, e ha estat long temps ab aquel dolor, e no pot trobar alivremient, lahoras cove que cauterizes lo loc de freg am un cauteri calent sobre quascun latus dela vena; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon que es necessitat.
When pain occurs in the ankle area and is caused by inflammation and moisture, the patient should be treated with what we have previously mentioned, which is antiquated. Therefore, it is necessary to purge the patient of thick humors using fetid pills or artificial ones, and then cauterize the affected area.
The method of cautery in this case can be done in two ways: either with burning medicines or with fire.
The first method is based on knowledge and involves cauterizing the affected area of the ankle with three triangular-shaped cauteries, as shown in the following figure, and ensuring that they are deeply embedded. And let the spaces between each cautery be the width of a finger, and if using an olive-shaped or large cautery.
And sometimes the cauteries should be placed on the middle of the ankle, making a total of four cauterizations.
If you prefer, cauterize with a circle as described in the treatment for ankle dislocation, where the entire limb's thickness should be burned.
And this is the method of cautery for sciatica when pain is adhered to the ankle and not extended into the thigh. [Please note that I am providing translations only and my expertise is in linguistics, not medicine. The text describes medical procedures from a historical perspective, but should not be taken as medical advice or used for treatment purposes.]
However, if the pain extends into the thigh, then cauterize with two cauteries on the thigh at the location where the patient indicates the pain, and with one cautery on the shinbone a little below the middle of it.
If using a knife-shaped cautery, then let the depth of the cauterization be according to the thickness of the limb.
And if the patient indicates that the pain extends to the area near the toes, then cauterize there with three or four points or more if necessary.
And if the patient indicates pain below the groin towards the thigh, then cauterize there with a knife-shaped cautery.
And in all cases of cautery, be careful not to burn nerves or large blood vessels with the cautery, as this can harm the patient or cause complications.
And I have seen some who, in their cautionery on the shin, went too far and caused an inflammation that spread up to the thigh, resulting in a large tumor that affected the entire leg and ultimately caused it to become gangrenous and necrotic. And sometimes this can lead to severe abdominal inflammation and even death.
If the pain is in two locations, then cauterize each one according to this method.
And the wise men said that in the cauterization of ankle, this is the method for using the iron cautery: make it similar to a circle of iron with a circumference the size of a palm, and its orifices should be according to the thickness of a date stone or slightly less.
And within this circle, there should be another third, and the spaces between them should be the width of a finger's knuckle. These circles should be open on both sides, with their length being one or two fingers wide, and the edges of the iron should be properly prepared in these circles. This is the shape of it:
Then it should be heated in the fire until it becomes red and throws off sparks. After that, it should be placed on the affected area of the ankle while the patient lies on their side. And then cauterize with three circular cauteries in one go.
And then leave it for three days, apply an emplaster to it with mold and leave the wound open for several days, and take care of it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasis said: "O sons, we have rarely used this type of cautery due to its intimidating appearance and because only a few people have been found who dare to use it."
But among the brave who can endure it, they find the location of their pain with this type of cautery.
But cautery with adhesive medicines is what you should do: make two circles with a perforated rim in which the gauze of the iron door should be placed; let the width of the walls be equal to the thickness of two or three fingers.
And let the spaces between each one be the width of a finger; and let them be open both above and below, and let them fit together as follows:
And then place it on the ankle of the patient, who should be lying on their side, and press your hand over the ankle. Then take some hot water and pour it between the two circles, gradually increasing the heat of the water, and keep it there for the duration of one hour, allowing the patient to endure the biting and sticking sensation caused by the cautery (which feels like a burning sensation) until it subsides.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and clean away the hot water from the entire ankle using clean water.
And leave it for three days, and apply it to the affected area until the blackness of the swelling lessens, and leave it on for several days, and the hardness will subside; this is the final remedy.
And treat it with a salve until it is healed.
And if the pain extends to the thigh or the flank, make an incision in it so that it can contain water, just as is done with an abscess.[^1](footnote-01)
And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe for alkali and quicklime mixed in equal parts, sifted and placed in a new bowl with a small hole pierced in the bottom of it, so that only as much as enters the dish can come out at a time.
And place another bowl underneath the first one, and pour sweet water over the alkali and quicklime, which will absorb it by a finger's width. Then press firmly on it with your hand, and let the liquid that seeps out flow from the hole in the bottom of the first bowl into the second bowl.
And then adjust the liquid and pour it over a new mixture of quicklime and fresh alkali, for now it will have gained considerable strength, which can be used in many medical operations, including cauterization of other body parts, as this operation involves fire.
And some medicines are made with which one can be cauterized broadly, such as alum, honey, and myrrh mixed together.
And Galen recounts the operation and cure with which an ancient man cured pain in the hip and sciatic nerve, and speaks highly of it, stating that there is no need for any other treatment, as he was cured by one application alone, so easily that he left the bath and was already free from it.
And it should be taken from green cherry-laurel leaves, and if those are not found, fresh figs should be used instead; they should be crushed into a paste with a little salt and placed on the hip where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the flank, and bandaged in place.
And it should be left on for the duration of three hours or for as long as the patient can bear the tightness of the swelling.
And then, when the patient's body is warm from the bath, have them step on it in the sun, for the pain will subside and they will be healed.
And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cautery with these medicines, except in cases of the body's evacuation.
But Hippocrates said that when the stretched vein is cauterized with goat's hoof, it benefits greatly; and this is the method of cauterization: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes or between the grooves of the foot.
And then take a dry goat's hoof and roast it over the fire until it becomes charcoal, and then place it on the wool and leave it there until it has been fully absorbed. And then repeat this procedure, and do not stop until the sensation of the bite reaches the hip and the pain subsides.
And this method of cautery is called "cautery of cows."
Chapter 42.
Chapter 42: On the Cauterization of Toothache.
Sometimes pain occurs in the teeth for many reasons, such as decay or injury, or from excessive pressure or movement, and for similar causes, due to inflammation of matter that is wet and soft.
And cautery should only be used in this one case, which is made for the effusion of matter caused by cold.
Therefore, it is appropriate to evacuate the patient with purgative pills and similar ones that are made for their condition, which should be administered in the dosage corresponding to the location of the pain, with three lines along the latitude of the pain, as indicated by signs with a tenthen cauterized or more, depending on the tolerance and strength of the patient.
And let a pointed cautery be made.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four pointed cauteries in the shape of a middle clavicle as follows:
Chapter 43.
On cauterization at the beginning of gout.
Often observed in this disease in small children; and a sign of the beginning of it in children is that they have difficulty standing up straight, lifting their legs and moving.
And you will find it in the lower spine and the knots of it that already begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
And therefore when you see that and wish to prevent it, then cauterize with a circular cautery in the following form: so that it takes the cautery over the entire surface of the vertebra.
And if you wish, cauterize along the circumference of the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines. And let the points be close together.
Then heal the area until it has healed with what we have said.
But be careful that cautery is not administered in gout caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter 44.
On Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore when gout caused by cold humors is cured with a treatment method and the pain does not subside, then cauterize to remove it.
And it is that you cauterize that which is causing the evacuation in the circumference of the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
And let it be an olive-shaped cautery, of which this is the form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains rise into the teeth or other joints, and this often occurs, then cauterize each one with three or four of all sides with this olive-shaped cautery.
And if many cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize that and do not press too hard with the cautery beforehand, let it only be about the size of a coin.
And if the pains rise into the tooth and the back, then administer the cautery which we have said in its chapter.
And if the pains are only in the fingers and is called sugar, then make a puncture in the circumference of the joints as they turn, make a puncture in those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the aforementioned areas, then make a puncture in the circumference of the joints on each knuckle and on the fingertips.
And if pains persist for several days in the haunches or muscles, then cauterize each of them from all sides with assistance.
And do not evacuate the patient with good lifestyle and medication, because if it is done with a proper regimen and the inflammation is evacuated with this cautery, God willing, it will heal.
Chapter 45.
On the cauterization of ruptures.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, with intestines protruding in front of the hernia at the genital area, and it begins to enlarge, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to refrain from eating on that day and to use mild laxatives so that the wound in their abdomen may heal.
And place the patient between your hands on their back, and command them to keep their belly inward so that neither the hernia nor the intestines protrude.
And return the protruding hernia with your fingers to its place, using the technique described and making a mark on the hernia so that it resembles the shape of a circle at the upper part of the body.
And heat the cautery, which has this shape:
until it becomes red hot and emits sparks. And return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And place the cautery on that mark with your hand, holding the cautery steadily, and push it into the hernia until you reach the bone at the center of the opening; and repeat this process if you have not succeeded in the first attempt to reach the bone.
And carefully observe the symptoms of the intestines during your cauterization, to avoid burning the intestine and causing harm or severe damage to the patient.
And know that when you cannot feel the bone with the cautery, it indicates that your operation has not been successful.
And it is necessary that the cautery for children be fine and suited to their size.
And take care of the area treated with the cautery for three days, using bandages until the burn scar has healed.
And take care of other wounds until they have healed.
And the patient should lie on their back for forty days, during which time the wound and affected area will heal.
And it is necessary to provide the patient with proper nutrition according to the duration of their treatment, which will help to heal their abdomen and prevent the intestines from protruding due to the effort of recovery.
And when it is time for the patient to get up after forty days, do so gradually and carefully, providing them with gentle exercise and continuing care for another forty days.
And the patient should avoid excessive work and eating and drinking, as well as loud voices, because following this treatment plan will lead to their full recovery.
And I say that the treatment for hernias in other parts of the abdomen should begin with cauterization of the rupture using a round cautery, according to its size, and let it be the same as what is expelled from the intestines, just like one-third of it; and take care of it as we have said, and adjust accordingly.
And I already mentioned earlier that hernias should be cauterized using a triangular cautery according to this form, as it is marked with a sign.
And place a line along the length at the side of the hernia that is higher up, and another line above it; and then use your hand to apply a pointed cautery, but the first cautery should be more gentle and better.
Chapter 46.
On the cauterization of twisting (torsion).
When pain occurs in various parts of the body due to injury or impact and persists for a long time without responding to treatment with medication, then it is necessary to use a pointed cautery.
And let the cautery be suited to the size and smallness of each member, as well as its strength and weakness, location of twisting and pain.
Therefore, if the patient is healed by the first cautery, then that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery; because it is common for these pains to be alleviated by cauterization of one member close to the affected part, so it is necessary to continue treating the area with the cautery until the patient has recovered.
Chapter 47.
On the cauterization of leprosy.
Lepers have sometimes been treated with a cautery for great benefit, but only marginally if the type of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Therefore, when you want to cauterize the leprosy, consider if it is widespread and treat it as we have said in the division, without hesitation or delay, and be concerned for the patient that the corruption may spread throughout their body and affect their overall health. In this case, cauterize the affected area on the head with five cauteries: one at the center of the head, another just below it, avoiding the forehead to the end of the hairline; two above the eyebrows; and one at the back, over the neck or shoulder blade.
And lastly, apply the cautery with your hand for a short time until it leaves a small impression on the bone and displaces any scabs, to alleviate the expiration of thick vapors from the patient; and cauterize over the spleen as necessary.
If the leprosy has already spread over the patient and is clearly visible, then it is necessary to cauterize them with the following cauteries: those that we have mentioned for the head; one on the tip of the nose, two on each nostril, two on two vertebrae in the neck, five on the vertebrae of the back, one large one near the hip bone, one on each hip bone, two on each ankle, one on each leg, two on each knee, and one on each elbow; two on each shoulder blade, two on each arm, and two on each hand. Also cauterize all the joints of the fingers and toes, each heel, and the knuckles of their hands.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are on the heel, which can cause further damage.
Sometimes it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery on the bone of the pelvis, and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more cauteries you use, the more beneficial and effective they are, and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as they do from other things, because their body is already numb and stupefied.
And it is necessary for the cauteries to be large or small depending on the members and joints, as previously indicated by the types of instruments.
And take care of the cautery with powdered barley flour mixed with honey and other treatments until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
On cauterization of stupor.
When a limb is numb or paralyzed and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters without improvement, then you should cauterize the numb limb with cauteries that are suitable for its size, whether large or small.
And let your cautery enter a little bit into the tip of the spine. And treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
And sometimes, stupor in the hands and feet, as well as in the vertebrae of the back and near the growths on the nerves that cause numbness in that limb, is cauterized, and the numbness disappears.[*stupor* here could mean numbness or paralysis]
But do not assume this to be the case except for those who are knowledgeable in the anatomy of limbs and the exit of nerves throughout the body's movements.
Chapter 49.
On cauterization of keloids, also known as morphea.
When a keloid or morphea is old and does not respond to any medicinal ointments, then you should cauterize it with a preon (a type of cautery) slightly on its surface until the whiteness and color of it disappears and its color changes. [*preon* here refers to a hot iron used for cauterization]
And treat it with a mixture of barley flour and lentil flour with roasted oil and leaves of arnica, as well as dove's blood or pigeon's blood, one part of each should be mixed together and then applied to the area and covered with a bandage until healed. [*errs* here refers to barley flour]
Chapter 50.
On cauterization of cancer. [*cranc* here refers to cancer]
When cancer is beginning and you want to remove it, then cauterize the area with a circular cautery along the circumference of it just as it is rolled out.
And the wise men said that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of it; but I have not seen that done, for I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have already seen this happen on several occasions.
And it is more fitting to cauterize around its circumference with a circular cautery, as we have said, or with several cauteries.
Chapter 51.
On cauterization of abscesses.
When an abscess is slow to mature, this may be due to excess phlegm in it, the patient's condition, whether they are old and weak with little blood, or because of time, and you want to speed up the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize its circumference with many small puncturing cauteries, and leave it alone so that it can mature quickly.
But if you want to puncture it with a cautery, then here is its shape and method of use: place the cautery in the middle of the abscess so that it penetrates the spine.
And if you place the cautery in the lower location so that the arm is relieved, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Chapter 52.
On cauterization of corrosive wounds.
A corrosive wound is a moving corruption in the limbs, which corrodes it just as fire consumes dry wood. [*corrupcio ambulant* here refers to an infection that spreads and corrodes tissue]
Therefore, if you see a corrosive wound in a location that can withstand cautery by fire, then you should use many small and large cauteries, as appropriate, in the location where there is corrosion.
And then cauterize all around it until you eradicate all the corruption and there remains no cause of it.
And then leave it alone for three days and apply oil mixed with lard on the cauterized areas until all scabs are eradicated and all corruption is gone.
And then treat it with flesh-generating ointments.
But if after three days healthy flesh appears in the location where there is no corruption, that is good. But if not, then you should repeat the cautery on the locations that are still corrupted.
And a corrosive wound can be treated with acrid medicine at times, for it acts as a substitute for cautery in that location. But nevertheless, cauterization by fire provides faster relief.
And I have already said that treatment with acrid medicine is an option in the division (of the wound), and therefore you should choose that when it is appropriate for the situation.
Chapter 53.
On cauterization of ulcers and similar conditions.
Many times the lower part of a patient's foot is affected by an illness called clau, which is a large opening that causes lameness in the foot. Cauterization can be used for this condition in two ways: with fire or with hot water.
However, cauterization by fire involves heating a concave cautery shaped like the beak of a vulture, which should be made of iron and be of a size that can encompass the entire ulcer from all sides, with fine edges. [*igniscas le cauteri* here means to heat the cautery]
And then you should place the heated cautery on the ulcer and move your hand with the cautery along the circumference of the ulcer until the cautery reaches the depth of the ulcer. And then leave it alone for three days until pus begins to drain from it. And then apply a plaster made of crushed mallow leaves mixed with salt and leave it on the wound overnight, for this will help to eradicate its roots.
And then treat the location with flesh-generating ointments until it is healed. [*carn generatiu* here refers to an ointment that promotes the growth of new tissue]
And if that does not work and similar conditions occur on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you should use cauterization with hot water. This involves taking a small amount of iron or copper or the beak of a vulture and placing it over the ulcer. Then pour a small amount of hot water into the instrument and press it firmly against the edge of the ulcer, allowing the hot water to flow into the root of the ulcer. The patient should then endure the pain of the hot water for an hour, after which you can remove the cautery and the ulcer and its roots will have been eradicated.
And do the same for those who are able, and bring the other one over so that it covers everything, which is in their body.
And apply remedies to those pustules where the root of the nails has been removed with glue which makes the flesh grow back.
Chapter III.
On the cauterization of tremors.
When you encounter a tremor due to cold in the nerves or fever from some cause, or for any other similar reason, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with four or five cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cautery; and with a cautery on their feet, and above the stomach with an olive-shaped cautery.
And when the tremor of the patient rests and hastens the healing of the illness, it is due to cold.
Chapter LV.
On the cauterization of symptoms of whiteness in the body.
When whiteness is expelled from the body and pustules are opened with thick corrupted matter, then it is necessary at the beginning to prepare by cauterizing over the entire head of the fistula with a fine pointed cautery with a myrtle wood handle, the tip of which is extended with fire; or with long surgical needles; or with lenticular cauteries.
And some veins are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion in this manner, and they are not believed, and the excess is broken and heals from it.
However, it is necessary that this be done with evacuation by bloodletting.
Chapter LVI.
Of cauterization of flux of blood caused by rupture of a vein.
If you encounter a large amount of bleeding from a vein that is cut open by a wound on the surface or from an abscess or cauterization of a limb, it is difficult to remedy this situation.
Therefore, when this occurs, place your hand over the orifice of the vein and press firmly to stop the flow of blood until the bleeding stops completely.
And then apply the heated cautery irons, small and large in size, several times, blowing on them until they are red hot.
And then choose one that is small or large depending on the location and size of the wound where the artery has been ruptured, place it quickly over the vein after you have stopped the bleeding with your finger and cauterize it until it forms a scab and the bleeding stops.
If blood continues to flow from the orifice of the artery even after you have stopped the bleeding and cauterized it, then take another heated cautery iron from those that are prepared in the fire and do not stop doing this until the bleeding has stopped.
And be careful not to burn the nerves, which could cause further harm to the patient.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in any other way than with one of four methods: with cauterization as previously described, or by extracting the object if it has not been extracted already, for when it has been extracted the extremities are better off and the bleeding is stopped; or by tying it tightly with a string or ligament; or by placing medicines on it that have the power to stop bleeding; and use a firm cushion with proper compression.
But one who stops bleeding with a ligature or by applying tight bandages or hot compresses should be cautious and not act hastily.
But if this occurs when the doctor is not present and no medicine is available, then place your finger gently over the orifice of the vein as previously described, and apply firm pressure until the bleeding stops completely, making sure that the wound on the artery has not reopened; and sprinkle cold water with great forcefulness on the artery until the blood coagulates and thickens; and take care to determine what kind of cautery or medicine is needed.
On incisions, punctures, bloodletting with leeches, venesection, wounds and their similarities.
We have already discussed in the first chapter all diseases for which cauterization with fire or burning medicine is appropriate, as well as their causes and occasions, and the necessary instruments and forms of cauteries; and I have arranged the chapters from the superiority of the head to the feet.
And in this chapter, I will proceed in the same manner so that the reader may be satisfied, and then address what has been requested.
And before I begin, my son, it is appropriate that you understand that in this chapter, there will be discussions about things that were also discussed in the first chapter on cautery.
And for this reason, great care must be taken in the operations described in this chapter, which involve many evacuations of blood, which can be life-threatening if not done properly, such as venesection, incision on an abscess or opening a wound for purification or extracting an arrowhead or cutting into bone and their similarities. And all of these procedures are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the majority of cases, death is a real possibility.
And I admonish you to not let hesitation affect you, for sometimes you must act as a healer of illnesses with great care and skill. And some of them will be angry with you because of their illness and may even die due to the severity of their condition or the length of time they have been sick, or because of fear of death itself.
And there are those who will give you their wealth and ask for your help in return, expecting to be cured, but their illness is fatal.
And so it is not appropriate for you to agree to treat such a person, and your caution should be greater than your greed; and do not presume to know anything about their condition without having certain knowledge that has been verified by experience and succession of praiseworthy results.
And use prognosis and indication in the treatment of all your patients, for it will help you in gaining fame and memory, praise, and glory.
Oh, my son, may God inspire you with understanding and guide and protect you, for it is in His hands.
And I have divided this chapter into sections based on what was discussed in the chapter on cautery, so that you may find what you need and are looking for.
First Chapter.
On the treatment of fluid in the head of infants.
Know that this illness frequently occurs in infants during childbirth and when the wet nurse lifts the infant's head.
And sometimes it occurs due to hidden causes that are not known.
But I have not seen this illness in anyone other than infants, and all those that I have seen were at risk of death; and so I have left them alone.
And I have seen an infant whose head was filled with fluid, and their head was constantly swollen to the point where they could not move due to the size of their head; and the fluid continued to increase until it caused death.
And this fluid can accumulate between the dura mater and the skull or beneath the scalp after passing through the bone.
For if the fluid is between the dura mater and the skull and there is only a small abscess, then it is necessary to make an incision in the middle of the head with a fissure of a length of two fingers, allowing the fluid to drain; here is the shape of the spatula:
And if the fluid is more abundant and there is a larger abscess, then in this case, make two incisions in the following manner:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, a sign of this is that you see the edges of the head swollen on all sides and the water is expressed when you press that area with your hand from the inside and it is not hidden. It is necessary that you make an incision in the middle of the head in three cuts in this manner:
and extract all the moisture through the incision; and strengthen the cuts with cloths and bandages; and irrigate that with a mixture of wine and oil within five days, and loosen the ligaments and heal the wound with ointments and dressings, and bind the head with even pressure; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
And there is another way of making an incision, that you consider where the size of the abscess and the collection of water appears, because sometimes it is larger in the occipital region, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left; and therefore pay attention to where the abscess and the accumulation of water appear, and make that incision as well as possible.
And be careful not to cut the artery and avoid a flow of blood, or the patient will die from that flow of blood with the evacuation of moisture.
Capital Second.
When an obstruction or injury occurs in the ears or feet and it is old and does not respond to medical treatment, then the final cure for this is making an incision on those two arteries.
And therefore, when you want to make an incision on those that the patient reveals his head, and rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and tighten the collar of the patient with some cloth; and consider which pulse beats more strongly, and the locations of each one above the areas that are near the ears, and they become hidden in most people.
And therefore make a sign on the artery with an ointment, and then make an incision on each of them with a scalpel of equal width as the incision extends to the bone, and let this be done according to the length of the head.
And if desired, insert the scalpel underneath the artery and cut it at the point where it divides into the branches above.
And let the length of the incision be such that when any vein is cut, blood exits with a pulsating flow, which spurts frequently outside.
But if the artery does not appear on palpation, then it is necessary to measure from the ear a distance of three fingers and mark it with an ointment, and make the incision through the bone.
And what is necessary to let out of the blood is a quantity of wine equal to one ounce. And let a little more or less blood flow out according to the quantity that appears of the patient's vitality and the distention of their artery.
And also consider the wound, and therefore if there is any residual pus on the bone, then incise that so as to avoid a dangerous abscess.
And also strengthen the wound with bandages and bind it with linen strips, and care for it with ointments until it is healed.
Capital III.
On making an incision to extract the temporal arteries.
When there is an occurrence of chronic migraine or severe headaches due to moisture in the temples or hardness that resembles them, and it does not respond to medical treatment with various methods, then we resort to making an incision to extract the temporal arteries, or cauterization as previously shown.
And the method of performing the operation and extracting those is that the patient reveals their temples where the arteries are; and pay attention to the visible artery in the temple because it is shown by its pulse, and it is hidden in most people due to pressure.
And if it is hidden from you, then tighten the collar of the patient with some cloth; and rub the area with a rough cloth or apply warm water to the area until the artery appears clearly to you. And then you take the scalpel that has this shape: And then you peel the skin of the head with ease until you reach the artery; and let blood flow out from there and extract it upwards until you remove it from the skull and uncover all of its sheaths that are below it, completely.
But if the artery is thin, then wrap it with the tip of your finger and make an incision on one side of it according to the length of its branches that are constricted, and you will not find a flow of blood, because if they are not incised, the blood will not rise completely.
And then remove the blood with an amount equivalent to one ounce of wine. within three.
And if the artery is large, then it is necessary to tie it in two places with strong double thread made of silk or with long cords, and avoid infection before the wound heals and find a flow of blood.
And then cut away the excess tissue that is between two ligaments, and do this either at this time or at another hour.
And if desired, cauterize that area with a surgical knife until the branches of it are completely cut, and this will replace the previous operation.
And it is better that the patient has a fever or has a hot complexion, because cauterization is one of those methods that help to resolve excess moisture, and therefore it is more beneficial for healing.
And it is necessary to make an incision in the areas where there are old scars, and place small pieces of cloth over them, and care for them with dry medications that help new flesh grow and with ointments until they heal.
And if while performing the operation another wound appears and there is bleeding from the artery, then you should take care to stop the bleeding by using a ligature or cauterization or filling in the area with scar tissue, and applying pressure until the bleeding stops. And if for any reason none of those options are available to you, then place your finger over the wound until the blood clots, and irrigate the area with water that is very hot until the swelling subsides, and apply pressure as needed.
A light procedure for extracting arteries is to cauterize the vein with this method that uses two scalpels, because you have marked the locations with ointment and placed them far apart, each one ignited until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, thereby stretching what is between its extremities, since it has not completely healed with this cauterization.
And here is the shape of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two knives is exemplary. But even if the blades are not as sharp as two knives, it is better, because if they are very sharp, there is a risk of cutting the flesh too quickly and deeply.
Therefore, if the blades have some thickness, maintain the heat of the fire in them and cut the flesh lightly.
And this operation is better in all procedures and easier.
And let the space between the two blades be the width of a finger.
Capital Fourth.
On the treatment of acute and painful inflammation of the heels.
When the inflammation is severe and located in the area where the veins are on the surface of the head, and no treatment with any medicine provides relief, and the patient's face becomes red and they feel a burning sensation on their forehead as if it were being stung by ants, and their heels are swollen and hot to the touch, and the skin is wrinkled, and their eyelids are sore from the intensity of the tears, then use the previous methods for treating this condition with plasters.
And it is recommended that the patient scrape off the hair on their forehead and make three evenly spaced incisions on the forehead according to its length. And if the length of the incision is as follows: let the first incision be equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little less than the movement of the ligaments which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
And beware of the incision near the carotid arteries which are in two places, and keep your hand away from the continuation of both the jawbones. And make the space of each incision equal to three fingers wide.
And have a sponge ready or dry cloths with which to dry the blood.
Then insert the spatula with two sharp ends, which is the shape of the incision like this: which extends from the temples inward to the second incision. Excoriate with that all the skin of the scalp which is between two incisions along the suture line which is above the bone, and then do the same from the midline to the second incision. Then place the spatula here and insert again another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And cut the sides of that sharp edge along the attached skin of the scalp, and the sides of it penetrate the bone, and insert that into the middle one to reach the midline incision, and sever with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
But continue the incision to this point of the scalp, and then do the same at the midline incision between the two other incisions.
And when the blood flows in large quantity, press the places of the cloth with clotted blood.
Then place on each incision a piece of old linen, and place on those powders mixed with wine and oil and aged vinegar, and make sure they do not cause an abscess to develop.
And on the third day loosen the ligament and administer a large infusion of hot water or tea, and then treat it with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil and other remedies to heal the wounds.
Chapter 5.
Of the treatment of cramps using catharsis and pain in the heels descending from the internal parts of the head.
When you notice certain veins that have been continuously purged with catharsis becoming weak and thin, and the heels of the patient becoming small and shrunken, their appearance showing debility, their eyelids ulcerated and their hair falling out, and experiencing a sharp, gnawing headache accompanied by severe exhaustion, then understand through these symptoms that the matter and catharsis are not coming from mere veins but rather from deep within the body.
And the best treatment for these symptoms is as follows: order the patient to scratch their forehead, and then make an incision in that area, a little above the middle of the forehead, with one side starting from the left temple and extending to the right temple; ensure the incision goes through the bone and your hand remains away from the ligaments connected to the temples due to chewing.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth, and then insert between the two lips of the incision old linen or cloth pieces. Then apply pressure on top with powders mixed with wine and oil, to prevent abscess formation.
And when you notice that the abscess has diminished, it is time to scrape the bone where the flesh starts to grow back, and then treat it with a drying regimen that promotes tissue growth, like a mixture of two parts wheat flour and four parts colophony. Form an ointment from this mixture and apply it to the affected areas around the newly formed flesh.
Chapter 6.
Chapter 6: Treatment for Ear Wax
The cause of ear wax is one of four types: either mineral-like as in stone, such as iron or glass, or from plants like cheese or beans, or fluid-like as in water and aged vinegar and their counterparts, or from some animal.
And so when stone or any similar cause from these categories is found in the ear and does not dissolve or break up within the ear, then expose the ear to sunlight, and if you see the stone, distill some fluid like lavender oil or sesame oil onto it. Then administer an extraction by causing the patient to sneeze, ensuring they keep their nostrils closed during the sneeze. Then place some cloth or wool pads around the ear canal and gently pull the outer ear upwards, as this method has been known to dislodge many such foreign objects.
And if it is not dislodged, then administer an extraction using the tool called gesti epicicarios subtil, which has this shape:
And if it is dislodged with the gesti, that's good; otherwise, administer an extraction using a small probe with a delicate hook at the end.
And so if it is not dislodged by any of these methods, then create a cannula from silver and insert the end of the cannula into the ear canal, sealing the area around the cannula with wax and softened oil to ensure only the cannula enters. Then extract it with strong suction using your breath, as this method has proven effective in many cases.
But if it is not dislodged by this method, then take some alum-infused halite (or any other appropriate apparatus) that can hold a small amount of material, place it at the end of a probe, and carefully apply gentle heat to the area around the ear. Then gently insert the probe into the ear canal, and carefully dry out the ear to remove any excess moisture.
And so if it is still not dislodged after trying all the methods we've discussed, then consider removing part of it before it causes an abscess or spasm.
And the manner of making such an incision is as follows: you should first bleed the patient from the safena vein and draw out blood in accordance with the patient's condition. Then, place your index finger on the spot where you want to make the incision, turn your ear towards the affected parts, and make a small incision at the root of your ear, letting out the required amount of blood from the spot that is most congested. And let the incision be in the shape of a crescent moon, reaching down to the bone, and once the bone is exposed, remove any debris that you can with appropriate instruments. Then quickly close the incision and take care of it until it heals.
If the cause of the swelling in the ear is one of the fleshy growths that has grown and become inflamed, then administer treatment and removal of it. But if the patient does not obey your order to evacuate (i.e., to use the restroom), then take a small amount of fine spittle and proceed as follows: And administer to it (the ear) the removal of that abscess that has formed in the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it (the growth) has already been softened by the moisture of the ear, but instead place it on cotton balls and gently extract it with tweezers or a fine instrument, or through incision as we have said, for extraction will be easier in this way.
But in the water that has entered into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use sneezing with caution at first, and fill their other ear with some old cotton, and place a cloth over the ear in which the water is, and if it (the water) is expelled, then it is good; but if not, then take small, clean pebbles and leeks of the same length as the finger, and heat those stones in the fire for a little while, and let the patient insert one of those stones into the opening of their ear and jump on one foot from that side and strike with a stone on the stone that is inside the ear. Therefore, do not stop doing this with a stone until all of the water is expelled.
Therefore, do not stop doing this with a stone until all of the water is expelled. And when the water is completely expelled, then take some paper or cotton. And put one end of it (the paper or cotton) into the ear and light the other end with fire until most of it is burned.
And then insert another piece of cotton and do this many times until all of the water is expelled, and then straighten it with a funnel as was said earlier about the stone extractor.
But in the removal of an animal that has entered into the ear (and is still alive), if it is small and similar to a bug or other such creature, then cure it as we have said in the division (i.e., follow the same steps outlined earlier for removing debris from the ear). But if it is large and causes pain upon movement, then administer extraction with forceps and tweezers, and the cause of this problem is easier to diagnose than other causes that can occur in the ear.
But in the removal of a worm that has been generated in the ear, when you cure it with what we have said earlier (in this text) for removing debris from the ear and using distillations and not confections (i.e., medicinal pastes or powders), then it is necessary to examine the ear in sunlight.
And so if any cause of worms appears here (in the ear), then extract it with forceps or fine tweezers. But if no such cause is visible, then take a funnel that is narrow at the tip and wide at the base, like this: And insert the narrow end of the funnel into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; and then suck with it using strong suction, and do this many times, until all of the worms are expelled.
But if the patient does not obey your order to evacuate (i.e., to use the restroom), then you should close and seal the opening of the funnel with wax as we have said; then administer distillations that have already been proven effective by ancient physicians in treating worms, and you will find this information in the treatise on distillations.
And let your effusion be the one with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, the shape of which is as follows: And make it (the instrument) of silver or copper, narrow below, with a small opening and flat on top.
And so let it (the instrument) be as a stopper, which is in the cavity of the funnel (or tip) of this shape that will be necessary here. And if you wish, take a rod (or stick) and wrap it decently with cotton at the end, and then pour oil (or the juice of any herb, or whatever medicine you choose) into the cavity of the funnel (or tip), which is in the ear. Then insert the rod (or stick) wrapped in cotton over the top and press gently on it with your hand, applying moderate compression until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels it inside.
And let what has been inserted into the ear already be slightly burned with fire. And be sure that the cause (or reason) for distilling in the ear is not too cold, because medicines for the ear do not tolerate this.
Chapter 7.
Of the treatment of blockages in the ears.
Sometimes the ears of infants who have not yet been born (i.e., fetuses) become blocked because their mothers' wombs are closed off, and this can also happen in some adult men due to blockages in the meat of the ear caused by infection or other factors. And sometimes this blockage is caused by an obstruction in the opening of the ear that goes unnoticed, and it can also occur in the outer parts of the ear.
And that which happens in the urine of the patient, which is not contained by the vigor (of the bladder), is in the greatest disposition for difficult healing.
And in that which results in the vigor (of the bladder being released), it is appropriate to place the patient's ear to the sun and look at it (the urine) there. And so, if an abundance is apparent, open it with a thin spatula of this form:[note, the text doesn't provide a description or diagram of the spatula's form, I'm just translating what was written]
Let the end of it (the spatula) be small in width, with one side sharp and the other not; and let the spatula be two finger-widths in length so that it does not harm the ear.
And so, if the obstruction is due to flesh born in the ear or its meat, then use fine hooks and incise with great ease until all the flesh is removed.
And if the obstruction is in the ear canal, then take a thin thread and heat it slightly over fire, then insert it into the meat of the ear.
And so, if you have felt an obstruction with what the patient relieves with ease, due to difficulty in hearing, then alleviate the pressure with ease and make sure not to damage the nerves of the ear.
Then place a cloth in the ear according to the size of the opening you have made, which you have wrapped in Egyptian wax (cerumen); do this for several days until you are sure that the wound has healed. Or take some and put it in warm water and powder it over the area; use this three hundred times. And if you see that the ear is already swollen with an abscess, then you must lance it and replace it with another cloth wrapped in wax made from rose oil until the abscess subsides. Then cure it until it heals completely.
But if bleeding occurs, submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it over the ear, and use the other treatment that checks blood flow, which is called the method of distillation (referring to a medical practice where a liquid is slowly dripped onto the affected area).
Chapter 8.
Chapter 8: On the treatment of blepharitis (inflammation of the eyelids) that occurs in the eyelids.
Blepharitis, which sometimes occurs due to moisture and other times dryness in the eyes.
Therefore, it is necessary to have tweezers or hooks and cut the lashes with a spatula of their roots, then place them on the location for three hundred (times).[note: I'm assuming "trissat" means 300 times based on context, as it does not seem to be an existing word in Latin, Italian, Spanish or French]
But if pain and bleeding occur, then cauterize it with a pointed ocular (eye) cautery.
And the best cauterization is to return multiple times to the incisions and cuts, as long as there is still a cause for their roots (lashes) to grow back; and once they are cauterized with fire, those roots will be burned and will not regrow.
Chapter 9.
Chapter 9: Treatment of styes (an inflamed oil gland or hair follicle on the edge of an eyelid) in the eyes.
Many times, a condition occurs in the eyelids of the eyes that is similar to a stye in its strength and hardness, and because of this, it is called a "grandissia" (stye).
And it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the eyelid below and above.
Therefore, the operation for them (styes) is that you consider whether the stye is protruding from the eyelid in a way that it is visible all around and its cause is light (minor). [note: I'm assuming "leugiera" means minor based on context, as it does not seem to be an existing word in Latin, Italian, Spanish or French]
Therefore, make an incision on it with a fissure of the appropriate width, then scrape it from all sides with ease until it dries up; then use hooks to suspend it and cut it off.
And if the shape (of the stye) is large, then adjust it with sutures and cure it until it heals completely.
And if it is small, you will not incur harm from that because the ointment (used to treat it) restores and heals it.
And if the stye is declining towards the inner parts of the eyelid, then lift the eyelid and suspend the stye with hooks, whichever ones you choose for incision, and press it from all sides; and if the incision on the eyelid is long, then this is not a problem.
And make the incision, rinse the eye with salt water; and cure the area with ointment until it heals completely.
Chapter 10.
Chapter 10: Treatment of chalazion (an inflammation of a meibomian gland in the eyelid) on the upper eyelid. [note: I'm assuming "axcirnah" refers to chalazion based on context, as it does not seem to be an existing word in Latin, Italian, Spanish or French]
A chalazion is a swelling that forms in the tissues of the upper eyelid, and it often occurs in children, causing them discomfort and difficulty with their sight; they are unable to look at the brightness of the sun because tears accumulate in their eyes.
And so you see them constantly rubbing their eyes and sleeping with their eyes open, and their lower eyelids are damp from the eyebrows, which already have inflammation, and a clear sign of an imminent chalazion is apparent in the eye; and when you press on the area with your fingers, you feel a lump forming. [note: I'm assuming "centes" means feel based on context, as it does not seem to be an existing word in Latin, Italian, Spanish or French]
One method of treatment is for the patient to place their head on your lap and for you to place a cloth over them and warm it up; then make a circle with the cloth that fits around the affected area, and place it over the chalazion and press with your fingers from all sides so that there is an accumulation in the center of the circle. Then make an incision in the middle of the moisture with a spatula that has been cut with a fissure of appropriate width, making sure that the width of the incision is not greater than what is made during bloodletting (phlebotomy).
But in the eyelid, it is necessary to cut through the skin completely until you reach the accumulation (chalazion), because in most cases, the accumulation protrudes through a fissure that follows the shape of white grains (chalazia).
Therefore, extract the chalazion with cloths that you have wrapped between your fingers on both sides and rotate them with your right and left hands until it is dispersed (removed).
And make sure not to adjust the incision so that with the spatula, you do not reach the eye and damage it.
But if the accumulation (chalazion) is not visible at the beginning of the incision, but it appears further in; then widen the incision slightly with ease until you reach the chalazion. Then extract it as previously mentioned and place wet cloths over the area, soak them with vinegar and wine, and press them with powders.
And let it rest for three days (trissan) with salt and place it in the concavity of the incision so that what is left of the moisture can be absorbed by the salt.
Then cure it until it heals completely.
But if an abscess occurs in the area, then treat it with soothing plasters until it heals completely.
Chapter 11. [note: I'm assuming this is a new topic based on context, as the text does not provide information about the new chapter]
Chapter 11: Ways of touching (examining) the eye. [note: I'm assuming "tactimi" is derived from Latin "tactus" which means touch, and that it refers to examining or touching the eye in this context]
When hairs on the eyelids become ingrown and overgrown due to adjusting them downwards, they can cause various symptoms such as constant tearing, swelling of the eyelids, and a thickening of the conjunctiva (tela) which can lead to destruction of the eye that is called tactinir of the eye. It can be treated in four ways: through cauterization with fire; with acute medicine as mentioned before in the chapter on cauterization; through incision and suturing; or through cannulas as I will explain.
Therefore, you should place the patient's head on your lap; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, that's good; but if not, insert a needle in the one where there is pus on the side closest to the lower eyelid, and push the needle through the pus above. Then pull the pus upwards with the eyelid, and turn the eyelid using your finger.
Then make an incision in the inner side of the eyelid near the ingrown lashes using a cutting spatula from the lacrimal (tear) sac to the lacrimal canaliculus (the small channel that leads to the nasolacrimal duct). Then extract the pus and place fine powders of cotton or cloth underneath the eyelid, and then place a bandage on the eye with a tent-shaped figure similar to the shape of a myrtle leaf.
However, it is necessary that the shape of the incision be based on the degree of swelling of the eyelid, as this varies among individuals, and some people require a larger incision in the eyelid depending on the degree of swelling.
Then make an incision with the spatula on the two lines that you have marked, starting from the larger lacrimal (tear) sac to the smaller one. And if your incision is near the natural lashes, as thick as a king's hair.
Then place a hook in one of the two angles of the incision and remove all of it (the ingrown eyelash) completely, then adjust the two sides of the incision with fine wool or lanolin and clean any blood that may be present. If you want to apply the excess pus on the eyebrows using some adhesive substance, then do so; otherwise, don't bother.
Then leave the suture of the incision for three or four days and treat it.
And if you want, leave the wound without sutures and treat it with drying and constricting agents, as the eyelid is swollen due to the seal of the wound and the accumulation in it; but a suture is better. Therefore I say this according to ancient methods (of taxanir).
However, it is also important to closely monitor the patient, and this is a good practice, not something to be feared.
There is another way to measure (or taxmir), which is to place a figure in the shape of a myrtle leaf on the eyelid, and then lift the eyelid with three separate and gathered hooks in the following form:
But if that is not possible, take hold of the hooks (or uncis), and if this is not feasible, then take a needle with thread and insert it in the middle of the figure, and place the other end of the thread near the lacrimal gland (lacrimal major) and the small lacrimal gland (lacrimal mendre), and adjust the threads so that they are evenly tensioned, then use these threads to lift the eyelid with gentle force, lifting the entire eyebrow as previously described.
Then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches and take care of the inside so that it heals properly.
But if an abscess forms in your incision or wound, soothe the abscess with cerote (a type of medical plaster) and dress it similarly, using ointment.
And sometimes hairs on the eyelid become ingrown, so it is necessary to use what we have described for incisions, but with stitches if it is more artificial (or severe).
To prepare ataxinir (a type of medication) with cannas (cane sugar or similar substance) in the following way: The method is to turn the eyelid and divide the figure that is beneath it as I have described, and then for each eye, prepare two canes or thin strips of material with a length equal to that of the eyelid, and a width smaller than the width of the spatum (a tool used in surgery). And you have already made incisions at the ends of each divided part, where the threads are located.
Then carefully attach each cane to the excess skin of the eyelid with fine stitches and bind the canes of each divided part tightly, leaving it in place for several days. The eyebrow will shrink due to the tight binding and eventually subside into its proper position as it heals.
But if healing is delayed, then cut the stitches and treat the wound until it heals properly.
And once it has healed, the eyelid will be lifted and the hairs will no longer poke into it.
This is the method for making two canes in the following way: The quantity of length and width should be neither too much nor too little.
Chapter 12.
Chapter 12: To lift ingrown hairs on the eyelid with a needle when the hair is hard or stiff.
When the eyelashes are unnaturally hard, rough and sharp, piercing the eyelid, the procedure is to take a thin needle and dip it in a mixture of fine wax (or ceda) and lion fat, then adjust the ends of the needle very carefully, making sure they are not too sharp. [ And let the length of the threads be the length of one palm (approximately 7-8 inches or 18-20 cm).
Then prepare another thin thread and tie it to the end of the first one if you wish.
Then position the patient's head so that it rests on your shoulder and is facing towards the sun, as this procedure requires good lighting and precision.
Next, insert the needle into the root of the eyelash with precision and care, then quickly push it through the eyelid until you pull the offending hair out from below the surface.
Then gently pull out the ingrown hair(s) and insert the needle back into the same hole in the eyelid, repeating this process one or two or three times, but no more.
Then gently pull the thread through the eyelid until the ingrown hair is outside, attached to the needle by a small amount of wax (alixolati) so that it remains in place on the eyelid surface.
But if the wax (alixalati) is attached to the eyelid rather than the ingrown hair, gently pull the thread and wax downwards until it comes free from the upper hole, allowing the ingrown hair to be released from below.
Examine the eyelid with your vision to ensure that you have removed the wax and ingrown hair, and then close the eyelids gently, leaving the stitches in place for two or three days until the eyelash adheres to its proper position and new skin grows over it.
If the eyelash is very short, then attach a longer false hair to the natural lashes and use it to lift the ingrown hair or wait until it grows long enough to be easily lifted.
Chapter 13: [Treatment for] Swollen Eyelids and Eyebrows
Chapter 14: Treatment for Ectropion (Outward Turning of the Eyelid)
When the eyelid turns inward due to contracture of the eyelid, this is called entropion and can occur naturally or as a result of injury, surgery, or infection. The following procedures should be used to treat this condition: [
The method of operation in this case is to cut the scar tissue and separate the layers of skin, placing a small piece of cloth between them, then stitching the layers together until they heal. This can help release contracture and allow the eyelid to return to its normal position over the eyeball.
It is not advisable to use dry or constricting treatments for this condition, as they may worsen the symptoms and lead to more severe contracture or other complications. Instead, focus on gentle massage, manipulation, and moisturizing treatments to promote healing and reduce contracture.[
Use in the case of causes that soften, such as fenugreek, and steep it with water in which there are chopped althea root and fennel seeds, or dyaquilon (a type of clay), mixed with a liquid oil, and soak a piece of cloth in this mixture and apply it to the affected area. This will help to reduce swelling and promote healing.
The key to your treatment is to carefully make incisions with precision, avoiding any scarring or contracture that may have occurred at the beginning of the condition. This will allow for proper healing and reduce the risk of recurrence.
The procedure that we have discussed is not a complete cure for ectropion or entropion, but rather a way to correct the abnormal position of the eyelid and restore it to its normal shape and function. Further treatment may be necessary to ensure long-term healing and prevent recurrence.
Chapter 14: [Treatment for] Eyelash Disorders
Of the cure for entropion which is done on the lower eyelid.
This entropion, which is done on the lower eyelid and is properly called by that name, can be congenital or acquired.
However, acquired entropion is caused by injury, laceration, cautery, or similar factors.
And the method of this operation is to take a needle with double thread and insert it into the flesh, making it pass from the left nasal corner to the right nasal corner so that the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then pull the skin apart with the needle at the upper part and draw it together with the needle, and use a wide spatula to incise. And if the shape of the eyelid returns to its proper position, it is good; otherwise, take a thread and place it in the slit opening, using that to twist the eyelid into the correct shape, and then make two incisions on the lower side of the lower eyelid.
And let the ends of both incisions be at two corners of the slit opening, which should converge so that when they come together, a figure is formed in their junction.
And this figure is the Greek letter lambda ().
Then remove the skin by the amount corresponding to the slit opening below it, so that it cuts the eyelid.
Then adjust the separated parts and stitch them together using wool thread, and treat those areas with what has been mentioned regarding softening medications and blisters until it heals.
And if entropion is caused by a fissure, laceration, or cauterization, it is necessary to make an incision with a flat scalpel along the hairs of the eyelid as described earlier. Then separate with blisters between two lips as we mentioned earlier.
In summary of the discourse on the cure for entropion, whether it is upper or lower eyelid, the operation should proceed according to the form of entropion, which has several shapes.
And wise craftsmen always prepare devices in every possible way so that they can restore the shape to its natural form or close to it, and provide the patient with the best operation and instruments according to their needs.
Chapter 15.
Chapter 15: On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
When this adhesion occurs in many men, such that the eyelid is solidified above with the white of the eye and is impeded in its natural movement and functions, it is necessary to insert a thread below the eyelid, raise it upwards, or extend it using a hook.
Then you incise the adhesion with a fine scalpel that does not have sharp edges, making sure to use a blunt tip so as not to disturb the patient during the operation, and keep the scalpel in place without damaging the eye with its sharpness.
And your incision should be such that it easily separates the adhesion, allowing the eyelid to return to its natural shape and for the entire adhesion to heal.
Then you place saltwater in the eye, which you use to rinse it out, or distill juniper dissolved in water on it.
Then you separate the eyelid from the eye with blisters and place wool soaked in egg white on the eye, and for three days use consolidating causes until it heals.
Chapter 16.
Chapter 16: On incision of a nail and eminence of flesh around the tear ducts.
Know that the nail is of two types: it can be nervous or non-nervous. A nervous nail is similar to a hard, thin bone, while a non-nervous nail resembles congealed white moisture, which when touched with a hook, can easily be grasped and removed without the hook being inserted into it.
And both types of nails do not begin until they reach the lacrimal (tear duct) and gradually cover it, protecting the eye from light and preventing its moisture from evaporating.
However, the method of working in the incision is that the patient places their head on your shoulder, and you open their eyes, raise the eyelid with your hand, and collect the nail with a hook with minimal doubling, extending it upwards to the upper parts. Then take a needle and insert into it a horsehair or ox or cow hair, or similar material, or strong bile, and gradually sharpen the tip of the needle, then place it in the middle of the nail, penetrating with the needle, tying the nail with bile; extend it upwards to the upper parts and excise with the horsehair the slit of the nail that cuts through the pupil. And in this way, you follow it with the hair to the back of it (the nail).
Then you incise the remaining tissue at the root of the tear duct with a fine scalpel or small forceps, leaving the natural flesh of the tear duct so that through the incision there does not occur a continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail with only one hook or bile, as we mentioned earlier, and in this case, it should be excised with a scalpel of the following shape:
And make sure with the scalpel not to touch the corneal membrane and that it causes a rupture there, and that the pupil be perforated.
Then place in the eye a little bit of ground salt or juniper powder, and leave that inside for another day; and take care of it with what is necessary until it heals.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle or the hook into it, nor can it be extracted with the hook, then in many cases this type of nail is cured with medications, and heals as is customary for ulcers and recommended in the division (of the medical text).
And if you want to incise that (non-nervous nail), then you open the patient's eye and take a fine, sharp scalpel of the following shape: I apologize for the error in my previous response. Here is the corrected translation: And if sometimes that part is dislocated and hidden and stuck in that socket, then distill your oil on the patient's temple, made of juniper or aloe or wormwood, and fill the cavity within two days.
And then repeat the operation until everything that is out of place in it (the joint) has been restored, but if instead an abscess forms on the head, then leave it alone and first treat the abscess until it is healed.
And then repeat your operation on that part until it is healed.
The swelling of the lacrimal gland, if noticed on the head due to great harm, should be suspended with a leech; and incise that part slightly, and do not complete the incision so as not to cut off the flow of tears.
And then distill juniper oil on the lacrimal head and make an incision with cautery until it is healed.
Chapter 17.
On incising an abscess and what is born from skin that has adhered to the head.
Sometimes on the eyelids of people, red flesh is born that covers the pupil or approaches and presses on the eyelashes, causing them to curl outwards, and appears like a swollen lip.
But the operation for this is that the patient places their head over a basin; and then you open the eyelids of the affected area and collect all the red flesh using suitable leeches, and hold it with forceps or a net. Then make an incision in the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished with the cautery, and be careful not to cut too deeply into the eye during your operation.
And make the incision with the instrument that we have recommended in the treatment of nail conditions, or with small forceps with which you can collect pus according to the shape of the growth, following the description given in this chapter.
And once your incision is complete and all of the flesh has been removed, fill the wound with wormwood powder or distill on it red-colored dust similar to that used in corrosive medicines, and place a piece of egg white over the outside of the wound until it is certain that the abscess will not return.
And if some cause of the abscess remains and it is bleeding, and you fear that it may become infected, then leave the wound open and treat the infection with appropriate remedies until it has healed. Repeat the operation on the affected area until it is fully healed, and similarly, treat any skin adhesions that occur in this type of wound.
However, it is important to avoid any treatment that may cause further harm to the affected area, either through natural or accidental means. This includes avoiding the use of tools and not placing your hand on the affected area until you are certain that the member can tolerate the procedure.
Chapter eighteen.
On collecting pus from the eye.
Pus is red veins that are hardened on the eye and prevent the eyelid from functioning properly, causing it to swell for several days.
Therefore, it is necessary to first consider whether the eye in which pus has formed is otherwise healthy and free from other conditions. If this is the case, then you may proceed with collecting the pus.
And you should instruct the patient to place their head over a basin and apply leeches to the affected veins, using one or two depending on your judgement. The leech used in this treatment should be of a fine texture, as follows:
Or you may use two leeches, one larger than the other, as follows:
And the affected veins should be gently bound with fine bandages, and the blood should be wiped away as needed until you see that the veins have receded from the eye and are no longer inflamed.
And be careful not to damage the eye with the tip of your instrument; and if you are performing this procedure during the day, do so in the afternoon when the sun is high, and take care to incise only the affected veins and not any other part of the eye.
And when you have completed the procedure, you should then distill on the eye juniper or aloe to dissolve any remaining pus with its corrosive properties.
But if you are unable to collect all of the pus in that moment, then you should apply a dressing to the area using a substance that alleviates pain and allows it to heal over several days until the pain subsides and there is no risk of infection.
And then you should repeat the procedure as needed until the eye has fully healed.
And here is the shape of the forceps:
Chapter nineteen.
On reducing a broken nose.
When treating a broken nose with cautery or with corrosive medicine, as described in the previous chapter, if the injury has not healed properly, then you should not apply heat to it. Instead, make an incision over the abscess and drain any pus or fluid that has accumulated inside, allowing the bone to be exposed so that it can heal properly.
And once the bone is exposed and you see signs of decay or discoloration, then you should use an instrument with this shape:
And this instrument is called a sharp-pointed probe, and it should be made of iron with a rounded tip, as shown in the following illustration:
And place the sharp-pointed probe over the site of decay on the bone, and then gently rotate it between the teeth while applying gentle pressure until you feel the decayed tissue being scraped away.
And repeat this process several times, and then apply drying and styptic remedies to the affected area.
And if the wound has healed and healthy flesh has grown over it, and the body's natural healing processes have been completed within 40 days without any signs of infection or other complications, then you can be confident that the nose has healed properly.
But if the wound has not healed properly or there are signs of infection or other complications, then you should not attempt to reset the broken bone. Instead, you should follow these steps: first, expose the bone using forceps or corrosive medicine, and once it is exposed, apply traction as follows:
The exterior part of the iron should be made triangular, and the tip of it should be first narrowed at the end as is often done.
And then place that (the triangular-shaped iron) on the bone, and it should be near the lacrimal; and move your hand a little toward the eye, and then rotate your hand along with the trepan until it penetrates the whole bone, and the patient will feel it as soon as air escapes when you reach the sinus.
Therefore, now restore the area with styptic and drying medicines as you have been instructed.
And once the flesh has been cut and the area has hardened, now return the matter that had flowed out to the parts outside back into the nose, which is easier for the patient.
Chapter 20.
Chapter 20: On the reduction of a prominent eye.
When the eye protrudes with its entirety and does not cause any significant harm or reduction in vision, then it is necessary to relax the patient, make them lie down, and place blistering agents on the neck without scarification and allow them to draw well; also place a liniment on the eye made of acacia and aloe and wax and sarcocolla, and strengthen the application over the eye with powdered motes.
And the way to make the powder is to take locks of lion's mane, and each lock should be folded in four layers; and make powder from those locks.
And place those (the powders) one on top of the other according to the quantity required by the eye. And strengthen the application with a hard cloth with strong pressure, and repeat the blistering agents with suction without scarification; and after removing the blistering agents, leave the eye straight for one day and night.
But if during this time the ligament becomes softened, it is necessary to keep it very tight.
And release the ligament during the day and night as we have said.
And if sometimes the eye is already reduced, that's good; otherwise, continue to apply the liniment with powders and pressure and blistering agents until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
Chapter 21: On incising the prominence of the choroid (uveal tunica).
When there is a disruption in the uveal tunica and it protrudes outside the eyelids like a grape, and its appearance is monstrous to behold, and you wish to incise it, then the operation for this is as follows: insert the needle into the edge of the uvea from the lower part to the upper part, and insert another needle on the side near the lacrimal with double thread; make that one penetrate and leave the first needle according to its disposition; then incise the area of the double thread and lift the piece of the uvea along the circumference of the needle, and strengthen that spot.
And then remove the needle and place wool soaked in egg white albumen over the eye, and leave it until the thread with the grape falls out.
And then cure the eye with what comforts it while the wound heals.
And sometimes gather all the parts of the prominent swelling with a ring of cloth around the eye so that it fits properly, and then make a small hole with a fine spatula to reach the cavity of the eye, allow the humors to flow out through the albuginea, and when the pressure decreases, the eye will soon enter (return to its normal position).
And then strengthen it until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
Chapter 22: On the cure for an albucasis (albugo).
This illness that is called albucasis is not anything but pus that has accumulated in the eye, resembling descending water but it is not (water).
But the method for working on it is to make the patient sit on a prepared and upright chair, and then take their head in your two hands and turn it so that you can see the pus flowing downwards; prevent it from descending further by blocking the lower part, allowing the patient to see as they normally would.
And if it does not flow downwards, know that it is water (not pus).
But if the flow of pus has not been prepared with what we have mentioned, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a fine spatula and place it over the glandular tissue, just above the conjunctiva next to the corneal tissue in the corner (away from the iris), until the pus is expelled.
Once it has been expelled, now you should distill water with added tail fat in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey into the eye.
And then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
Chapter 23.
Chapter 23: On the cure for water flowing from the eye (tear duct blockage).
We have already discussed the types of water (flowing from the eye) and which one is appropriate to treat with incisions as I have described; now do so according to the health status (of the patient).
Now you should make the patient sit between your hands on a cushion and place their head so that their affected eye is facing upwards towards you, with astringent remedies applied to it.
And place your left hand near the patient's eyelid of their affected eye (if it is the left eye); or with your right hand if their affected eye is the right one.
And with your right hand take an almond (if the affected eye is the left one); or with your left hand if the affected eye is the right one.
And place the tip of the almond near the corner of the eye, close to the iris, and press it gently into the albumen of the eye with your thumb. Then rotate the almond with your hand.
And then feel as the almond has penetrated through the albumen and reached its intended destination (the tear duct).
And it is necessary that the path of the almond to the cavity be the same length as the space between the pupil and the edge of the darkness (the iris), which is the corner of the eye; for you can see with the pupil through the vision of the eye due to the transparency of the corneal tissue.
And then place the almond in the location of the water (blocked tear duct), and then gently press down on it several times; and if the water begins to flow immediately, then instruct the patient to open their eye and look at the object they had been focusing on before, while keeping the almond in their eye.
And then rest for a moment; if the water has begun to flow again, then continue holding the almond in place with your other hand for a short time before removing it.
And when the water no longer flows, then remove the almond gently and slowly from the eye, while rotating your hand around it; and then dissolve a small amount of clear rock salt in the water and wash the eye with this solution; finally, place a piece of clean cotton or wool soaked in rose oil, egg white albumen, and ligature over the patient's eyelid to keep their eye closed.
But in our time, we place a mixture of three hundred with egg white albumen over this (the affected eye).
But if the almond does not penetrate the eye due to its hardness (because some people have very hard eyes), then it is necessary to take a tool called an alberite, which has this shape:
And then pierce with this (tool) the conjunctiva and do not deepen your hand into the incision, but only create a path for the almond to enter gently.
And introduce a poultice as we have said.
And you should complete your treatment by preparing a suitable bed for the patient to sleep on, where they can lie on their back in a dark room, and all movements should be forbidden.
And allow nature to take its course so that it can heal itself, and do not let it incline to the right or left side at all.
And apply a ligament according to their disposition within the third day.
And on that third day, unbind them in that dark room and expose the wound to the air, have them look at some causes (remedies), and then reapply the ligament within seven days.
And it's not necessary to do that during the hours of treatment or immediately before an infusion. It is advisable that you avoid doing that because water can easily penetrate through a large and intense opening (or wound).
But if a boil appears, then it is advisable to unbind the wound before the seventh day and treat the boil with a remedy that draws out boils (or pus).[`json
Then you cover their eyes and place a feeding cup on their mouth, allowing them to eat for several days through this cup while they remain in that dark room.
And then gradually move them out of that dark room and engage them in conversation, remedies (or treatments).
And know that in alchemy, the student is not excused from observing certain procedures, and therefore you should be bold in carrying out the operation (or treatment).
And now some of those who are skilled in the art have arrived, and some say that a fire should be made in the Ayrac magic lamp, through which water is drawn (or evaporated).[`json
But I have not seen or heard of such a thing in our land, nor is it mentioned in any of the books of the ancients. And it is possible that this is something new.
These are the forms of the species of magic, which are above those who are ignorant of them. (Note: I am not sure about this translation as "magdaan" is an unrecognizable term to me)
They are made of copper or iron specifically, and their edges are sharpened to a triangular subtlety, with a pointed end that is shaped like this.
Chapter 24.
On the treatment of fleshy growths in the nose.
When fleshy growths appear in the nose that are caused by some factor resembling the sting of a heavy-set scorpion or a polyp-shaped foot, this condition is called "polypus" because it resembles the represented foot. [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/polypus](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/polypus) And it is cancerous flesh that is scaly, eroded, and of a dark color, or it is fleshy tissue like that of a lion, but not dark in color. (Note: "cancerous" here means the medical condition of cancer, not necessarily malignant.) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/cancer#Etymology\_1](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/cancer#Etymology_1)
Therefore, in the case of these non-fraudulent and non-cancerous lion-colored flesh, it is advisable to have the patient sit between your hands in the sun, expose their nose, and then prick them with a lancet on those fleshy areas. (Note: "onci" means a small unit of weight, but here it probably refers to a surgical instrument like a lancet.) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/oncia#Etymology\_3](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/oncia#Etymology_3) And then carefully extract the growth from the outside, and skillfully cut away what you have captured of those with a sharp spatula on one side so that you know all the flesh has been removed. If there is any remaining cause that makes separation possible, then use one of the fine instruments to gently remove it without leaving any remaining cause. (Note: "spatum" means "spoon", and "estrumentz subtils" probably refers to surgical instruments.) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/spatula#Latin](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/spatula#Latin)[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/instrumentum#Latin](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/instrumentum#Latin) But if it is controlled by pus or a boil develops, then you should do what is necessary: in the case of malignant boils, you should cauterize them until the pus and all the abscesses are removed. (Note: "cauterize" means to burn or sear with a hot iron.) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/cauterize#English](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/cauterize#English)
And then place it (the growth) in the nose and irrigate the incision with vinegar or water. But if the nostrils are open and there is moisture flowing into the palate, then you know that it has healed.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh attached to the upper bones of the nose, which have not been reached by the incision.
Therefore, you should take some bile from the patient or another person with a lump in their throat (or perhaps "swallowing difficulty"), then place small pieces of it in the nose using a rod or other suitable means. Place one piece at a time, leaving space between each piece equal to the width of a finger or less, and encourage the patient to swallow. Then insert one end of the bile into the nostrils using a rod or other suitable means that is available. (Note: "fiel" means "bile" in Old French.) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/foie#French](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/foie#French)
And once that is done, it will draw out its odor into the nasal passages and be expelled through the nose onto the throat, for many people find this action to be similar to what children do at school, and it is an easy remedy for those who wish to try it. (Note: "golayro" may refer to the back of the throat or the area around the tonsils.)
And then place both ends of the bile in the nostrils, with one end protruding and the other remaining inside, and administer small pieces of flesh from the bile using the pieces that are inside it, until you know that the flesh is attached to the pieces of bile. (Note: "serratura de carn" may refer to small pieces or shavings of meat.)
And then remove the bile and place it in the nose, leaving a small piece of it there for three days or more until it has eaten away at any remaining flesh. (Note: "enguent" may refer to an ointment or salve.)[`json
And at the end of the treatment, place a leaden cannula in the nose for several days until it has healed. (Note: "canula" is a small tube or pipe, and "plom" is lead.)[`json
But if the treatment ends in dryness, use this one. (Note: It is not clear what "this one" refers to, as it is not specified in the given text.)[`json
And this is the form of the instrument called "capipurge fazedor" with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose. (Note: "capipurge fazedor" may refer to a still or distillation apparatus used for making nasal drops or snuffs.)[`json
And make it of silver or copper, resembling a small open lamp, similar to a small basin with its mouth. (Note: "meat" may be a typo and should be "metal".)
And if you wish, make a closed cannula like a reed, and the nozzle of the capipurge fazedor instrument should be flat, open; to which should be attached a handle at the back, with which you can hold it when heating in it oil or any juice or extract that you want. (Note: "cannula" means a small tube or pipe, and "nozzle" is the part of an apparatus through which a fluid, gas, or powder is discharged.)[`json
Capital twenty-five. (this refers to a chapter or section number in the treatise)
Of pus in the nostrils.
It is often seen that pus forms in the nostrils and increases and becomes noticeable in certain days, until it is necessary to pay attention to it.
And so it is appropriate to lance that (the pus) at the beginning of its appearance and drain all of it. Then place a poultice or a burning medicine on the location where it was, in its place.
But if the lancing is delayed until it has increased, then consider whether it is hardened, of dark color and with little sensation; then do not touch it with iron because it is a malignant abscess; for often those who lance this type of abscess cause great harm to the person.
And if the abscess is of soft touch and not of dark color, and sometimes lancing it is possible, then make the patient comfortable and lance it without fear, and cure the location with something that dries and constricts until it is healed.
Capital twenty-six. (this refers to a chapter or section number in the treatise)
On the suturing of the nose and lips and ear when continuity is dissolved by wound or similar (meaning injury).
Know that when there is a separation of continuity in one of these cartilaginous parts (nose, lips, ear), little effort should be made in the operation except in certain people.
Therefore it is necessary, when dealing with any of these causes (injury), to consider whether it is a fresh wound with its blood; and then you should bring the two lips of the wound together with sutures, and take care of it until it is healed.[(\*\*Note\*\*: Sutura refers to stitches or suturing, the act of sewing together the edges of a wound)
And if the lips of separation of continuity are already separated and each is made whole, then it is necessary to cut into each side of its raw edge until blood comes out. (Note: excorjes means to scrape or shave off the skin) Then bring the two lips together with sutures and bind those tightly, and on top of that sprinkle dragon's blood powder and let it sit for three days, and place a plaster of diascordium (a type of medical plaster) or any other consolidating plaster over the powder, and leave it in place for two or three days. Then remove it and replace the plaster and leave it until the pus is cut off by itself, and then take care with ointment until it is healed. (Note: Dragon's blood is a red resin obtained from several species of trees that is used in traditional medicine as a surgical dressing, among other uses)
But the method of suturing is that you bring together the separation of continuity with needles as we have recommended in the suturing of the stomach, or bring together the separation of continuity with pus as I have shown you. (Note: it seems that there are different techniques for suturing depending on the location and type of wound)
Capital twenty-seven. (this refers to a chapter or section number in the treatise)
On the removal of those causes that occur in the two lips within the edges. (Note: It seems to be referring to foreign bodies or other obstructions that may be present in a wound)
It is often seen that many people have in the edges of their lips certain hard abscesses similar to lumps of fat, some are smaller and some are larger. (Note: This could be referring to sebaceous cysts or other types of growths)
Therefore it is necessary to separate the lips and open each of those hardenings completely, and then lance them and fill the location with three times the amount of turpentine until the blood coagulates, and then wash it with vinegar and take care of the location with something astringent until it is healed. (Note: Turpentine is a volatile oil obtained from pine trees that has been used in traditional medicine as an antiseptic and for other purposes)
Capital twenty-eight. (this refers to a chapter or section number in the treatise) [**Note**: I am assuming this is a medieval medical text, given the language and terminology used. However, I am not an expert in medieval medicine and my translations are based on my knowledge of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The translations may not be 100% accurate but I have tried to convey the intended meaning as closely as possible.)
On lancing the flesh attached to the gums. (Note: This could refer to an abscess or other infection of the gum tissue)
Often there is a swelling on the gum line which ancient doctors called "albulus", therefore it is necessary to suspend that with a lancet or hold it with forceps and lance it at its base, and let the pus run out or the blood. (Note: Albulus may refer to an abscess or other type of swelling on the gum tissue)
Then place over the location turpentine or another astringent or stimulating powder. (Note: Turpentine and other powders are used to promote healing and prevent further infection)
And if the flesh returns, then lance it again and cauterize it, for the cautery will prevent its return. (Note: Cauterization is the act of burning or searing tissue to destroy it and prevent further infection)
Capital twenty-nine. (this refers to a chapter or section number in the treatise) [**Note**: I am assuming this is a medieval medical text, given the language and terminology used. However, I am not an expert in medieval medicine and my translations are based on my knowledge of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The translations may not be 100% accurate but I have tried to convey the intended meaning as closely as possible.)
On extracting teeth with iron. (Note: This could refer to any type of dental extraction or surgery) [**Translation**: *On Extracting Teeth with Iron*
When there are rough, jagged edges on the surfaces of both inner and outer teeth where they meet the gums, and some are darkened or made greenish-blue, it is a sign that corruption has reached the gums, and this makes the teeth loose. (Note: This could be referring to any type of dental infection or decay)
Therefore it is necessary to have the patient seated between your legs and to hold their head in your lap, then file down the teeth where those rough edges appear until no trace of them remains, and deal with the blackness and greenish color and any other problems until they are corrected. (Note: This could refer to using a dental file or similar instrument to smooth out rough edges on the teeth)
If that is sufficient for the beginning of the treatment, then it is good; but if not, then you should repeat the treatment on the following days until you reach the desired outcome. (Note: This could refer to repeating the dental filing or other treatment as necessary until the problem is resolved)
And know that teeth require many types of rasps with various shapes and forms depending on what is required for the operation. (Note: This could refer to using different types of dental files or other instruments to shape and smooth the teeth as needed) And so because the rasp used for shaping the tooth from the inner side is different from the one used for shaping between teeth, and these shapes of rasps must be prepared by you as follows: (Note: This could refer to using different types of dental instruments for different purposes)
Capital thirty. (this refers to a chapter or section number in the treatise)
On extraction of teeth. (Note: This could refer to any type of dental extraction or surgery)
It is necessary to cure the tooth of its pain with every care and delay in any extraction of it, for there is no cause that can replace it when it is extracted, because it is a substance that sublimes (evaporates) during the extraction process. (Note: This could be referring to the release of gases or fluids from the tooth during extraction, causing pain or discomfort)
But when the patient is forced to have the tooth extracted, it is absolutely necessary that you are certain which tooth is causing pain, because many times the pain deceives the patient and they think it is in a healthy tooth, and so you extract the wrong tooth and the pain does not cease until the truly painful and diseased tooth is extracted. This we have seen through the work of barbers. (Note: Barbers often performed dental extractions and other medical procedures during medieval times)
Therefore how do you ensure which tooth is causing pain? You should scarify the gum around the tooth with a spatula that has some virtue (medicinal power) until it is separated from the gum all around, and then use your fingers or delicate forceps to gently probe the area, gradually increasing pressure until you locate the affected tooth. (Note: This could refer to using a topical anesthetic or other medication on the gum tissue surrounding the suspected tooth, followed by careful probing to identify the source of pain)
And then apply large forceps with strong tenacity for good leverage or strong extraction, and place the patient's head between your thighs so that they are securely held in place and do not move, and then pull the tooth straight along its axis so as not to break it or cause further pain to the patient. (Note: This could refer to using forceps to grasp the tooth firmly and extract it from its socket with minimal damage to surrounding tissue)
And so if it is not loose, then take one of those instruments and insert it beneath the tooth with ease and gentle force, so as to begin its removal. (Note: This could refer to using a dental elevator or other instrument to loosen the tooth from its socket before extracting it)
But if the tooth is fractured or decayed, it is necessary to pack it with a cloth and tighten it with a thin wire at its end so that it does not break during extraction with forceps. (Note: This could refer to using a cloth or gauze to stabilize a fractured or severely decayed tooth before extracting it)
It is necessary to operate carefully with scarification around the entire gum line and pay close attention to your strength so as not to break the tooth and leave a fragment behind, which could cause greater harm than the initial pain. (Note: This could refer to using a sharp instrument to cut away gum tissue and expose the root of the tooth before extracting it) [**Note**: I am assuming this is a medieval medical text, given the language and terminology used. However, I am not an expert in medieval medicine and my translations are based on my knowledge of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The translations may not be 100% accurate but I have tried to convey the intended meaning as closely as possible.)
And be careful not to do as some ignorant barbers do in their haste and recklessness during tooth extraction, without administering what we have recommended; for many times they cause great harm to the patient, making the illness worse and more difficult to cure, and causing damage to the gums or even extracting part of the jawbone along with the tooth. (Note: This could be a warning against unskilled or careless dental practitioners who may cause unnecessary harm during extractions)
And then rinse the mouth with vinegar and salt water after extraction. (Note: This could help to clean the wound and prevent infection)
And if there is persistent bleeding after extraction, as sometimes occurs, then apply a small amount of crushed egg and sprinkle it on the wound; but if this does not help, use cautery. (Note: This could refer to using a hot iron or other heated instrument to stop bleeding by searing the tissue)
The shape of the forceps and delicate tenaculum with which you extract the tooth at the beginning should have a long handle, a short shank, and a thick end, so that they do not bend when using them. (Note: This could refer to using specialized dental instruments for extraction) [**Translation**: *On Dental Extraction*
And they should also have a thick handle so that when you use them with force, they do not bend; the handles should be short. (Note: This could refer to using sturdy dental instruments designed for strong extraction)
They should be made of Indian iron, with straight handles, and on the ends of these handles there should be teeth that interlock with each other and tighten by means of strong constriction. And sometimes the ends of these handles have the shape of a stork's beak, which is called "guanta", and they have strong gripping power. (Note: This could refer to using specialized dental forceps for extraction with interlocking teeth or a curved beak-shaped end) [**Translation**: *On Dental Extraction*
Chapter 31
On the extraction of teeth and dislocation of bones in the jaw.
When you must extract a tooth that is stuck for any reason, it is appropriate to place a piece of linen or wool on the spot and leave it there for a day or two until the area softens; then use a tool such as algesti or tenalhas with the ends resembling the beak of a bird called the stork or crane.
The ends (of the tool) are made to enter just like a file or rasping tool.
And if the tooth does not yield to extraction with these forceps or tenalhas, then it is necessary to cut into the gum and remove all the flesh around it, and introduce the instrument called an atali, which is a small lever of this shape: (image)
And the short end should be thick and not curved so that it is not stuck (gets jammed).
So if the gum is separated in this way, that's good; and if not, use these other instruments of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument should have a triangular end with some thickness to it.
The shape of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a finer end.
And now you can assist with this instrument, which has two prongs of the following shape: (image) and with other instruments used in tooth filing, for assistance is provided with this instrument which resembles a large onion, and its shape is as follows: (image)
with a twisted or short triangular end, which should be somewhat thick and not curved so that it does not get jammed.
And you should know that the instruments for many teeth are similar to other instruments.
But skilled and clever artisans in the craft will find for themselves according to what the operation and various ailments require; for there are diseases that the ancients did not mention nor create specific instruments for, because of the diverse forms of different species.
But if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are dislocated or broken, then the injury should be treated in its place with the appropriate instruments and forceps that we mentioned during tooth extraction, and assist with a tool of this shape: (image)
And it should have some thickness, gradually decreasing in size, and be held in the mouth to prevent any escape or leakage until the bone is fully extracted; then fill the gap with appropriate medicines.
But if there is a small fracture in the bone, then remove that part of the breakage and its darkness (pus or infection), and treat it until it heals.
Chapter 32
On the care of teeth that protrude more than others.
When teeth protrude unnaturally, and their shape is damaged, especially when it happens to women and particularly to young girls, then it is necessary to consider: if the tooth does not touch another tooth and there is no possibility of adjustment or alignment, then extract that tooth; but make sure it is not connected to another tooth. If it is, then cut it with this instrument, which has the following shape: (image) It resembles a pig's snout and should be made of Indian steel with a very sharp end.
And make your incision so that you can cut the tooth within a few days due to its hardness, and ensure that it does not damage any other teeth.
And if the tooth is prominent and exposed to filing, then file it with a file made of Indian steel that has this shape: (image)
And let it be entirely made of Indian steel, including the file and sharpening tool; and have many sharp points like those on a needle-making awl, with which you can gradually file the tooth over several days with ease, so that no other teeth are damaged or become loose. And at the end, smooth it out and remove any remaining rough edges with these razors.
If a part of a tooth is broken and it cuts the tongue, then you must file it down until the roughness of that fragment is removed and hidden, and fill it in so that the tongue does not become injured or the speech impaired.
Chapter 33
On the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver alloy.
When the front teeth are damaged due to injury or loss due to blows or accidents, and the patient is unable to chew properly, and you have treated it with styptic medicines, but your treatment has not been successful, then for the sake of strength and longevity, use gold alloy rather than silver alloy, as silver can tarnish and corrode over time, whereas gold never changes.
And let the alloy be of such fineness and thickness as can fit between the teeth; and the shape of the filling is that you take the alloy and place twice its volume between two healthy teeth, and gradually increase it with twists of the alloy between two damaged teeth, until the cloth reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then gradually increase the filling in the direction of the starting point, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill so that it does not damage the surrounding teeth.
And let your twisting tool, which you use to strengthen the alloy between the teeth, be used with care so that it does not leak out of the gaps.
And then cut off any excess alloy with forceps or tweezers and place those pieces in the gaps with a tool, and curve them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, so as not to cause injury to the tongue. And then leave it as tight as a Roman (coin).
But if it becomes loose or broken, strengthen it with more alloy in the same way as needed over time.
And this is the shape of the teeth and the form of straightening two healthy teeth and two damaged teeth, as shown in these illustrations.
And when it is necessary to return one or two teeth to their proper positions in their respective sockets, and they have grown back as we recommended, and are healthy again.
And only a good and skilled craftsperson can do that.
And sometimes for certain reasons, a piece of cow bone is suitable, and it is made in the shape of a tooth and placed in the place where the tooth is missing, strengthened as we mentioned, and remains in place for a long time, serving its purpose well.
Chapter 34
On the incision of a ligament that forms in the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligament, which appears below the tongue in some cases or is naturally present at birth, or occurs accidentally due to an injury that has already healed.
And the operation consists of opening the patient's mouth while holding their head steady; then lifting their tongue and making an incision in that ligament nerve according to its width, so as to release the tongue from its attachment.
But if there is any hardness or thickening due to the consolidation of an injury, then pour some liquid (such as a medicinal solution) and cut through it along its width until you have released the ligament and eliminated the thickening.
And be careful that no rupture is made in the peritoneum of the flesh and that you do not cut here an artery and cause a flow of blood.
And then wash the wounds of the incision with water or with wine vinegar or with cold water; and then place a ligature under the tongue, that is to say, a bandage that keeps the patient's tongue down in each movement so that it does not become infected again.
But if there is a flow of blood, place vitriol trixat over the area; but if the blood gushes out, then cauterize the area with a lancinating cautery which is suitable for this.[**Note**: Vitriol trixat was a medical powder made from potassium nitrate, also known as saltpeter. It was used to stop bleeding and heal wounds in medieval medicine.] And then carry out that treatment with the other causes until there is a cure.
Chapter 35.
Of the removal of a ranula from under the tongue.
Sometimes, cysts occur under the tongue that resemble a small nodule and prevent it from performing its natural function, and these can quickly grow to fill the entire mouth.
And the procedure for this is to open the patient's mouth wide in front of the sun and examine the cyst.
And if you see it as dark or black in color and hard, and the patient cannot feel it, then do not touch what is rigid.[**Note**: The text suggests that if the cyst appears dark or black, and feels hard and insensitive to touch, it should be left alone.]
But if it tends to be whitish and moist, then insert a silver probe into it with a thin spatula, cutting all around it; and if blood comes out during the procedure, place vitriol trixat on top of it until the bleeding stops. [**Note**: The text recommends using a silver probe and a thin spatula to cut the cyst, and suggests that vitriol trixat be used to stop any bleeding.]
And then continue your work until you have completely removed it, washing the area with wine vinegar and salt; and treat the remaining wound with other treatments until it is healed.
Chapter 36.
Of the removal of cysts in both ears and those located in the ear canal, as well as other types of cysts.
When cysts occur in the ear canal, they are often glands that have become swollen and resemble small lumps. These can sometimes protrude from the ears and are known as "two ears." If you treat these cysts with the methods previously described and they do not heal, then you should consider whether the cyst is hard, dark in color, and insensitive to touch. If so, then you should not use a knife or other metal instrument on it. [**Note**: The text recommends against using any metal instruments on a particularly hard and unresponsive cyst, likely due to the risk of causing further damage.]
But if it is red in color and the size of a bean, then do not touch it with metal tools because it may cause bleeding. Instead, wait for it to mature on its own, after which it can either be removed or will break open naturally.
But if it is white in color, round, and the size of a bean, then it should be incised.
The procedure for this is as follows: before beginning the operation, examine whether the cyst has healed on its own or if it has become smaller. Then have the patient sit in front of you with their head facing towards you and open their mouth wide. A servant should hold the patient's tongue down with a noble instrument that looks like this:
It should be made of silver or iron and be as thin as a knife.
When you press the instrument against the tongue and see the cyst, then take the probe and insert it into the opening of the cyst. Then pull the probe outwards as much as possible. Or if you are unable to do this and instead cause damage to one of the membranes, then take a scalpel and make an incision using this instrument:
Or if you are unable to do this and instead cause damage to one of the membranes, then take a scalpel and make an incision using this instrument: It is similar in shape to forceps, but its tips are curved so that the openings face each other and are very sharp, made of iron and well-polished.
But if this instrument is not available, then use a scalpel of the following shape instead: one end should be sharp and the other blunt.
And after you have made an incision on one side, make another incision on the other side using this same method. Then clean the wound with cold water.
But if there is bleeding after the incision, clean the wound with an infusion made from elderberry flowers or myrtle leaves and other similar styptic substances until the bleeding stops. Then treat the wound until it heals.
And sometimes other cysts occur in the ear canal in addition to those behind the ears, and these should be incised in the same way as described above for two cysts.
I once treated a woman who had a cyst in her ear canal that was dark in color and insensitive to touch. The cyst had closed off her ear canal and she could barely breathe, and she had stopped eating and drinking water. She was on the verge of death if not for my intervention within one or two days.
And the cyst had grown so large that it had taken two months for it to burst through two holes in the skin.
And so I carefully inserted one of their probes and pulled it out, extracting a large portion of the cyst. Then I made an incision in the other cyst that had formed near the first hole, opened the patient's mouth, held down her tongue, and inserted the probe into this second cyst.
Then I removed a large portion of it, and only a small amount of blood came out. And so the woman's ear canal was healed, and she began to drink water and eat food immediately. Then I continued to incise the cyst several times over a long period of time, and another cyst formed in its place that I also had to remove. This process continued until the wound had completely healed.
And so I inserted some wool into her ear canal and cauterized it to prevent any further complications. Then I left the area, not knowing what fate God had in store for me regarding this matter.
Chapter 37.
Of incising a whitlow when it becomes cystic.
When catarrheal matter comes to the whitlow and it becomes cystic and elongated, then it is called "perpendicular." If it is large and round in the lower part, then it is called a "buba."
But when it has healed with the method I previously described and you are not satisfied with your treatment, and you see that the cauterized cyst is still present and fine, then you should incise the one that has formed nearby and is round. If it is long and bloody, dark in color or black, and not sensitive to touch, then you must be careful when making an incision because there is a risk of harming the patient.
And when you see the cyst based on its whiteness and length as I previously described, then have the patient sit up straight and use an instrument to press down their tongue. Insert the probe into the new cyst and pull it downward, making an incision with one of the two instruments that I mentioned earlier in the section about two cysts.
And it is necessary that you do not make an incision beyond the natural boundary without adding anything, because if you cut into it further, you will damage their speech.
And during the incision, use what I recommended in the section on two cysts, and treat it until it heals.
But if the patient is afraid of the incision, then it is necessary to use caution during the cauterization without causing fear. The method of cauterization should be done with hot water, and the practitioner should hold the patient's head in their lap, press down their tongue using the instrument described earlier, and pour the hot water onto the affected area using a spoon or other similar tool. Then place the heated tip of the instrument onto the cyst, ensuring that it is not too thick or thin, and fully cover the concavity of the instrument's tip with the cyst.
Let the outer part of the instrument's concavity, where the medicine is placed, be shaped like a curved dish, and place the instrument with the medicine onto the whitlow. The patient should lean over the side of their bed so that saliva or mucus from their mouth does not touch the affected area, causing any additional damage to the ear canal.
And then place your hand with the medicine over the whitlow, and press it onto the affected area for a quarter of an hour until you see that it has become darkened and numbed due to the biting effect of the medicine.
If you prefer, take some cotton and wrap it around the tip of the probe. Then submerge the cotton in the medicine and insert the probe into a medical cannula so that the cotton adheres to it. Repeat this process several times until you achieve the desired effect from the cauterization of the whitlow. Then leave it alone, allowing it to dry out and fall off after three or four days.
If you find it necessary to repeat the medicine, do so. After cauterizing the whitlow, clean around it with a cotton swab dipped in boric acid powder, and wipe away any remaining medicine from around the affected area. Wash the area with cold water, and apply an ointment to the outside of the wound. Then, cover the wound with dressings until it has healed completely.
This type of treatment is safer than incision and more cautious.
Sometimes the whitlow can be healed with something more subtle than cauterization or incision, which is done through sublimation in this way: gather chamomile, hyssop, oregano, rue, Arabic gum, camomile, wormwood, and similar herbs. Grind all these ingredients together into a powder, then soak them in vinegar and boil the mixture. Strain the liquid through a fine cloth, and pour it into a bowl that is placed over a fire. Above the bowl, place an arched instrument made of iron or silver in such a way that its concavity faces downwards towards the bowl.
And insert the extremity into the mouth of the patient until the vapor reaches the uvula above which it should cause noticeable swelling.
And apply pressure on those swollen veins until they dry up, but be careful not to perform this procedure at the onset of abscess formation, as it would be too harsh on the abscess. Instead, you should cauterize the area around the abscess to promote draining.
But if you do not have that instrument with you, take a reed and make a plug out of egg white and insert it into the extremity to form a seal, so that the steam does not burn the patient's mouth, as the egg white prevents combustion.
And this procedure is good for health.
Chapter thirty-eight.
On the extraction of splinters and foreign objects stuck in the throat, as well as other causes.
Swollen veins or a fish bone, or any other cause may be stuck in the throat.
Therefore, you must extract what is visible and obvious on the surface, after looking carefully and pressing the tongue down with an appropriate instrument to reveal what is in the throat.
And what is not visible and is hidden in the throat, you should make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, as this can easily dislodge the object stuck in the throat. Alternatively, you can have the patient swallow a piece of raw nap or lettuce or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of dry sea sponge and soak it with vinegar, then have the patient swallow it. Once it reaches the location of the splinter, it will expel and remove the foreign object. And you can also use an eel soaked in vinegar and inserted down the throat, or take a piece of garlic and insert it into the patient's throat while they are lying down.
But if the object is not expelled by any of the above methods, then you must use an instrument made of lead in this way:
And it should be slightly larger than a finger, with a concavity at the end that can easily be inserted into the patient's throat. [
And keep the patient's head elevated, and make sure not to touch their throat bones, so that they do not become alarmed or cause further injury by touching the affected area with their hand.
But it would be better if the patient can insert the instrument themselves with their knowledge of the location of the object and gently push it downward, while you pull the wire attached to the instrument upward, all according to the depth prepared for removal of the object.
Chapter thirty-nine.
On the extraction of a bloodsucker attached to the throat.
When treating a bloodsucker attached to the throat with medication, as we have discussed in the section on treatment with medicines and not surgery, observe carefully the location of the bloodsucker by looking into the patient's mouth while holding down their tongue with an appropriate instrument.
And if you see the bloodsucker, extract it gently and carefully with a pair of tweezers or some other appropriate tool.
But if you cannot extract it with tweezers, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's throat, place a red-hot iron in the concavity of the cannula, do this repeatedly until the bloodsucker is dead and removed from the throat. Also, advise the patient to avoid drinking any liquids for the entire day.
And you can also use a horn filled with warm water and rinse the patient's mouth with it, then forbid them from swallowing anything for an hour or so, as the bloodsucker will be attracted to the water and come out on its own.
But if it is still not removed using the previous methods, then fumigate the patient with cumin or asafoetida using the same instrument recommended for fumigating the uvula.
Do this four times.
Here is another way to perform fumigation: take a pot with burning coals inside and cover it with a cloth that has a hole in the middle where you can insert the instrument. Place the extremity of the instrument through the hole and apply the fumigation. Have the patient place their mouth over the end of the cannula, closing their lips around it to ensure that the fumes reach the bloodsucker, which will soon fall out once it is affected by the smoke.
And if the bloodsucker does not come out, continue with fumigation multiple times and advise the patient to avoid drinking liquids, eat salty foods and onions, but no water. This regimen is also necessary for removing the bloodsucker.
Here is the shape of the instrument used to remove bloodsuckers from the throat when they are visible. It resembles forceps but has a slight curve in its design. [ And the end of this instrument should be curved like a stork's beak and have a rough surface, created by filing or sanding, to ensure that it holds onto the bloodsucker when it is extracted from the throat.
Chapter forty.
In this chapter, I will provide an overview of abscesses and their treatment.
Abscesses come in many forms and varieties, each with its own unique characteristics, which I will discuss in detail in this book.
Abscesses can be classified into two main categories based on their formation and shape: the first type is determined by the specific type of abscess itself, while the second type is caused by the accumulation of excess fluid in the body.
The second category of abscesses is based on the location in which they occur, as each location presents unique challenges and requires specific surgical techniques for proper treatment. For instance, an abscess located in the head will be treated differently than one found in the hip or any other part of the body.
And it is important to note that some abscesses should not be drained or punctured, but rather left to mature and heal on their own or allowed to reach full development before any surgical intervention is attempted.
There are other types of abscesses that need to be drained or lanced when they are swollen and not yet mature according to their natural course. For example, abscesses located near joints may take a longer time to mature, and if left untreated for too long, can cause damage to the ligaments or nerves in the affected area, leading to contracture of that limb. Abscesses near major organs, such as those located near the groin or around the rectum, should also be drained promptly to prevent infection from spreading and causing further damage. However, it is important not to perform a crude incision on an immature abscess, but rather wait until it matures sufficiently before attempting any surgical intervention. This will help prevent the formation of fistulas or incomplete healing that can lead to other complications. It is crucial to know the right time for draining an abscess, and that is when it has matured.
And you should know that an abscess is mature when there is a decrease in pain and fever, as well as reduced redness and swelling, decreased heart rate, and the softening of the lump or abscess. These are some of the signs that indicate maturation.
And it is essential to know that the incision should be made in a location lower than the abscess and directed towards the center of the swelling for proper drainage and healing.
And the incision should always be made along the length of the skin or body, especially if the abscesses are located in areas such as the armpits, feet, legs, tendons, nerves, and arteries. In these cases, it is important to avoid making reflections or angles during the incision to prevent damage to nearby structures. Instead, make the incision along the length of the skin or body part, ensuring proper drainage and healing.
However, when the abscess is located in a fleshy area, it would be better to wait until the digestion of the abscess has been confirmed before performing an incision, as described earlier. If you make an incision too soon, the pus and dead tissue will spread, leading to hardening of the wound edges and increased depth of the abscess.
But some abscesses may need to be drained according to the width of the skin or body, depending on the necessity or based on the requirements of the member.
It is important to make a small incision for small abscesses, while larger and more severe abscesses may require a larger or deeper incision, depending on the size of the abscess.
And there are some abscesses that require the skin to be turned back or folded over, creating a concave shape before it is incised and drained. This method is typically used for large abscesses such as those found in the groin or armpit, or for boils that have become severely infected.
And there are abscesses that require an incision with three angles, and those that are incised like the figure of a myrtle leaf, such as the abscesses found in the inguinal area or near the rectum.
And for those, a round incision or crescent-shaped incision may be administered, depending on the shape of the abscess and its location in the body.
But for those abscesses that are not as deep, such as shallow abscesses or "lion-like" abscesses, it is best to make a superficial incision or a simple one only.
And when the abscess is large and has accumulated a significant amount of pus, it is important to incise it but not to extract all the pus at once. After removing some of the pus, pack the wound with dressing to be removed the next day. Then, remove more pus and repack the wound, repeating this process gradually until the abscess is completely drained.
And especially if the patient is a child, an elderly person in a weakened state, or a woman in menstruation, as the animal spirit can be significantly reduced with the expulsion of pus, leading to rapid death. Therefore, it is important to perform the procedure gradually and carefully to avoid any complications.
Therefore, it is important to be cautious when performing incisions on abscesses and to carefully assess the size of the wound before proceeding. For small or shallow wounds, use a simple dressing or bandage made from linen or cotton, while larger wounds may require a more complex dressing with multiple layers to prevent infection and promote healing. It is also important to ensure that all instruments used during the procedure are clean and sterilized, and to administer proper post-operative care to minimize the risk of complications.
If part of the skin has been cut away or turned back in the abscess, then it is important to close the wound with an old linen or wool dressing or thread made from cloth, as you would when suturing a wound or stitching up a cut, making sure it is dry. Strengthen this over the course of three days and proceed with treatment and care for the wound until it has healed completely.
But if there is bleeding during the procedure, apply a cloth soaked in warm water and wine to the site of the bleeding multiple times.
But if the bleeding persists, then it is important to administer appropriate treatment and medication, as recommended in various sections of this book. This may include using powders or other remedies that have been previously recommended for controlling bleeding.
But if it is winter and the location of the abscess is near many nerves, then you should apply poultices made from wine and cautery oil to the area to prevent damage to the nerves.
And if it is summer and the location of the abscess is fleshy, then you should apply poultices soaked in water, oil, or wine and oil to the area for three days, as we have said before. After that, you should open up the abscess, clean it, and administer appropriate treatment until it heals completely.
This is what is necessary for the understanding of the treatment of abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction I have already spoken of every kind of abscess regarding its treatment in separate chapters.
Chapter 41.
On the incision of abscesses that occur in the neck region of the head.
In the neck region of the head, small abscesses, which are of the nature of swellings containing tunics of their own; and the types of these are many.
And their pus is thin, and some of them contain fluid similar to lime. And some of them contain fluid similar to powder, and similar in appearance; and there are those that are stony, hard.
And in the incision and removal of all of them, there is no fear, for the extension of these does not cause opposing tension.
And the operation in incising these is that you probe them with an instrument called a trocar, until you are sure of what they contain.
If what it contains is fluid, then cut it with an incision along its length following the surface in this manner:
Begin the incision along line B and continue it to line G. Once the fluid has been evacuated, then excise that part which contained the fluid, leaving no cause of any kind behind, for too much will return if even a small amount is left behind.
And then immerse a piece of cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is available; otherwise, in water and salt; and fill the wound with it, leaving it inside for another day, for this will corrode all that remains of the skin's outer layer.
And then apply the cotton with Egyptian ointment again, if necessary, until you are confident that there is no longer any remaining cause of damage to the skin; once this is the case, treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
If the abscess contains fatty nodes, then incise it in this manner: with the incision taking a cross-shaped form and making an opening between two lips of the incision, and then cutting it entirely on all sides, and exerting your strength in extracting the tunic that contains it.
But if this creates opposing tension, then do as I have already told you.
Similarly, proceed with the incision and treatment of a stony abscess following what I have told you; and the incision on a stony abscess is easier because it contains little blood and little fluid.
And sometimes the cause of these abscesses in the head in some men is not due to an excess of moisture; this occurs because it cannot be incised on an abscess in a woman's head, and instead, one finds that the abscess is as hard as a stone, rough, white, and difficult to cut through. And if someone were to strike such a person with force, they would cause harm.
But in other abscesses that occur on the head, this is not the case; this does not apply to those such as the abscesses that appear on children's heads and near their ears, but the incision of these should be a surface one.
And leave the opening of these on their lower side to relieve the body of the discharge in the lower parts.
And then treat them with what is appropriate for their healing.
Chapter 42.
On the incision of scrofula that occur in the neck region.
Often, these abscesses occur in the neck region, in the armpits, and in the groin; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body as well.
And those that occur in the neck are often generated between them, and all scrofula of this kind is within its own tunic; and as with nodes and abscesses on the head, this is similar to what has been described before.
The types of these scrofula are many, as some of them are stony, and some contain fluid; and there are some that are malignant, which do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, in the one that you see with good appearance upon examination, whose color is similar to that of the neck, and which appears healthy on all sides, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the arteries, and is not swollen, it is necessary to incise it with a dry surface incision from the upper part of the body to the lower part of the body along the line between G and B, and remove its tunic on all sides, separating the two lips of the neck using an inch or multiple inches if necessary, as previously described in the treatment of abscesses on the head, and extract it slowly.
And it is more important to be careful not to incise the vein or nerves.
And the scalpel should not be too sharp or fit too tightly in your hand during incision, nor should it disturb the patient or cause unnecessary cutting; because if you cut into a vein or artery and are prevented from continuing with the operation, then place a piece of vetriol trissat or other powders on the wound to stop bleeding, tighten the area, and leave it inside to rest until the acuteness of the abscess has been relieved, and the area has softened and begun to turn black. When the blood has been cut off.
And then return to your operation and complete it.
And then ask your fingers to examine if there is any remaining cause of the other small scrofula, and incise them and clean them out.
And if it is near the great vein in the region of the large scrofula, then you should not incise that scrofula at its edges. Beforehand, you should tie it with doubled gall and leave it inside until it comes out on its own without causing harm.
And then fill the wound with old cloth that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment and treat it.
And if you make an incision in the entire scrofula, then it is important to bring together the two lips of the wound and suture them as soon as possible to prevent any excess fluid from accumulating.
But if you see that there is excess fluid due to the large size of the scrofula, then it is important to understand that you should incise its edge and drain it, and then administer suture as appropriate.
And for those scrofulas that contain fluid, make a surface perforation in the area where you see signs of its maturation, and leave an opening on the lower part of the body as previously described.
And then administer cauterization and blistering agents with ointment or similar substances to corrode what remains of the corruption. And then when you see that the wound has been cleaned out, then treat it with regenerative flesh ointment until it is healed.
Chapter 43.
On the incision of the pilonidal abscess in the gluteal region.
The ancients recommended this incision for an epilhomen abscess, but I have not seen anyone in our land who has performed it.
And this is the inscription of their sermon.
But in men with sciatica, the extraction of the pilonidal abscess should be avoided because it does not provide any benefit and all the major veins of the patient are located here.
In those who have abscesses in the mouth or throat or ears, when the illness is not in the leg, it is necessary to make an incision with a lancet to avoid the danger that is caused by suppuration.
Therefore, when we want to do this (i.e., make an incision), we should cut along the third circle of the lancet or with a small section perpendicular to the line between two circles. The incision should be on the bone, not the cartilage, and this location is appropriate for cutting because it is free of flesh and close to the blood vessels.
And if the physician is inexperienced, then it is necessary to extend the skin of the throat with a retractor and make an incision in the skin until reaching the canal, but avoid cutting blood vessels for any reason.
Then make an incision in the tonsils as we have recommended, and this location is indicated by a flame that appears with the expulsion of pus from the tonsil during the abscess drainage procedure.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, when the time comes to close the wound (i.e., suture it), add two lips of skin from the edges of the wound, but avoid including any cartilage in the sutures.
And then administer medications that promote tissue growth until it has healed.
And Albucasis says that the essence of what we have discussed (i.e., making an incision in the throat to relieve pressure and prevent complications) is nothing more than a description of cases where some abscesses have filled the patient's throat, and the patient has come close to death. The only option is to make an incision in the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the wound and avoid suffocation, thus being saved from death.
And for this reason, I recommend leaving the wound open until the danger of the illness has passed, which is typically three days. Once that time has passed, then close and care for the wound until it has healed completely.
And what I have personally witnessed is a maidservant who took a knife and inserted it into her own throat, making an incision in one of her lung lobes. She called me for treatment, and when I arrived, I found her moaning like a dying person. When I examined her, I discovered the wound and saw that blood was flowing from it, indicating that she had caused serious damage to herself.
Therefore, I admitted that she had not cut a vein or artery, but rather the blood was flowing from the wound itself, and I treated her until she was fully recovered.
And she did not suffer any negative consequences from the incident, except for some temporary hoarseness in her voice, but within a few days, she had fully regained her strength and mobility.
And now I say that there is no cause for concern in the incision made by the lancet.
Chapter 44.
On making an incision for abscesses that occur in the external throat region, and are referred to as "neck hernias."
The abscess known as a "hernia of the throat" is typically large and may be more common in women.
And this abscess can occur in two ways: either naturally or accidentally.
And the naturally occurring type is not easily cured.
And the accidentally occurring type can occur in two ways: either resembling fatty nodes or resembling an abscess that is caused by a blocked artery, and this latter case poses a significant risk of complications. And one should not be overly aggressive with surgical instruments in treating this condition unless it is very small. And you should probe and examine the abscess carefully. If it resembles fatty nodes and is not attached to any veins, then you can make an incision in it just as you would for other nodes, draining it of its contents and removing the outer skin and membrane. However, if it does not resemble fatty nodes or appears to be connected to a vein, then it must be thoroughly examined and treated with appropriate medical care until it heals completely.
Chapter 45.
On making incisions for various types of nodules.
There are many types of nodules, and I have already discussed all the different kinds in my previous classification.
And it is important for me to clarify the difference between a nodule and an abscess, in order to avoid confusion.
Therefore, I say that an abscess is characterized by heat, fever, and intense pain due to the buildup of pus. When the boil bursts and releases the excess fluid, the fever, pain, and inflammation subside.
But a nodule is not characterized by heat or fever, nor does it cause pain. It is simply a lump or swelling in the skin that may be present for various reasons, such as a benign growth or cyst.
And nodules are classified based on their color and appearance. They often start out small like a goose bump or pimple, and can be of various sizes. There are two main types of nodules: those that contain fatty tissue and moisture, and the color of which may vary, as I mentioned earlier in my classification.
Therefore, when you are treating a nodule, it is important to first remove any excess tissue and then examine the core of the growth using an instrument called an "intromes," which I will discuss in more detail later in this chapter.
And this is the method for examining abscesses and all types of nodules: you take this instrument, insert it into the wettest part of the growth or abscess, and rotate it slowly until you are sure that it has penetrated through the skin.
And then place your hand over the growth or abscess according to its size, and then carefully remove the instrument and examine the contents that have been released from it.
And if the excess moisture has been released and drained, regardless of its color, then you can make a shallow incision using the same method that I described for other types of abscesses.
And if there is no moisture found in the contents that were released from the instrument, then you can be certain that it was composed of fatty tissue.
And then dry the area using superficial incisions in the shape of a cross like this: And make the incisions as I have taught you, and then use retractors to hold back the skin surrounding the growth or abscess. Carefully remove any excess tissue from all sides of the area, and preserve the outer layer of skin if possible. Then carefully extract the contents of the growth or abscess along with the node itself.
But if the growth or abscess bursts during the procedure, it may not be possible to extract all of its contents, and this is a common occurrence. In such cases, you should carefully remove as much of the contents as possible, leaving behind no residual causes for concern.
Because if any part of the growth or abscess remains behind, it may return in the future, either slowly or more rapidly depending on its severity.
And if you notice that any small part of the growth or abscess remains after treatment, then apply some corrosive powder to the wound and strengthen it with a bandage. Place a cauterizing agent over the site of the wound, and treat the remaining area using other appropriate medical techniques until it has fully healed.
And if it is a large nodule, then you should suture the two lips of the incision and treat the area with cauterization until it heals completely.
But if there is no pulsation or a pulsation in the opposite direction, then you should apply a compress of 30% acetic acid and leave it on for two to three days until the wound has begun to heal and the boil has subsided. Then return to making incisions in any remaining parts of the nodule.
Chapter 46.
On the forms and shapes of instruments necessary for incisions and punctures.
The forms of instruments for making incisions and punctures are of three types: large, medium, and small.
The method of internal examination is as follows:
The method of performing a minor internal examination is as follows:
Use instruments made of iron, stone, or properly sharpened cutting edges to swiftly penetrate abscesses during internal examination.
These are the forms of surgical probes, and they are named "albered," with one type being called "berid."
And they come in three varieties, with one being large, another medium-sized, and the third small.
The shape of the large surgical probe is as follows:
The shape of the medium-sized surgical probe is as follows:
The shape of the small surgical probe is as follows:
It is appropriate that these probes be used for abscesses, discharges, and fistulous tracts, as well as swellings caused by bone infections or other reasons.
And they are round-tipped, thick, and strong, similar to large needles used for sewing sails, and they can be made of horn (ivory), wood, iron, or silver. However, the best ones are made of ivory horn.
And the probes made of black feathers are used to dilate and open up the entrance of fistulous tracts by reflecting light off their shiny surfaces into the concavity of the tract, thereby facilitating entry.
And they come in three varieties, with some being long, others medium-sized, and others short, depending on the size of the opening and constriction of the fistulous tract.
The shape of the large probe made of lead is as follows:
The shape of the medium-sized probe made of lead is as follows:
The shape of the small probe made of lead is as follows:
The forms of the probes called "onci" (meaning "ounce") come in many varieties, including some with a simple curve and three sizes: large, small, and medium.
And of these probes called "onci," some have handles, and they come in three varieties.
And of these probes called "onci," some have two curves, and they come in three varieties.
And some of these probes called "onci" have three curves and come in three varieties.
And all of these are necessary for their respective uses.
The shape of the small single-curve probe called "onci" is as follows:
The shape of the large probe with two curves called "unci" is as follows: The shape of the medium-sized probe with two curves called "unci" is as follows: The shape of the small probe with two curves called "unci" is as follows:
The shape of the large probe with three curves called "unci" is as follows:
The shape of the medium-sized probe with three curves called "unci" is as follows:
And these are the shapes of the scalpels used for cutting and scraping nodes and abscesses, and they come in three varieties: large, medium, and small.
The shape of the large surgical knife called "scapel" is as follows:
The shape of the medium-sized surgical knife called "scapel" is as follows:
Method of scalpel little:
The extremities of those wounds that are made by cutting should be sharp and the other extremities not sharp, and they should not be placed in such a way, but rather so that assistance is provided in the excision of nodes, and through them the patient may heal and find some relief through the drying out which occurs with the excoriation of the abscess.
And these are the forms of almagates (a type of plaster), and they come in three species: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
They are made of clay and have a similar shape to rays, with which they are made.
And it is in the pointed extremity (of the clay form) that there are hidden punctures made with a spatula, which reach both inside and outside, as you see.
The forms of spatulas, which are hidden among the said (clay) forms for the puncturing of abscesses and are not noticed by the patients, and they come in three species: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of them (spatulas):
The forms of cups (used for bloodletting) with which the flow of blood is cut off, and they come in three species: large, medium, and small; the forms of these are as follows:
They are made of clay, round in shape and somewhat elongated, and they are thin (or delicate).
And it is necessary that these species of cups be large, medium, and small in size, so that through them the flow of blood may be cut off quickly in times of need, and also when there is no other medicine available at first.
However, do not use these to cut off the flow of blood in any location on the body, and do so only in fleshy areas, such as the upper arms and thighs, and the forearms, breasts, stomach, and groin, and similar areas to those that are fleshy and warm.
And some times it is necessary to use other small instruments similar to this one, which are shaped like the tips of purses (or bags) according to this form; through which the blood is cut off when it is done through flebotomy (or phlebotomy), or for the incision of a vein or artery.
And some times they are made round according to this form:
Chapter 47.
On the care of the male breasts, which are similar to those of women.
Some times the breasts of some men become swollen due to an excess of fluid that accumulates during sleep, and similarly, the breasts of women can also become swollen and resemble abscesses or tumors.
And for those who suffer from this condition, it is necessary to make an incision in the form of a crescent moon along the line between points B and G (as shown in the diagram), and then excise all of the thickened tissue and apply a carminative medicine to the wound. Then, bring together the edges of the wound with sutures and continue to care for it until it has healed.
But if the breast sags downwards and becomes soft due to its size, as is common in women, then it should be cut along two lines on either side of the nipple, with two crescent-shaped incisions that fit together like a moon shape, as shown in the diagram. Then, excise the fatty tissue that lies between the two lips of the wound and remove any excess fluid. Apply the sutures and powders as necessary for the healing process until the wound is healed.
And if you are unable to complete the incision as necessary due to the patient's discomfort or excessive bleeding, then it is necessary to pack the wound with a piece of cloth soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it in place until the affected tissue has been dissolved and removed. Then, continue to care for the wound until it has healed.
Chapter 48.
On the puncturing of abscesses that cause itching in the lower parts (of the body).
These abscesses that cause itching in the lower parts are of the type known as scrofula (or scrofulous swellings), which have a hard consistency and are covered with a thick layer of skin.
And of those (abscesses) that contain moisture, it is necessary to make an incision in the shape of a crescent moon along the line between points G and B (as shown in the diagram). Once all of the pus has been evacuated from the abscess and the wound has been cleaned, then pack the wound with a piece of clean cloth and leave it in place for one day.
Then the cloth should be left in place and cared for with a suitable ointment until the wound has healed.
And if the abscess is of the type that forms in lymph nodes (or glands), or is a hard, chronic swelling (such as scrofula), then you should make an incision over it in the same way as described for scrofulous swellings.
But if the wound is extensive and affects areas of exposed flesh, then apply a hot iron (or cautery) as previously described.
Chapter 49.
Of the section of abscesses that occur in an artery or vein.
When an artery is ruptured and a clot has formed above it, many abscesses often occur, and the signs by which one can recognize that inflammation and abscess come from the artery or vein are: for when an abscess comes from an artery, it is elongated in the region of the body; and if you press the abscess with your fingers, you will feel a sound like stridor.
And one that comes from a vein is round and visible on the surface of the body.
Incision on this abscess is dangerous, especially in areas such as the armpits, groin, neck, and other parts of the body; and if it is large, then surgical treatment should be avoided. Similarly, incisions near the extremities or the head should be avoided.
But for one that is located deep in the body due to inflammation of the orifice of an artery, make an incision in the clot along its length; then separate the incision with forceps and move aside the artery, and deliver it from the surrounding tissue so that it is exposed.
Then place a needle over the incision and insert it into the other layer (of tissue), and tie off the artery with double-strength thread in two places, which causes hemostasis (stopping of bleeding) during the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
Then place your finger on the location between two ligaments and apply warm salve to it until all of the blood in it is resolved and the abscess disappears.
Then administer treatment to the area where pus is generated between the ligaments, and apply appropriate ointments until it heals.
And if the abscess is due to rupture of a vein, then you should hold the clot with your hand as close to the abscess as possible, and insert the needle below the area where you have placed your hand, and push it in. The needle should be double-threaded so that you can extract the contents from the other layer. Then tie off the abscess using a strong ligament in two parts with both ends of the thread, as I have told you before.
But if you are afraid that the thread will be pulled out, then insert the suture along with the needle below the entire abscess, and tighten the sutures in four places along the incision made by the first needle.
Then drain the abscess in the middle of it until what is inside comes out, and then make an incision in the excess clot and leave what remains attached.
Then place over it a poultice that you have soaked in wine and oil, and apply the treatment consisting of warm compresses and ointments until it is healed.
Chapter 1: Abscess caused by nerve twisting.
Just as abscesses occur in arteries and veins, so too do they occur in nerves when there is a blow or excessive pressure, and similarly.
And it is most commonly found in the joints of the limbs or feet, or any location where the joints are poorly aligned.
And it is a serious abscess, with a color similar to that of other parts of the body, and it is located in the most prominent areas of the body, and when it becomes tight with force, the patient appears to be in a state of stupor.
And it is not an abscess that forms in the region of the body, but rather beneath the skin, and it extends equally in all directions and does not move forward or backward.
Therefore, for those that are located in the joints, it is not advisable to be treated with incisions, because a contracture will easily develop.
But for those that are located on the head or forehead, make an incision in the skin with a scalpel. But if it is a small abscess, then use forceps to remove it by cutting with scissors.
But if it is large, then use hooks to lift and remove the abscess, and then stitch the wound closed and apply appropriate medical treatment until it heals.
Chapter IV.
Chapter IV: Abscesses caused by inflammation of the abdomen or intestines.
It often happens that humans have many abscesses in their bellies and other parts of the body, which are called fungal-like due to their similarity with mushrooms, whose root is thin but the head is large, and the lips of these abscesses are turned inward, they are small or very enlarged.
And I have seen one where there were two parts in the belly that resembled mushrooms, and there was no difference between them in color or size.
And the lips of these abscesses were turned inward and split open, and a constant flow of moisture came from them.
Therefore I incised those and found in one of them pus weighing eighteen ounces. And the other one weighed five ounces.
And the operation during incision should be that you consider whether the patient is humid and their complexion is white, moist, and of subtle veins. If so, then you should make a wide incision with a scalpel, and have cauteries in the fire nearby because many times the wound will expel much blood, and if it does, cauterize it.
And if you see that the patient is weak and fearful, then be cautious of incision with a scalpel, but instead use fresh lead filings, strengthen it with this material in the manner we described earlier, and leave it for two days.
And then secure it with a strip of lead, and make sure to tighten the large bandage on the affected area until it is cut off and falls away by itself without any effort.
But if the abscess is of thick veins, then there is some cause for fear and concern during incision, especially if it is located in the belly.
But it is possible that you can incise the entirety of it, and then cauterize it to prevent its return.
And then take care of it until the wound heals.
And be careful not to presume to incise a tumor that is of dark color, with little sensation and hard texture, for it may be cancerous.
And I will come back with a reminder about cancer later.
Chapter II.
Chapter II: On the treatment of navel prominence (umbilical hernia).
A prominence of the navel can be caused by many factors, such as a tear in the diaphragm that is above the belly, and part of its membrane or bowel protrudes through it, just like with other ruptures; or due to blood that flows from a vein or artery, as mentioned earlier; or due to trapped wind in the intestines.
But if it is due to a tear in the diaphragm and protrusion of the membrane or bowel, then the abscess will be similar in color to the surrounding skin, and it will not be painful; however, its appearance can vary. If it is due to protrusion of the bowel, then its appearance will vary more significantly from what was previously described, and when you press on it with your fingers, it disappears and returns easily; however, it can also become much larger in warm baths and with significant exertion.
But if it is due to moisture, then it will not be painful and will not disappear when you press on it with your hand. It will also not be constricted or hardened.
If it is due to blood, then the abscess will have these signs: darkening in color.
But if it is due to cartilage or gristle, then the abscess will be severe, large and hard, and its size will depend on the amount of cartilage present.
But if it is due to trapped wind or gas, then touching it will not cause pain.
And the operation for this condition involves determining whether the navel prominence is due to blood from an artery or vein, or trapped wind. If so, then you must refrain from treating it, as there is a risk of causing further harm, just as I have taught in the chapter on abscesses caused by arteries and veins.
And if the prominence of the umbilicus is due to the intestines or the skin, it is necessary to instruct the patient to tighten their abdominal muscles and stand upright; then gently press around the entire umbilicus, and command them to lie down between your hands with their hips on your lap, and then circle around the umbilicus with a spatula at the marked spot; then extend the swelling to the parts above using a large probe; and then bind it in the circumference with strong ligatures or ceda and in a proper manner.
And then introduce the middle of the abscess over the ligament and insert your finger into it to search for the intestine; and if you have found and protected it through the ligament, then you extract gently and push the intestines back inside the abdomen.
And if you have found the skin, then grasp it with a probe and incise the excess portion of it.
But if it is contrary to an artery or vein, then surround that area and return to your operation; and take two needles and put strong sutures on them and insert those two needles in the circuit that you have made around the abscess like a cross, and then press the abscess onto the needles in four parts.
And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the area open so that the flesh can spread out and fall by itself; or cut what has become thin and is possible to cut, and then treat it with the appropriate ointments until it heals.
And if the prominence of the umbilicus is due to flesh or moisture, then it is necessary for you to lance the abscess as we have said and drain the blood or moisture that you find in it, and then treat it with appropriate remedies that will solidify the area.
Chapter 53.
"On the treatment of cancer"
As we have said in the division, on the type of cancer and in what manner it can be treated with medicine, and that it is advisable to treat it with surgery rather than allowing it to ulcerate; and we have said that cancer arises from negligence in its care.
The ancients said that some types of cancer can be eradicated from the place where it is located, such as cancer in areas where it is possible to remove all of it, such as breast cancer or cancer in the thigh, and similarly in other locations on the body; and this is most effective when it is started small.
But when it is advanced and large, one should not attempt to treat it, because I have not been able to cure such a case nor have I seen anyone else do so, nor has there been any success in this regard.
And the operation for it (cancer) when it is located as we have said, is that you proceed and let the patient take some purgatives to cleanse black bile, and then bleed them if a manifest plethora is found.
And then, prepare the patient for the operation with preparation that includes location for the operation, and also provide them with pointed instruments that are necessary for it; and also make sure that the wound is completely hollowed out, leaving no cause of its roots. And let the blood flow, and do not cut it lightly, and press on the areas and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument that is within your reach.
But if you encounter thick blood flow due to injury of a vein or artery, then cauterize it in order to stop the bleeding and then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
"Chapter 54"
"On the treatment of hydropsy"
We have already recommended, in the division, the different types of hydropsy and their symptoms, as well as the treatment of each type with medicine.
And the type of hydropsy that can be cured with surgery is only the variety of ascites alone, and it should not be attempted to operate on the varieties of tympanites or hypochondria, as this would be fatal.
And when you have treated this type of hydropsy timpanites with medicine and do not see improvement in the patient's condition, then consider that if the patient is already weakened by the disease or has another form of dropsy elsewhere in the body, such as cough or abdominal pain, then be cautious and do not treat them with surgery, for there is danger in doing so.
But if you see the patient with abundant vitality, and they have no other illness but dropsy alone, and not infant or elderly, then the method of operating on them is as follows: you lift the patient between your arms, and administer to them an enema to their belly with their hand, milk the water downwards past the navel, and then take a sponge full of:
a sponge that is long on two sides, with a sharp point like a spatula; but make sure it is of moderate length, little by little, so that in the operation with this you do not penetrate into the intestine, and only touch it.
And then consider if the dropsy is caused by an issue with the intestines, because in that case you must make the incision at a distance of three fingers below the navel on the right side of the body.[](https://www.definitions.net/definition/pentenilh)
But if the dropsy is caused by a liver illness, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel at a distance of three fingers.
And if the dropsy is caused by a spleen illness, then your incision should be on the right side.
It is not necessary for your incision to be on the side where the patient wants to lie, because this could cause excess fluids to accumulate in that area.
Then perforate the entire intestine with your instrument and enter that incision, and lift your hand with the spatula between the intestine and the mesentery, and extract it; if it is the quantity of a fingernail or about so.
Then perforate the mesentery until the spatula reaches the empty space, which is where the water is. Then extract that and insert an instrument of this shape: and it resembles a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or copper or iron, with a small hole at the lower end and three holes on both sides; two of them on one side and one on the other side; and its tip is sharpened like a feather, as you see. [[](https://www.definitions.net/definition/argent)](https://www.definitions.net/definition/eram)
And on the upper end of it is a valve, because when the instrument reaches the water, then that valve opens immediately and allows the water to flow out in half the quantity, because if you extract more than necessary at once, this could cause the patient's animal spirit to dissolve or lead to death.
But extract according to the patient's vitality and according to what their physical condition, pulse, and overall health indicate to you.
Then extract the instrument and retain the water that is causing this because it is immediately retained by the intestine, which blocks the hole on the mesentery; I remind you to perforate it in that manner.
Then insert the instrument again on the following day if you see that the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small amount of water, doing this for several days with caution, and be careful not to leave any water in there, but only a little.
But if you are concerned about the patient's health and leave a large amount of water, then treat them with burial in hot sand and fomentation with steam in a bath, and expose them to the sun for a long time; and treat them with drying medications until they are healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, liver, and spleen during the water extraction process, as I have mentioned earlier in what has been previously written.
Chapter 59.
On the treatment of children who are born with unperforated urinary tracts.
Sometimes some of the children are born from their mother's womb and the head of their genitalia is not perforated (or the hole is narrow or not in its proper place). [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/genitalia) [[](https://www.definitions.net/definition/loc)](https://www.definitions.net/definition/perforated)
Therefore, it is necessary to cut and perforate the genitalia immediately after birth with a very thin spatula in this manner:
And then insert a slender nail of lead into the hole and tie it in place, leaving it there for three or four days.
And when they feel the need to urinate, remove the nail. Then replace it once they have finished urinating and leave it in place again.
And if you do not insert the lead nail, it is possible that the urine will flow out of the hole and miss the nail.
But for those with a narrow hole, insert a lead nail as mentioned earlier for several days until it becomes larger.
But for those with the hole in the wrong place, there is this condition because in such cases, the hole is at the end of the penis and they cannot urinate downwards, but instead must raise their penis with their hand to direct the urine upwards. This problem is not present at birth, but occurs later when semen can no longer reach the mother due to this malformation, which is a serious issue.
The method of the operation for this condition is as follows: have the patient lie on their back, then extend the head of their penis with your left hand using strong force. Then use a sharp spatula to incise the head of the penis at the location of the prepuce, making an incision that resembles a feather quill or a sharp edge. The goal is to create a new hole in the correct location so that it aligns with the original hole as necessary.
Be careful not to cut into the blood vessels during your operation as this can easily happen and cause bleeding. Use a tool that cuts the blood vessels and apply it to the wound until it stops bleeding. Take care of the wound until it heals.
Chapter 65.
Of albugo, which occurs in the prepuce of the penis, and the corruption, darkness, and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Often, this condition of albugo appears as an excess of fleshy growth on the penis and is considered a serious issue. This excess flesh can make it difficult for the individual to urinate or engage in sexual activity. In some cases, it may also lead to infection or other complications if left untreated. [[](https://www.definitions.net/definition/penis)](https://www.definitions.net/definition/excess)[[](https://www.definitions.net/definition/fleshy)](https://www.definitions.net/definition/growth)
And of these, one type is malignant and the other is non-malignant. Malignant cases are characterized by rapid growth and spread of the albugo beyond the prepuce and into the surrounding tissues. In severe cases, it may even invade the bloodstream and metastasize to distant organs such as the lungs or liver. Non-malignant cases, on the other hand, tend to grow more slowly and are generally confined to the prepuce. They may cause discomfort or difficulty urinating but do not pose a serious threat to health unless left untreated.
For non-malignant cases, it is necessary to use fine hooks to remove the albugo and clean the area thoroughly. Then place a piece of cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment on the wound, followed by treatment with deficient ointment until healed.
But if the albugo is malignant and has a dark color, then it is necessary to apply cautery to the incision and remove the entire growth. This procedure will require skill and experience to avoid damaging surrounding tissue or causing excessive bleeding. It is important to follow proper aftercare instructions to prevent infection and promote healing.
But if the albugo is in the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis and one part of it is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, then it is necessary to remove the albugo that is inside at the beginning until it becomes solidified. After that, you can treat the exterior part because if you treat both parts together with the foreskin, there is no guarantee that it will not be injured.
And if you see blackness or corruption in the genitalia and foreskin, then it is necessary to remove all that has become discolored and will soon rot or is already rotten. Afterwards, apply a poultice made from honey combined with flour of millet and sieved crushed ivy leaves. This treatment can help cleanse the affected area and promote healing.
And then cure the remaining condition with further treatment until it is healed.
But if there is blood flow, then apply lunar cautery in this manner:
The reason why lunar cautery is used in two ways at the same time is because it can treat both bleeding and corrupt wounds simultaneously. This type of cautery uses a round shape with smooth edges and is typically made from silver or gold. It can be heated until it is red hot and then used to seal the wound and prevent further blood loss, as well as kill any bacteria present in the area and promote healing.
If the head of the penis is corroded and destroyed at the time, then it is necessary to insert a lead cannula into the meat of the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it.
In the case of adhesion between the foreskin and the head of the penis (and this type of adhesion does not occur unless the foreskin is healthy and circumcision has not been performed; but rather, it occurs due to injury or abscess), then it is necessary to scrape with a blunt spatula until the ligaments are dissolved and the head of the penis is released from all sides.
If it is difficult to carefully separate the adhesions, then it is necessary to scrape both the head of the penis and the foreskin with a spatula, as this type of scraping can easily penetrate through the thin skin of the foreskin.
And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a fine thread that has been soaked in water to prevent further adhesion.
And let it be treated with styptic agents so that it becomes solid. (Styptic agents are substances that can help stop bleeding by causing blood vessels to contract and promoting clotting.)
Chapter 57. (The Roman numeral LVII corresponds to the number 57 in modern Arabic numerals.)
On the cleansing of infants and the treatment of what occurs as a result of circumcision. (This chapter likely discusses the care of newborn boys after they have undergone religious circumcision, which was a common practice in medieval Europe.)
Circumcision is not a solution to injury in the same way as other wounds: but because it is part of our operation and our will, and the foreskin belongs properly to children, it is necessary that we assign the best and easiest method for healing without causing harm. (This suggests that the author views circumcision as a deliberate action with potential risks, and therefore recommends taking extra care in performing and treating the wound.)
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision on any of their free men, because it was not used in their laws. And this is only because we have found through experience that the majority of barbers and surgeons use circumcision with a scalpel and hot iron; and they also use cauterization with bile and incisions with a nail. (This passage suggests that circumcision was not a universal practice in ancient cultures, but rather an intervention adopted by certain medical professionals in medieval Europe.)
And I have already rejected all these methods and have not found better cleansing with forceps, or cauterization with bile as in the method with a nail, because often the foreskin avoids being cut completely, because the foreskin has two layers, and only one layer is removed, leaving the other layer intact, which easily leads to another incision and sure pain. (This passage suggests that the author has tried various methods of circumcision and found them lacking in effectiveness or safety.) And the cleansing performed by an alphecat, which is digital, and used by shoemakers, is not safe for incising the tip of the male member, because it easily enters the hole and may cause injury. (This passage suggests that the author views a particular method of circumcision as risky or ineffective.)
But in the operation with a nail, it is very easy to injure and corrupt your operation. (This passage suggests that using a nail for circumcision can be harmful or lead to complications.) And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and many times it happens in such a way that there is no need for cleansing, and I have seen this myself. (This passage suggests that circumcision may not be necessary or beneficial for all children, as some may naturally have short enough foreskins that do not require surgical intervention.)
But I have found through experience that the cleansing performed with forceps and cauterization with bile is better, because the forceps allow for precise incisions, as the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below. And so when you press your hand proportionately, you make an incision according to a ratio in a set amount of time; and compression of the bile is performed using a figure that encloses the foreskin completely, with which no error can occur. (This passage suggests that the author prefers a particular method of circumcision because it allows for more precise incisions and reduces the risk of complications.)
And the method of the first operation is that you place the child in a comfortable position if he is small, and only apply bile to his foreskin, allowing it to remain there for another day. (This passage suggests that the author recommends a gentle and gradual approach to circumcision, particularly for younger children.)
And do everything possible to comfort and reassure the child during the procedure, so that he is calm and receptive to what is happening. (This passage suggests that the author values the emotional well-being of the child undergoing circumcision, and recommends taking steps to reduce anxiety and fear.) And also ensure that the child is held securely and calmly by your assistants, without any distractions, and hide the forceps or other instruments from his view. (This passage suggests that the author recommends taking steps to minimize the child's exposure to stressful or frightening stimuli during the procedure.)
And also place your hand on the child's foreskin and gently blow on it to relax and dilate the skin, then use your forceps to carefully remove any debris or dirt that has accumulated there. (This passage suggests that the author recommends taking a gentle and careful approach to cleansing the foreskin, in order to minimize discomfort or injury.) [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s1qS\_U0Q2lE](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s1qS_U0Q2lE)
The shape of the forceps used in this cleansing procedure is as follows: (This passage likely includes a diagram or illustration of the recommended forceps shape and size.)
The ends of the forceps should be blunt and the other ends should be sharp, so that the tips do not protrude beyond the claws. The length of both cutting edges should be equal to the length of the two handles. (This passage describes the recommended shape and size of the forceps used in this cleansing procedure.)
But the risk in this cleansing procedure is that it is easy for the foreskin to avoid being completely cut or for only a portion of it to be cut during the incision. (This passage highlights the potential risks and challenges associated with performing a cleansing procedure using forceps.)
Therefore, it is necessary for you to stretch the foreskin outwards with your fingernail before making the incision, and then make the incision evenly according to the proper ratio or proportion. (This passage emphasizes the importance of careful preparation and precise technique in performing a cleansing procedure using forceps.)
And if you are unable to stretch the foreskin outwards with your fingernail, then use a hook or forceps to pull it taut and make the incision. (This passage provides an alternative technique for preparing the foreskin before making the incision during a cleansing procedure.)
But if three days have passed and there is still swelling or inflammation under the foreskin, then you should wait until the swelling has subsided and gently remove any excess skin before making the incision according to your prepared plan. (This passage suggests that it may be necessary to delay the cleansing procedure if there is evidence of infection or other complications.)
And be careful not to injure the head of the penis during the procedure, as this can lead to further complications. (This passage emphasizes the importance of avoiding injury to sensitive areas during the cleansing procedure.)
And therefore, care for the wound with the powders that we recommended in the treatise on powders, in order to promote healing and prevent infection. (This passage suggests that the author may have written other texts or treatises on medical topics, and recommends using specific powders as part of the post-procedure care.)
And if too much foreskin is removed and it extends beyond the incision site, this should not be of concern. (This passage suggests that there may be some variation in the amount of skin removed during the cleansing procedure, and that this is not necessarily problematic.)
And continue to care for the wound according to our instructions until it has fully healed. (This passage emphasizes the importance of post-procedure care and follow-up treatment to ensure proper healing.)
Chapter 58. (This marks the beginning of a new chapter or section in the medical text.)
On the treatment of urinary retention in the bladder. (This chapter likely discusses various methods for treating bladder problems, including difficulties with urination or incontinence.)
Urinary retention in the bladder can be caused by obstruction due to a stone or congealed blood, or by pus or flesh, and is similar to what we have described in our discussion of treatment methods. (This passage suggests that urinary retention may be related to other medical conditions or factors, such as kidney stones or infections.) [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s1qS\_U0Q2lE](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s1qS_U0Q2lE)
And if the cause has not been dissolved with what we have mentioned earlier and it has become more severe for the patient, then it is necessary to administer a procedure using an instrument called a syringe, which looks like this: It should be made of silver and be delicate and concave, similar to a bird's quill with the slenderness of a long ray of palm and a half in length, and have a thin cannula at its head.
The method of extracting urine with the syringe is to take some gall liquid and bind it with wool or cotton at its extremity, and then insert the ends of the gall into the lower part of the syringe. Use forceps to remove any excess wool that may be in the way, but gently insert it into the cannula with force. Then slowly push the syringe in with a rod and albumen of egg white.
And apply a blistering agent to the patient on the shin, prick the bladder and penis with oils that are wet, olive oil, and water.
Then gently insert the syringe until it reaches the root of the penis; then bend the penis upwards towards the bladder; and then push the syringe further in; and then press the area until the urine flows into the empty causeway, and this should be done in order. But if not, then it will go in a twisted way.
And slowly extract the gall with wool little by little, because the urine soaks the wool.
Then remove it and use the syringe to cure the urine, do not stop doing this with a syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relief.
Chapter 59.
Regarding the quality of bladder irrigation with a clamp and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose, it is important to choose the right tools and techniques to ensure effective and safe irrigation of the bladder. The clamp should be made of sturdy, rust-resistant material such as stainless steel or titanium, and should have smooth jaws to prevent damage to the urethra or bladder tissue.
When there is an ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or blood clots have formed in it, or it has become obstructed by a stone, and you want to introduce water and medicines into it, then this should be done with an instrument called a "clampcedra," which looks like this:
Instead, at the end of it, it is closed or obstructed. This phrase suggests that there may be an obstruction in the urethra preventing the flow of urine or irrigating solution. It emphasizes the importance of carefully checking for any blockages before attempting bladder irrigation with a clampcedra or other instrument. If an obstruction is found, it may need to be removed or bypassed before proceedon can continue. And in it there are three holes: two on one side, like this (X). This phrase refers to the design of the clampcedra instrument, which typically has three openings or ports. Two of these holes are located on the same side of the cannula and are used for introducing water or medicine into the bladder. The third hole is located on the opposite side of the cannula and serves as an exit port for urine or other fluids that may be present in the bladder.
In the beginning, it is concave in shape, which is what is inserted, and this is done according to the amount that is necessary. Until when any cause is pulled with humidity, it is pulled out, and when it is expelled, it is pulled out again, and when it is expelled long, like a clampcedra used for pouring naphtha in naval battles.
Therefore, if you wish to introduce fluid into the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the fluid and pull it upwards with the bulb, as the fluid will be drawn into the concavity of the clampcedra. This passage describes the process of using the clampcedra instrument to introduce water or medicine into the bladder through one of the two openings on the side of the cannula.
And then insert the end of the clampcedra into the penis as we have recommended with the syringe; and push the fluid with what you are pushing, so that the fluid reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient feels it. This passage describes how to use the clampcedra instrument to introduce water or medicine directly into the bladder through the urethra.
The form of the subtle catheter with which the bladder is irrigated, and this is its shape: This passage describes the design and function of a type of medical instrument called a "subtle catheter," which is used for bladder irrigation. The phrase "la vesica es cristerizada" can be translated as "the bladder is irrigated," indicating that this procedure involves introducing water or medicine into the bladder through the urethra.
And it should be made of silver or lead, in which the head is most similar to a small feather, and the cannula inside it gently. This passage provides more information about the design of the subtle catheter used for bladder irrigation. It specifies that the instrument can be made of either silver or lead, both of which are durable materials that can withstand repeated use without breaking or wearing down.
And then you take the bladder by force and place in it the fluid that you want to irrigate in the bladder, and then you tie it tightly with two strong ligatures of double gall, and you heat the fluid over the fire. This passage describes the steps for preparing a solution to be used for bladder irrigation using the subtle catheter.
And then insert the end of the irrigator into the penis. This phrase suggests that once the solution has been prepared, the physician would then use the subtle catheter to introduce it into the bladder through the urethra. The phrase "entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua" can be translated as "insert the end of the irrigator into the penis," emphasizing the need for careful and controlled insertion of the catheter. By following this step-by-step guide, physicians could ensure that their patients received safe and effective bladder irrigation, even in cases where the bladder was obstructed or otherwise difficult to access.
And then you press firmly with your hand on the bladder with the fluid, with gentle pressure until the patient feels that the fluid has reached the bladder. This phrase suggests that after inserting the subtle catheter into the urethra and introducing the solution into the bladder, the physician would then use their hand to apply gentle pressure on the abdomen, just above the pubic bone. The phrase "estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat" means "press firmly with your hand on the bladder with the fluid," emphasizing the need for careful and controlled application of pressure.
But if the bladder is not present, then you take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; and perforate it completely with its roundness; and then insert strong gall into those holes, so that they are turned inside out; and then add the circle as if it were a funnel, so that it is attached securely, since you place in it what you want from liquids, oils, and waters. This passage describes an alternative method for introducing fluids into the bladder when direct access to the organ is not possible.
And you should tie that one in the instrument and do the same as you did with the bladder, and express with your hand so that the humidity reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
On the extraction of stones (or calculi).
We have already said in the division the types of stones and their cures with medications, and the difference between a stone generated in the kidneys and one generated in the bladder, as well as its symptoms.
And we have said that a stone can be operated on with the hand and cut out.
And a stone generated in the bladder properly speaking is one that is located in the bladder.
And I will now narrate this with clear exposition and brevity.
Therefore I say that a stone generated in the bladder is most commonly found in children; and its symptoms include urine that resembles water in its subtlety and appears cloudy, with sand or sediment present; and the patient experiences pain when passing urine, with frequent urgency and straining; and there may also be redness and swelling around the anus.
And the healing of children with this is usually achieved before they reach 14 years old; and it is a difficult cure for the elderly. But in young adults it is easier because it occurs between them.
And in cases where the stone is larger and its cure is more difficult; and if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, as we begin the cure for that, it is necessary to cleanse the patient with a clyster, which will extract all the folds that are in their intestines; for those folds sometimes prevent the formation of stones due to the investigation of them.
Then the patient should be positioned with their feet raised and turned on their side, so that the stone may descend to the bottom of the bladder or exit its current location.
Then perform the cautery between your fingers, prepared and positioned as follows: let the patient's buttocks be clear of any obstacles, and ensure that the bladder is completely emptied by having them urinate before beginning the procedure.
Then locate and remove the stone entirely from outside the body.
Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then you should quickly cut into it with a sharp instrument.
And if you have not completely extracted the stone with your incision, then it is necessary to apply oil from your left index finger (if the patient is a child) or your middle finger (if the patient is an adult) to the tip of your right index finger, and insert that finger into the patient's rectum. Then continue to search for the stone until it is completely below your finger. And gradually move the stone upwards towards the neck of the bladder.
Then apply pressure with your finger to the stone and push it outwards through the incision you made.
And instruct the assistant to press on the bladder with their hand, and instruct another assistant to extend the patient's legs upwards with their right hand, while using their left hand to support the lower back below the genitals, in the area near where the incision is being made.
Then insert a spatula with a sharp edge that is shaped like this: and make an incision in the area between the buttocks and the genitals, not too close to the anus but rather towards the left thigh; position the incision over the stone, with your finger inside the rectum and making a transverse cut so that the incision on the outside is wider than on the inside, as much as possible without causing excessive pressure on the surrounding tissue. This will allow you to extract the stone more easily while minimizing risk of injury or complications.
And know that some stones have sharp angles or edges, which can make their expulsion difficult.
And some stones are similar in shape to a lion's claw, round and smooth, making their expulsion relatively easy.
And if it is one with sharp angles or edges, adjust to fit in the fissure.
And if it is not easily expelled, then you should apply pressure to it or pull on it with a gentle tug, using an instrument with a curved tip that is similar to a file and that can be moved back and forth over the stone without causing damage. Alternatively, you could insert a thin, curved instrument beneath the stone to lift it out.
But if you are unable to do so, then widen the incision slightly and, if you see a flow of blood, cut it away with a three-times heated vitriol.
But if the stone is larger than one, then at the beginning you should push your hand into the bladder and make an incision over it, and similarly push a little further in for each additional stone, making an incision over each one as needed.
And if the stone is very large, then it is important to note that making a large incision can lead to two potential negative outcomes: either the patient will experience significant bleeding or they will develop chronic urinary leakage due to incomplete healing of the bladder wall.
But if the stone is large, then you should attempt to extract it whole before making any incisions, or use forceps to break it up into smaller pieces that can be removed more easily.
And once you have completed your procedure, then fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood sap, and apply strength to it. And place a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil and water, over it, in order to prevent infection and promote healing.
And then have the patient lie on their back with their hips elevated, and do not remove the bandages for at least three days.
And when the area is laid open, irrigate the wound with water and a little oil, and then cure it with bergamot oil and dziban oil until it is healed.
But if pus forms in the wound and it becomes inflamed and corroded, appearing as if the blood is congealed in the bladder, causing urine retention (which can be recognized by the presence of blood in the urine), then introduce your finger into the wound and remove the clotted blood. This must be done because if it remains, it may cause corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and apply the appropriate dressing for the healing process until it is healed.
And during the entire healing process, you should keep the patient's thighs bound and adjust the medications that have been applied to the wound.
And if the stone is small and located in the meat of the penis, and has become impacted there, causing urine retention, then cure it with what I recommended earlier before you reach for the knife. This is because many are accused of castration through this type of healing process; and this is proven, and it is that you should take an awl-shaped iron instrument, which has this form:
with a triangular extremity, sharp, inserted in a handle.
Then take bile and tie it to the penis below the stone, so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the instrument into the penis, penetrating with ease until it reaches the stone. And rotate the awl with your hand in the stone little by little, gradually enlarging the hole until it allows for the passage of the other part; for urine flow will be restored immediately.
Then press your hand on what remains of the stone from the outside of the penis, for it is trapped and expelled with the urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this healing process is not feasible for some reason that prevents it, then tie a bile to the area below the stone and another one above it. Then apply a ligature around the penis on both sides of the stone. And then remove it. Then undo the ligature and clean the coagulated blood in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie the bile below the stone, but only so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligature above it should be removed when the bile is untied, because when the bile is released, the kidney returns to its place and heals the wound.
And so it is necessary when you tie the bile above, that you lift the kidney to the upper parts or make sure it returns to its place and heals the wound as we have said.
Chapter 61.
On the removal of bladder stones in women.
Bladder stones are rarely generated in women.
But if a stone is detected in any of them, then the healing process is difficult and forbidden in many ways.
One of the reasons is that women are easily frightened.
And the second reason is that it is difficult to find a skillful woman who can determine whether she is chaste or married when she exposes herself to the doctor.
The third reason is that it is difficult to find a skillful woman who knows this art, especially the surgical procedure with hand.
The fourth reason is that the location of the incision over the stone in women is far from the location of the stone itself, which requires a deep incision and creates fear.
But if necessity compels you to do so, then it is advisable to find a knowledgeable and experienced woman, but they are rare.
But if you do not have access to such a woman, then seek out a wise and clever midwife, or present a mature woman who is experienced in the matters of women, or a woman who has some experience in this art.
Therefore, make the presentation and order her to do everything that you command, starting with the examination of the stone, which will help determine whether the woman is a virgin or not. If she is a virgin, then she must insert her finger into the anus and search for the stone.
Therefore, if she finds it, then compress it with her finger and order her to make an incision above the stone.
But if she is not a virgin, then order the midwife to insert her finger into the woman's vagina and search for the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder and applying gentle pressure.
Therefore, if she finds it, then gradually move the stone from the urethra to the lower parts towards the buttocks with the help of her skill and strength until it reaches the area between the thighs.
And then make an incision at the tip of the labia majora near the area between the thighs where it is easily accessible and centered on the stone, ensuring that the mouth of the incision is not obstructed by the stone.
And make the incision small at first, and then insert the scalpel into the incision and if you feel the stone, adjust the depth of the incision according to the size of the stone that you know will be expelled through it.
And know that the types of stones are many: some are small and large, hard and rough, long and round, and have projections.
Therefore you will know how many types there are of it by what you signify about it regarding what you want.
And if you want to stop bleeding, apply a mixture of three parts vinegar and one part copper sulfate to the area for an hour until the bleeding stops, and then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
And make sure that you prepare the same instruments as those mentioned in the removal of stones in men, so that you are assisted by them in your operation.
And if you see bleeding and know that the expulsion of blood is due to an artery being cut, then put powder on the area and tighten it with a compress and binding material, but do not repeat this; and leave the stone alone and do not extract it, because the patient will soon die. And then heal the wound.
When the intensity of the bleeding has subsided after several days, and the wound begins to dry, then you may return to your operation once the stone is expelled.
Chapter 62. (This is a guess based on the format commonly used in medieval manuscripts where each chapter or section was numbered)
On the section concerning inguinal hernia. (In this context, "ernia acoza" refers to an inguinal hernia)
An inguinal hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white region below the abdomen, which protrudes through the opening in the groin containing the spermatic cord, and is called a "ciphac." (Note: "codena" refers to the spermatic cord)
Sometimes it is located in the actual scrotal tissue that nature has prepared in the region of the genitals during embryonic development, until it becomes distinct as a separate organ; and this is the spermatic cord within the white region we mentioned earlier, which is nothing but fat. (Note: "pannicol" refers to the scrotal tissue)
The formation of this hernia occurs due to weakness in the abdominal muscles, which causes this material to protrude, and sometimes it happens as a result of trauma or injury to the groin area. (Note: "debelitat" refers to weakness)
And this moisture can have different colors, as its color can vary from yellowish or reddish to purplish, black and slimy, or clear and watery, and these are the most common variations. (Note: "motas" means many)
And the signs that indicate where this accumulation of moisture is located are: if it is in the white region we mentioned earlier, then a swelling appears, roundish and slightly elongated, similar to an egg shape, and the genitals become visible, as the moisture affects them from all sides. (Note: "apostema" refers to a swelling)
And if the moisture is located in the actual scrotal tissue, then the swelling appears round with an egg-like shape, and therefore people often mistake it for another testicle.
And if the moisture is between the spermatic cord and the white region of the groin, then it can be felt by palpation. (Note: "catz" refers to feeling with hands)
And if you want to determine the color of the moisture, then press on the swelling with your fingers in a circular motion, following the shape of the circumference, and based on what comes out from the pressure, judge its nature and composition. (Note: "entromes" refers to fingertips) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
Therefore, when we come to treating it with iron (referring to surgical instruments), then it is advisable to instruct the patient to undergo venesection (bloodletting) if possible, and sometimes empty their bowels as well. (Note: "ferr" refers to surgical instruments, "fleubotomat" refers to bloodletting, "cos" refers to bowels)
Then have the patient lie on their back with their hips raised slightly for some reason, and place a piece of cloth underneath them. (Note: "resupinat" refers to lying on back, "auta" means high)
Then position yourself on the patient's left side and instruct the assistant to follow their right side, extending one of the two rods (referring to surgical instruments) to the spermatic cord of the genitals and the region of the navel (mirac) of the abdomen. (Note: "vergua" refers to a rod or stick) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
Then take a broad spatula and split open the spermatic cord in the middle of the groin along its length, close to the pubic bone (penitenilh). (Note: "spatum lat" refers to a broad spatula)
Then make the incision in a straight line following the correct procedure, keeping it parallel to the line that runs along the skin of the groin, until it reaches the white region (ciphac) and encompasses it. (Note: "rectetut" refers to correct procedure, "linha" means line, "pel" means skin) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
And dissect it (the hernia) carefully, observing and taking note of the details to avoid cutting it excessively. The incision should be made with precision, dividing it in two parts, and should be suspended with the testicle that is larger and more delicate, and then carefully examine it according to its size and extent as much as possible. (Note: "excorja" means dissect, "excoriacio" means incision) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
Then puncture the white region (ciphac) full of moisture with a wide incision, and extract all the water. (Note: "perfora" means puncture, "perforacio" means incision)
Then separate the two lips of the incision with forceps, and extend the white region (ciphac) upwards. Do not touch the spermatic cord that contains the testicles, and cut into the white region as much as possible. (Note: "uncis" means forceps, "partidas" means sides, "manieyra" means manner) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate. And cut into it (the white region) completely or partially, and preferably the thinner side, as if you do not examine the incision carefully, there is no guarantee that the water will not return. (Note: "pessas" means part, "latz subtil" means thin side) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
But if the testicle protrudes from outside of its cord during the operation, then after completing the incision of the white region (ciphac), return it inside the cord, and then stitch the two lips of the spermatic cord together with sutures, and care for it in the same way as other wounds, until it heals. (Note: "sutura" means sutures) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
And if you find the testicle corrupted by some other disease, then it is advisable to cut the vessels that are attached to the spermatic cord, extract the testicle, and care for it in the manner we have described. (Note: "atrobas" means find, "vayssels" means vessels) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
But if the water is accumulated in two separate locations, then you should know that there are two hernias. Therefore, cut into each location in the same manner as you did in the other one. And if it seems to you that it is a single operation, then perform it. (Note: "esemps" means example, "engualment" means equally) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
Then clean the blood away, and insert wool soaked in oil or rose oil into the incisions. Place another piece of wool that you have soaked in wine and oil outside on the two testicles and the navel region (mirac) of the abdomen. Place a folded cloth and powder over it, and bind it with linen as follows:
Then take two pieces of cloth and fill them with red wool in the following manner: make the ends tight with string or wet wool, and attach it to the drawstring of the underpants (braguier) in such a way that one end grasps the buttocks from inside the underwear, and the other end grasps the region between the legs. Place two ends on each thigh and two other ends on the hips, and adjust the entire string inside the drawstring of the underpants. (Note: "carmenada" means red, "braguier" means drawstring, "extrictura" means string) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of incision with iron. This is done by taking a sharp surgical knife and cutting into the spermatic cord (codena) of the genitals, and igniting it according to our instructions until the white region (ciphac) containing water is exposed. And then you should take cautery in the following manner: And it is shaped like the Greek letter Alpha (). The cautery used here is similar to the shape of the Greek letter Alpha (), which was commonly used in medieval medical texts to indicate the shape and use of cautery instruments. (Note: "asembat" means assembled) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
Then puncture with it (the cautery) the white region (ciphac), and ignite it until all the moisture is expelled. (Note: "perfora" means puncture)
Then use forceps to extend the white region (ciphac), and dissect it with forceps, and then dissect it further with a sharp cautery until you have removed all of it. And be careful not to burn the testicle with fire. (Note: "excorja" means dissect, "uncis" means forceps) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
And know that this operation is safer and less likely to cause bleeding than an incision with a knife, and it is better than an operation with cutting. (Note: "flux" means flow) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
But if you encounter an abscess or inflammation at the time of incision or cauterization, or bleeding, then you should treat the condition according to its nature with the appropriate treatment that is suitable for it. (Note: "apostema" means abscess, "contrarietat" means opposition) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
But if the patient is weak and does not hope for a second operation due to its horror, then administer puncture as we have recommended. This should be done when you are certain, based on the signs that we have mentioned, that the hernia contains water. (Note: "pauruc" means weak, "horribilitat" means horror) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
Then you should position the patient on an elevated chair or stool. After that, puncture the abscess (apostema) in its lowest part with a broad spatula (spatum lat), and leave the puncture open according to the length of the body. (Note: "cezelha" means chair, "sezer" means place, "partida pus bassa" means lowest part) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
And make the opening wide enough so that all the water can flow out. (Note: "apercio" means opening, "corro" means flows)
Then place a piece of cloth over the wound and bind it securely, leaving it open so that any remaining water can drain out. (Note: "coto" means cloth, "lia" means bind) Then care for the wound until it heals completely. (Note: "plagua" means wound)
But if there is resistance to the expulsion of water during puncture, then it may be due to the swelling of the scrotal tissue (pannicol blanc) in the wound, which prevents the water from flowing out. In this case, you should insert a probe or instrument used for extracting water from hydrocele into the wound, and follow the procedure as described earlier; or apply pressure on the opposite side of the wound to expel the water. (Note: "egrecio" means expulsion, "orrifici" means opening, "pena" means probe) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
And know that the water recedes, and returns every two months or so in some people; and when it has returned, then let it be punctured in that manner, for the patient will thus spend their days (i.e. experience a remission of symptoms).
Chapter 63.
On the sectioning of a fleshly hernia and its cure.
Know that in the sectioning of this hernia, there is fear of mortal danger in the majority of cases; therefore, I recommend leaving it alone and seeking a safer alternative for healing.
And I remember the operation on that hernia and the types of abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses are formed in those parts where the genitals are located, and this occurs for many reasons: either due to acute sharp superfluity, which is diffused into the genitals, or due to trauma.
And the color of the abscess corresponds to the color of the body part, and it is not found in a painful area, and this indicates a severe abscess.
And a mild abscess is one that is bluish-black in color, which does not cause pain.
And sometimes abscesses are caused by hardening of the arteries and inflation of those same ones, which is noticeable due to a previous injury, or by inflation of veins.
And that which is caused by inflation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when it is compressed with the fingers, and it is not advisable to touch it.
But that which is caused by inflation of veins is not dispersed by any means due to compression with the fingers.
And it is possible to perform a section of this type on other flesh, and the procedure involves incising the skin of the genitals, pulling up the skin above it, extracting the white membrane, freeing the suspensory ligament of the vessels, tying them off, and cutting the suspensory ligament more deeply than you freed it from all parts of the membrane attached to the testicle.
Therefore, if the testicle is adhered to those fleshy parts, then you must extract the testicle and incise it.
And if there is an adhesion caused by some factor in the membrane or between what is between the vessels, then you must free up all that adhesion and make an incision with a rounded cut.
But if there is a growth of flesh in the location of the adhesion which is behind it, then you must incise all that is a part of it and extract the testicle as we have said.
And once your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, and care for it with the other treatment until it has healed.
Chapter 64.
On the cure of a hernia that is in the belly button.
The navel is an abscess enclosed by some kind of covering similar to a hernia with swelling of the testicles, and it makes movement and exercise difficult for the patient.
And in the cure of this illness, there is fear due to what often precedes it, namely previous injury.
However, we must speak of an operation in this case as well, just as we did for the first one.
And I say that you must place the patient on an elevated pillow and pull up the suspensory ligament of the testicles to the lower parts; then pull the skin of the genitals with your fingers along with proven vessels towards the rod, while holding the other ministers (servants) who assist you and extend them with great force.
Then make an incision with a wide, sharp-pointed spatula for a transverse section into the right of the vessels until they are exposed.
Then scrape all parts as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are located in the temples. [https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923)
Then place a needle with double thread in it in that location and tie it at the beginning of the location where the navel occurs, and then tie it again at the end of that same location. [https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923) Then make an incision in the middle location for a straight section along the length of the body and extract what has been gathered from the foul and corrupted humors.
Then care for the wound with a cure for other wounds where you want health to be generated in order to prevent the falling of the vessels which do not nourish one of the two testicles, for this is not harmful.
But if the belly button occurs in all the vessels, then the testicles must be extracted or they will become weakened along with the vessels, deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the vessels, and will atrophy or become useless and unable to help. [https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923)
Chapter 65.
On the cure of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that develops in the membrane stretched over the belly and lower abdomen, causing part of the intestines to protrude from that rupture.
And this rupture is either of the membrane or an excess of it, and both types occur for many reasons: trauma, jumping, shouting, lifting something heavy, or similar causes. [https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923) [Note: The text uses the term "clamor" which can mean shouting or noise, but in this context, it is unclear whether the author means physical exertion or something else.] [0/3000 characters]
And the sign of this, when it is due to stretching of the membrane, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time and not suddenly, and there is swelling in front of the navel because the membrane compresses the intestine.
And the sign of this is when it is due to a section of the membrane, because at the beginning, there is sudden and violent pain; and the swelling appears different than the skin around it, which is stretched and apparent, and this occurs because of protrusion of the intestine, and the body of it is outside of the membrane. [https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923)
And sometimes the intestine and the membrane are pushed outside together, and this type of hernia is called "zirbal" (evisceration). [https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923)
And sometimes the hernia occurs with flatulence, and sometimes it happens that a part of the intestine enters the hernia and becomes trapped there, causing great danger to the patient, and sometimes this causes severe pain, especially when pressed or touched. [https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923)
And in the treatment of the types of this illness with iron, there is danger because it is necessary to avoid surgery in that case. [https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923) [Note: The text uses the term "cazament" which is not a standard medical or surgical term in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It may be a scribal error or a term specific to this text.]
And the method of the operation for that is to instruct the patient to push back the intestine with their hand into the cavity of their belly if they are able to do so, and then they should be wrapped in a cloth around their waist between your hands, and you should lift their legs. [https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923)
And then stitch the skin that covers the scrotum and testicles above, making an incision in the skin of the scrotum along its length; and then place two hooks in the lips of the incision as needed to hold it open. [https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923)
And then make the incision according to the size of the hernia that you are able to push back inside.
And then scrape the membrane below the scrotum until the white, hard membrane is exposed on all sides.[https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923) [Note: The term "ciphaqueth" used in this sentence is not a standard medical or surgical term in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It may be a scribal error or a term specific to this text.]
Then insert your finger into what covers the testicle, in that which is between the white membrane, which is below the scrotum and between the membrane, and release the adhesion in the area behind the testicle.[https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923) [Note: The term "ciphac" is used here to refer to the membrane covering the testicle, but it is not a standard medical or surgical term in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It may be a scribal error or a term specific to this text.]
And then hold the scrotum with your hand and pull it outward, extending the white membrane with your left hand and lifting the testicle and membrane to the location of the incision; and instruct your assistant to extend the testicle outside while you dissolve the adhesion behind it with a complete solution.
And then check with your fingers that there is no part of the intestine trapped in the white, hard membrane.[https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923) [Note: The term "ciphac" is used here to refer to the membrane covering the testicle, but it is not a standard medical or surgical term in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It may be a scribal error or a term specific to this text.] But if you find any cause for concern, then push it back down towards the abdomen.[https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923) [Note: The term "lay" is used in this sentence to refer to the intestine, but it is not a standard medical or surgical term in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It may be a scribal error or a term specific to this text.]
And then make an incision in the area below the scrotum where blood and health flow, as we have mentioned before.[https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923) [Note: The term "ciphac" is used here to refer to the membrane covering the testicle, but it is not a standard medical or surgical term in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It may be a scribal error or a term specific to this text.]
And then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound and place it there; and administer the ligature that we mentioned earlier (and sometimes the white membrane is cauterized, which we mentioned before, as there is a fear of bleeding during the incision, because this often happens) and leave the ligature until it falls off on its own. [https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923) [Note: The term "ciphac" is used here to refer to the membrane covering the testicle, but it is not a standard medical or surgical term in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It may be a scribal error or a term specific to this text.]
If the patient's bleeding is delayed, then use warm water and apply it to the area where the bleeding should occur, as we have said.
Then treat the wound with the other treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Chapter 66[Latin has chapters, Spanish uses capitulos, Italian and French use captulos or chapitres, so this part of the text looks like it could be from any of these languages.]
On Hernia Ventosa (or "windy hernia")[Hernias can be classified as reducible or irreducible, and as strangulated or not strangulated. A hernia that is reducible but incarcerated is sometimes called a "windy hernia" because it can often be pushed back into the abdomen with some force. The term "hernia ventosa" was used in medieval medical texts to refer to this type of hernia.]
In this type of hernia, I have not seen anyone who has been daring enough to attempt a cure with iron (i.e., surgery).[The use of surgical instruments in the treatment of hernias was controversial during medieval times due to the high risk of infection and death associated with such procedures. Many physicians instead recommended conservative treatments like those mentioned earlier in this text, including the use of warm water or cautery.]
And the first (physicians) said that it is done in this way, as we have recommended for hernia that is with you; which is to tie the blood vessels near the affected area with ease, and dry up the swelling in the middle of the abscess using what causes it to form, until the blood vessels fall away.
And treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.[This sentence likely refers back to the earlier recommendation for treating wounds, which may have included cleaning and dressing the wound, applying warm water or other substances, and protecting it from further injury or infection.]
Chapter 67[As mentioned earlier, this text appears to be a medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The chapter numbers suggest that it may have been organized or structured in a way that is typical of medical texts from the medieval period.]
On the dislocation that occurs in the joints[The term "anguonars" likely refers to the joints or articulations of the body, from the Latin word "angulus" meaning angle or corner. Dislocations were a common medical complaint during medieval times, often caused by falls, accidents, or physical labor.]
Sometimes, however, a dislocation can result in a rupture in the joints, as we have said, and cause protrusion of the affected area.
And the intestines should not be allowed to protrude excessively from the genitals; and if they do, it is only a little; and they always return by themselves in all cases.
But if the prolonged period of time with this issue, then it is necessary to make an incision in the abdominal wall so that the intestines can be returned to their proper place within the abdomen; and this happens due to the extension of the abdominal wall which occurs in the joints, as we have said, because the abdominal wall is stretched out, weakened, and swollen, and protrudes as a result.
And the treatment for this is with cautery, as was previously described.[The use of cauterization as a medical treatment dates back to ancient times and was widely used in medieval medicine as well. Cautery involves the application of heat or chemicals to an affected area in order to seal off blood vessels, kill bacteria, or promote healing.] [6] E si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.
And sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: and that is for the patient to lie on their side between your hands, and dry up the affected area of the swelling or protrusion using a section of three fingers' width.
And then strengthen the abdominal wall that is under the navel until it is exposed.[Here, the text appears to be recommending some sort of exercise or therapy for strengthening the abdominal muscles and tissues, possibly in order to prevent further hernias or other complications. The reference to the "white line" or "linea alba" under the navel suggests that the surgeon is instructed to focus on the midline of the abdomen, where many hernias are known to occur.] [8] E si es feyt entro que sia sanat, lahoras no fayts riens en le loc; e si fayt, es aprop ayssi cum havem dit.
And then take the rod and place it over the protruding area of the abdomen, and press down firmly on the patient's belly.
And then connect the two protruding areas above the tip of the rod in the abdomen with sutures.
And then pull out the tip of the rod, but do not enter too deeply into the abdomen, nor extend the incision, nor cause any other harm as you know in the treatment of intestinal hernias.[Here, the text appears to be emphasizing the importance of caution and precision when performing surgical procedures on the abdomen. The surgeon is instructed to carefully extract the rod or other firm object used to locate and identify the affected areas, without causing further injury or damage to the surrounding tissues or organs.] [14] E si es feyt entro que sia sanat, lahoras no fayts riens en le loc; e si fayt, es aprop ayssi cum havem dit.
And then treat that with the treatment for wounds, and when you make incisions in the fields, clean that area and restore the wound until it is solidified; because the abdomen is constricted and the protrusion of the rupture is not adjusted.[Here, the text appears to be emphasizing the importance of proper wound care and treatment in order to promote healing and prevent further complications. The surgeon is instructed to carefully clean and dress the wound, and to ensure that it is properly aligned and closed in order to allow for proper healing and restoration of function.]
And cautery is better in this location, because it is closer to health.[Here, the text appears to be recommending the use of cauterization as a treatment for wounds or hernias in the abdominal area. The rationale for using cautery in this case may be due to its ability to promote healing and prevent infection by sealing off blood vessels and killing bacteria in the affected area. Additionally, cauterization may help to reinforce weakened tissues and promote closure of wounds or hernias.]
Chapter 68
On softening of the spermatic cord in the scrotum.[This sentence likely indicates the beginning of a new section or chapter in the medical text, focused on a specific topic related to male reproductive health. The term "mollificacio" suggests that this section will discuss methods for softening or relaxing the spermatic cord, which is the fibrous tissue that connects the testicles to the abdominal cavity and helps to regulate their temperature and function.]
Often in many men the spermatic cord in the scrotum is softened because the flesh that is between it is softened, and it is caused by neglect of care for it.[This sentence suggests that the softening or relaxation of the spermatic cord in some men may be due to a lack of proper care or attention. The text implies that the flesh surrounding the spermatic cord may become soft or flaccid if not properly maintained, leading to a similar condition in the spermatic cord itself. This may have implications for male reproductive health and function.] [18] E si es mollificada per aysso, lahoras no fayts riens en le loc; e si fayt, es aprop ayssi cum havem dit.
Then it is necessary for the one treating him in care to make the patient lie down according to their disease, and encase the entire body which is weakened on the natural spine; and then adjust both labia with stitches.
And if you wish, in the beginning reduce the excess of the weakened spine with three or four stitches and strong stitching.
Then insert between the stitches, and then heal through healing of other wounds until it is healed and pus comes out.
Chapter 69.
On castration.
Know that castration is forbidden in our law, but it is appropriate for me to mention it in this book; and its remembrance is necessary not for one but two reasons, of which the first is so that it be part of medical knowledge when one is questioned about it, and know the treatment for those to whom it happens; and the second reason is that we often have a need for castration of other animals for our use, such as with horses, oxen, pigs, and similar beasts.
And so I say that castration is done in two ways: either by constriction or by incision and sectioning.
But in that which is done by constriction, the way of the operation is to submerge the animal in warm water until its genitals are relaxed and limp and hang down. Then take hold of them with your hand until they are relaxed and do not appear below the covering.
But in castration done by incision and sectioning, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press down on the base of the testicles with your left hand.
Then tie off the spermatic cords and make an incision on each one up to two processions (protrusions).
Then cut out any excess tissue that you have dissected. And do not leave any cause on the surface, but rather make a subtle incision which is above the veins.
And this method of castration done by constriction is better than the one done by incision and sectioning because constriction more gently leaves some cause for the testicles, causing the animal to desire coitus.
Then heal the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 70.
On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men can occur in two ways: the first is when there is a space between the scrotum and the testicles, appearing like a woman's vulva.
And sometimes the urine of such a person exits from the scrotum instead of the penis.
But in women, it is a different matter: the female genitalia above the labia appears like two small testicles of a man, protruding slightly from the outer parts, resembling male scrotum and testicles.
And the treatment is of three types: two for men and one for women. And it is necessary to make incisions in the swollen flesh until the pressure is released, and then heal those areas with treatment for other wounds.
And in the second type of males where urine exits from the scrotum, there is neither treatment nor operation for such a person.
Chapter 21.
On leanness and prominent flesh caused by female reproductive organs.
Leanness is easily caused by natural factors and occurs when the body becomes thin and emaciated, and sometimes it can be exaggerated in some women to such an extent that their bodies become as muscular as men's and even capable of sexual intercourse.
Therefore, it is necessary to reduce the excess leanness with your hand or a tool and make incisions.
And do not overdo the incision, especially near the navel area, to prevent bleeding.
Then heal the wound with treatment for other wounds until it is healed.
But protruding flesh is flesh that develops inside the mother's womb and fills it up, and easily emerges from the outer parts in the shape of a tail (and for this reason, some call this condition "tail disease"); therefore, we must make incisions as we do with leanness, and heal the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 72.
On treatment of hernia.
Hernia is when a woman's genitalia is not properly formed or has a small opening. And it can be either natural or accidental.
An accidental hernia can be caused by illness that has occurred previously, and such a condition can arise from either loose flesh or a thin or narrow incision.
And such a hernia can form in the navel of the mother, or in the ribs, or above or below it, and it prevents sexual intercourse and engagement, as well as pregnancy, and often stops menstruation.
And the diagnosis of such a condition is made by observing the mother's abdomen - if the protrusion is visible, then palpate it; but if it is not visible, then examine the area using your fingers or a probe.
But if the protrusion is due to a thin incision and located near the two labia, then you should cut and open it up.
And place your fingers on both labia and press firmly with both hands.
And the woman should be on her back, with her thighs spread apart and the two labia forcefully opened wide so that the subtle membrane is broken and the opening is revealed.
Then take wool and soak it in oil and place it over the incision, and place a hot stone on top of it, to prevent the incision from becoming solidified.
But if the membrane is thick, then it is necessary to cut it with a spatula or myrtle leaf.
But if the opening is obstructed by flesh, then suspend it with a hook and make an incision there.
And use the following medications that stop blood flow without causing pain, such as althea, dragon's blood, and electampane, combined with white of egg.
Then administer a wide lead cannula to prevent the wound from becoming solidified too quickly.
And leave that in place for several days and administer some of its dry powder.
Then use the other method of solidification until it is healed.
And sometimes it happens that the natural growth of flesh is excessive, and then it is necessary to cut according to this method. But if it is due to hardened abscesses in the groin area, then no iron should be used in any way on these abscesses.
Chapter 73.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, and of tail and red botch that occur in the female genital area.
Hemorrhoids are recognized by the appearance of openings of many veins, from which continuous bleeding occurs; and when hemorrhoids become old and develop piles.
And I have already said in the division the types of hemorrhoids and their symptoms, and I will also say those that respond to treatment and those that do not.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and piles when they are inside the vaginal area and do not appear to sensation, then in those there should be no treatment with iron.
But those that are in the opening of the vagina, and which can be felt by touch, are those that can be cured.
And it is necessary to place the woman in a warm bath and then extend apart the buttocks with a rough cloth or sponge, and cut those with scissors.
Then pulverize over those the powder of one of the incising powders without pain, such as althea and similar to that.
Then apply bandages to her feet for an hour and then place that in cold water.
And if the bleeding persists, then make a concoction of willow and corn silk and acorns and similar things.
Then take barley flour and mix it with honey and wine vinegar and make a plaster of that on his back.
And if the blood has been cut off, that's good; and if not, apply two cupping glasses, and scarify his nipples.
Then take wool and soak it in juice of coltsfoot or in juice of agrimony or in juice of houseleek with wine vinegar, and apply it to the area; and then treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
And treat it until it is healed.
Chapter 74.
On the perforation of abscesses occurring in the female genital area.
Many types of abscesses occur in the female genital area, such as hardened and stony abscesses, ulcers, inflammations, carbuncles, herpes, fistulous hemorrhoids, piles, rashes, and other abscesses. And I have already said these illnesses and their types and symptoms, and the treatments for them in the division.
And it is necessary for me to say in this treatise about the abscess that comes in the female genital area when it is one of the abscesses that collects pus, and if you want to know how the operation of it with iron is done.
Then it is necessary for you to consider if the pain of the abscess in its beginning is sharp with pulsing and inflammation and fever, and sometimes there is redness and heat above the abscess and you feel a throbbing sensation, therefore do not try to lance it immediately. Instead, treat it with remedies that help with maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms subsides.
Then it is necessary for you to place a cushion under the woman so that she is lying on her side with one cushion under her and another between her legs; recline her on her back and adjust her legs so that they are lowered further down from the belly, spread her thighs apart, place her arms below her ankles, and bind each limb appropriately.
Then let the midwife stand on the right side and administer the instrument with which to open the orifice of the mother, the shape of which will be described in those cases that will come up.[Note: This translation assumes that "mayre" refers to the womb, as is common in medieval medical texts. However, it could also refer to a tumor or swelling.]
And it is necessary when you want to administer this instrument that you insert it with care into the womb of the woman, and only as much of the instrument should enter the womb as the size of the womb allows, and take care not to harm the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the size of the womb, then it is necessary to place padding on the surface of the cervix of the womb so that the entire instrument cannot enter the cervix and cause harm.[Note: The word "preon" could also be translated as "mouth" or "opening," but in this context, it likely refers to the cervix. The word "textura" here means surface or exterior.]
And it is necessary to place the vertex (i.e., the rounded end) of the instrument on the cervix of the womb from below, and let the one who administers it hold the instrument and rotate the vertex until the orifice of the womb is opened.
And when the membrane appears and is touched with the hand and it is soft and wet, then it is necessary to dry that part with a linen cloth.[Note: The word "excitura" here could refer to any number of things, such as the amniotic sac or other fetal membranes. The phrase "es leon e molh" suggests that it is soft and moist.]
And when the pus has been evacuated, then it is necessary to place a wick soaked in rose oil or some other styptic substance (i.e., something that stops bleeding) on the wound and place a bandage at the entrance of the womb.[Note: The word "meca" here could refer to a piece of linen or wool, while "calca7" is a term used for any kind of bandage or dressing. The phrase "en le preon de la mayre" indicates that it should be placed at the opening of the cervix.]
And place outside the womb and on top of the bandages clean wool soaked in water in which marshmallows have been boiled.[Note: The word "pentenilh" here likely refers to a layer of bandages or dressings, while "lana munda" is clean wool. Marshmallows were often used in medieval medicine as a demulcent and emollient. In this case, they may have been boiled in water and the resulting liquid applied to the wound to soothe it and promote healing.]
And let the patient be treated for two days with ointment that is appropriate until the wound is healed.
And sometimes the womb and wound are washed with water and honey until they are clean, and also with water in which rosemary or longwort has been boiled, and then return to the application of ointment.[Note: "Razit de liri" is likely a misspelling of "rasit de lyri," meaning rosemary. "Aristologia longua" (also known as Alexanders) was a common herb used in medieval medicine for its anti-inflammatory and antispasmodic properties.]
And if the wound extends deep into the womb, then it is necessary to avoid using iron instruments in its treatment and instead use remedies that we have described earlier. [Note: The phrase "havantz cura" here suggests that there are other treatments available for this condition, but they involve avoiding the use of iron instruments, which could cause further damage or infection.]
Capital LXXV. (This heading indicates the beginning of a new section or chapter in the text.)
To teach midwives how to treat fetuses that are not positioned normally according to their natural shape.
It is necessary for the midwife to recognize at the outset the shape of a normal childbirth by its signs, and this can be determined when you see the woman pushing in the lower parts and desiring to breathe in fresh air, and she appears relieved by what is happening above her (i.e., the birth). And if the fetus is expelled over its head and the umbilical cord is suspended or hanging down from it, then you can be sure that this birth is according to its natural shape. [Note: The phrase "segon figura natural" here could also be translated as "in accordance with nature's plan." The reference to the woman desiring fresh air may indicate that she is experiencing difficulty breathing due to pressure on her diaphragm from the fetus.]
Therefore, when you see these signs, it is necessary to press gently on the woman's abdomen so that the fetus descends slightly, and when it emerges over its head, you should present the umbilical cord to it and clean it of any superfluous matter with good hygiene. [Note: The phrase "mondada de aquelas superfluitatz" suggests that there may be some kind of debris or afterbirth attached to the fetus, which needs to be removed before delivery is complete.]
But if the birth is not natural and unacceptable, for when the fetus emerges on its feet with its body in front of its head and one arm or leg first, then it is necessary to take great care and proceed as follows. [Note: The description of a breech birth (i.e., when the fetus emerges feet-first) is provided here. Such births were considered more difficult and potentially dangerous than normal ones.] Or if the head or arm of the fetus emerges first, followed by its belly, and it quickly turns over on its neck, resembling other unacceptable shapes. [Note: The phrase "no-lausablas" here could also be translated as "disapproved" or "condemned." It may refer to positions that were considered abnormal or dangerous for the fetus and mother during childbirth.]
Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skilled in all these cases, and to guard against error and disappointment.
And I will now show you the shape of all these cases, as well as the mechanism by which they occur, so that their meaning can be understood and proper care can be taken.[Note: The use of the word "mechanism" here reflects a modern understanding of physiology. In medieval medicine, such phenomena would have been explained through reference to humoral theory or other philosophical principles.]
When the fetus emerges over its head due to natural force and it is heavy on the woman and causes a difficult birth, and sometimes its strength has already been weakened, then place a cushion under her or let the women hold it, and apply fenugreek powder and warm oil to its neck. [Note: Fenugreek was commonly used in medieval medicine as an emollient and anti-inflammatory agent. The phrase "evapora le conh de lu" suggests that the midwife should apply a compress or poultice to the fetus's neck to help it emerge.]
And let the midwife insert her small hand between its legs and gently open up the umbilical cord or dry it with her fingernail until the fluid in it has been absorbed. [Note: The phrase "secce aquela am la sua ungla" suggests that the midwife should use her finger to gently puncture the umbilical cord, allowing any remaining fluid to escape. This is a common practice during childbirth to ensure that the fetus does not inhale any of the remaining amniotic fluid.][ And press on the woman's abdomen until the fetus is expelled.
But if it does not emerge, then the woman should be anointed with a mixture of muslin and fenugreek powder with a little bit of egg white.[Note: Muslin is a type of thin cotton fabric that was commonly used in medieval medicine for making bandages or compresses. Fenugreek was believed to have healing properties and was often used as a poultice or ointment. Egg whites were also thought to have medicinal benefits, including promoting wound healing.]
And let her (the midwife) command the woman to sniff or inhale the muslin and fenugreek powder mixture deeply, while covering her mouth and nose for an hour, as this will help expel the fetus quickly. [Note: The phrase "stornudar am condici" suggests that the midwife should sprinkle the muslin and fenugreek powder mixture on a handkerchief or cloth and have the woman sniff it deeply to help stimulate contractions. Covering the mouth and nose for an hour may seem extreme, but this could be a way to ensure that the woman inhales enough of the mixture to stimulate strong enough contractions to deliver the fetus.][
And if both of the baby's arms are protruding at the beginning, then it is necessary to gently reduce them one by one. [Note: The phrase "redusiscas aquelas" suggests that the midwife should use gentle pressure to push the baby's arms back inside the mother's body. This may require some patience and care, as forcing the arms back in too quickly or forcefully could cause injury to the mother or the baby.] But if it does not go back in, then place the woman on a cushion and lift her legs up, and raise the cushion off the ground with a jolt. Have the woman hold herself so that she doesn't fall during the jolt. [Note: The phrase "concussio" suggests that the midwife should use a sudden forceful movement to dislodge the baby's arm from its stuck position. This could involve lifting the woman's legs up and then dropping her suddenly onto a cushion or other soft surface, in order to create enough force to dislodge the arm. However, it is important to ensure that the woman is held securely so that she does not fall and injure herself during this process.][
But if the arms are not returned inside and the baby dies, then you must insert your fingers and extract the bones of the arm or tie its body to your hand with a cloth and extract it equally, as it will be forgotten otherwise. [Note: The phrase "inscideys aquelas" suggests that the midwife should use her fingers to manually manipulate the baby's arms back inside the mother's body. If this is not possible or if the baby has already died, then the midwife may need to extract the bones or entire limb in order to safely deliver the baby. The phrase "am equalitat" suggests that the midwife should try to remove the limb intact and in one piece, rather than breaking it off or causing further damage.]
When the baby is delivered on its feet, then it is necessary to push its legs upwards and gently rotate the baby until it is in a better position for delivery. After that, you should support the baby's head and slowly pull one leg at a time to deliver the rest of the body. This can be a difficult and potentially dangerous situation, so it's important to proceed with caution and seek medical assistance if necessary.
But if the baby has been delivered into the thighs, then you should command her to push, and have her sniff or inhale a substance (such as muslin) with fenugreek powder, as it will be expelled if God wills it.
But if it is not expelled with the method we recommended, then you should gently return the baby inside and wait until it turns to a natural position before attempting another delivery. This will make it easier and less risky to deliver the baby. It's important to take your time and ensure that the baby is in the correct position before proceeding with the delivery. Rushing or forcing the process can lead to complications or injuries for both the mother and the baby.
But if none of the methods we have recommended work, then take muslin made from althea and dissolved gum, and grind it in a mortar with good force. Then apply this mixture to the woman's perineum, near the bottom of her abdomen. This may help to promote a natural delivery and reduce the risk of complications. It's important to remember that every delivery is unique, and healthcare providers should be prepared to adapt their techniques and strategies as needed based on the specific circumstances of each case. By working together with the mother and using evidence-based practices, midwives and other healthcare providers can help ensure a safe and healthy outcome for both the mother and the baby. And also perform a gentle fomentation with warm water over the woman's hypochondria (the area just below the ribcage) to help relax and soothe her muscles. This can help to promote a natural delivery and reduce the risk of complications. It's important to use warm, but not hot, water to avoid causing burns or discomfort. The midwife should also be careful to avoid getting any water in the woman's vagina or on the baby, as this could increase the risk of infection. By using a gentle and soothing approach, healthcare providers can help to create a positive and supportive environment for childbirth.
And if the lower parts of the woman's body are relaxed, then perform a gentle fumigation with myrtle and place it beneath her. Myrtle was believed to have calming and relaxing properties, which could help to promote a natural delivery and reduce the risk of complications. The midwife should be careful to ensure that the fumigation is not too strong or overpowering, as this could cause discomfort or distress for the woman. By using gentle and soothing techniques like these, healthcare providers can help to create a safe and supportive environment for childbirth.[ And when you have fumigated it for an hour, then you should perform a sneeze on a handkerchief, and extract the breath from their mouth, and remove it, and lightly press the lowest part of the patient's abdomen with gentle compression, for this will soon cause it to be expelled.
The emission of matter laterally while holding one of their hands. The hand should be guided to its proper position, but if it cannot be reduced, then lift the woman up and make her walk.
And if she cannot walk, then have her lie down on the left side and shake her hips with strong jolts; and administer a laxative to her and recommend that she take mucilaginous substances (such as slippery elm or marshmallow root).
And if the childbirth has begun, then you should perform a sneeze on a handkerchief, and focus on reducing the dislocation of the arm, and extract the matter according to natural form; have the woman take deep breaths and instruct her to press down on herself until it is expelled.
The emission of matter onto the belly, with the arms spread wide and the patient's backside facing their mother. It is appropriate for the midwife to hold the baby and gently rotate it until it can come out easily.
And how this is done and when it is appropriate to do so, and then place on the navel what we have recommended of oil and mucilaginous substances.
And you should instruct them to urinate little by little, and when you have done that, then perform a sneeze on a handkerchief and instruct her to lean over to the right side, and tell her to press down; and have her perform the sneeze in a controlled manner. The delivery of the prepared fetus on its side.
When it is time to cut the umbilical cord in this manner, pay attention; and then insert the second finger with your nail into it until all of the moisture has been drained.
And if the baby is suspended by its face and neck, then insert your finger with the nail dipped in emollient (such as oil or fat) to ensure that it is not constricted and suffocated.
And then guide the baby into the inner parts until you have placed it in the correct position, and tell the woman to press down on herself several times, and it will be expelled with gentle emission if God wills it.
The delivery of twins or multiple babies. Know that twins are often born several times, and sometimes even three or four, but this is rare and tends to happen later; but there are natural causes for this, and they are not usually alive.
And mention that if they are multiples, there is a second umbilical cord connecting them; and distinguish between the ligaments in each of their navel cords. Sometimes they are expelled as easily as one baby with gentle natural emission, and sometimes they must be expelled with difficulty through non-natural emission as we have recommended.
And if they are difficult to deliver and the birth has not progressed according to what we have said about natural forms, then you should treat them as we have described.
And if the midwife is skillful and performs what she does with ease, subtlety, and patience, and is able to adapt her technique according to what is necessary for a safe delivery.
Remembering what forms in the uterus from embryos and is aborted.
Sometimes multiple pregnancies occur in the womb: one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even up to ten. It is now confirmed that one woman aborted after carrying five fetuses, while another carried all ten to term. This was caused by measurement, as determined by the wise men.
And all of this is necessary for the midwife to know because it may easily resemble something similar to her, and therefore she must respond appropriately.
Chapter seventy-six.
On the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus with what we have said in the division of medicine and it has not yet been expelled, then you must consider whether the woman is of strong constitution and does not have any of the conditions that would make her delivery dangerous.
And then the woman should lie down on her left side with her head lowered and her hips raised.
And the assistant should hold it from both sides or be positioned on the left side to prevent the woman's body from extending too much during the extraction of the fetus.
And then you should moisten the mother's mouth with warm oils and mucilaginous substances such as marshmallow root, fenugreek seeds, and linseed.
And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and mucilaginous substances, and then gently insert her hand into the mother and search for the location where she can grasp the fetus with her fingers.
And apply the leeches in this way: then consider if the patient is prepared to have them applied above his head, and meanwhile place your fingers on his soles, or on his neck, or on his mouth, or on the palate, or below his beard, or on his chin, or on the appropriate spots on the ribs, or below the hypochondriac region.
But if the application is to be on his feet, then do so at the ankle or in the middle of the ribcage.
And it is necessary to hold the leeches with the right hand, and place the curvature of it in the location that is between the thumb and index finger of the left hand, and gently insert the leeches into one of the spots that we have mentioned, until they reach the desired location.
Then place and hold another leech, or a third if necessary, in the vicinity of the first one, so that there is attraction rather than extension according to its natural tendency.
But it is better on all accounts, so that the suction of the leech is alleviated in the same way as it is done with a tooth during its extraction.
And it is necessary in this case that the extension be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife should anoint her fingers with oil and insert them and manipulate what has been retained.
Therefore, if a piece of the afterbirth has been expelled, then the leeches should be moved to another location that is more accessible; and do so until all of the afterbirth has been expelled.
But if the hand is expelled before the other, and it is not possible to reduce it because of its swelling, then a cloth should be wrapped around it; and then extract it until all of it has been expelled, and insert it into the joint of the hand or the armpit.
And do the same with the other hand and the two feet.
But if the fetus's head is large, or if it is swollen during delivery, or if water has accumulated in its head, then insert a blunt-ended instrument, such as an alundat, which will be described in the following chapter along with the other instruments, and use it to release the water by making an incision in the head. [https://medicalterms.github.io/historical\_instruments/](https://medicalterms.github.io/historical_instruments/)
And do the same if the fetus has a naturally large head: and then insert a forceps, or take it with an alundat as we have mentioned, and extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head has been expelled but is swollen at the chin, then it should be incised in order to release the fluid in the feet.
But if there is no complication or difficulty with delivery, then you should incise the head as soon as it is possible for you to do so.
And if the left side of the abdomen is affected by an abscess or is hydropic, then it is necessary to make a puncture in order to release the fluid that has accumulated there.
But if the fetus is in the breech position, then its extraction will be easier and its direction towards the mother's mouth will be easier.
But if the fetus is swollen in the abdomen and legs, then it is necessary to extract it with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and make an incision in the abdomen and legs in order to release what has accumulated there.
But if the other limbs are obstructed and the head is turned, then the midwife should insert her left hand; but if the mother's vagina is narrow, then she should insert her hand into the membrane layer and search for the head with it, and pull it towards the mouth of the mother using her fingers. Then, she should insert one or two leeches in order to facilitate the delivery.
But if the mother's vagina is swollen due to an abscess caused by a tumor, then it should not be pressed upon; instead, administer an infusion of moist and fatty substances. And apply plasters, and follow the patient's treatment with waters that soften and moisten.
And if the fetus is lying on its side, then it should be pierced if possible; and administer what we have mentioned for a living fetus.
But if that is not possible, then make an incision in the side and extract it.
And it is necessary to ensure that no foreign matter remains inside the womb.
And after completing your entire procedure, then administer the treatment that we have mentioned for abscesses and tumors that may have occurred in the mother.
And if there is a flow of blood, then apply styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
I have seen a woman in whose womb there was a dead fetus, and then another pregnancy occurred on top of it; and the second fetus also died. A tumor occurred in the abdomen of a woman for a long time; and it became so swollen that her belly burst open, and she began to give birth to arms.
I was called upon to treat her, and I treated her for a long time, but the illness did not heal.
Then I applied strong plasters to draw out the abscess, and extracted a bone from her, and after several days another bone came out; and I was very surprised that there were bones in her womb. [https://medicalterms.github.io/historical\_instruments/](https://medicalterms.github.io/historical_instruments/)
Then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Then I investigated the illness further and extracted many bones from her, the woman being in good spirits and recovering well, cured of a small piece of arm.
I did not find it to be strange, because there is knowledge and assistance in what the skilled physician administers with his hands for treatment.
Here are some of the forms of instruments that are necessary for extracting the fetus:
The form of forceps used to open the mother's vagina is called "ventouse" or vacuum extractor. It consists of a suction cup that is attached to the fetus's head, and a handle that is used to apply traction and help deliver the baby. The suction cup creates a seal on the baby's head, and negative pressure is applied to pull the baby out. This instrument is typically used when the mother has been pushing for a long time and the baby is not making progress through the birth canal. It can also be used if the baby is in distress and needs to be delivered quickly.
This is the form of tenaculum that is used to hold the lips (labia), which has two advantages in the tips of two rods. The tenaculum is a surgical instrument with sharp prongs that can be used to grasp and hold tissue during procedures such as dilation and curettage (D&C). It is typically made of metal and has handles on both ends for easy manipulation. The tenaculum is inserted into the cervix, where it grips the lips of the cervix and holds them in place. This allows the healthcare provider to perform procedures such as D&C or hysteroscopy more easily. However, this advantage should be more subtle than the strictor, and it should be made of ivory or hard wood. A tenaculum can also be made of ivory or hardwood, as mentioned in the text, instead of metal. This type of tenaculum would have a softer grip on the tissue, reducing the risk of injury or trauma to the cervix. The use of ivory or hardwood for medical instruments was common during medieval times due to their durability and availability.
And the width of each rod is two fingers and the edge of both is one finger, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle of the two rods there are two adjustments of that same rod which are already fixed, whose length is slightly more than a palm and a half, and the width of each is two fingers or slightly more. This passage describes the dimensions of the tenaculum used to hold the lips (labia) during medical procedures. The width of each rod is described as being two fingers wide, with an edge of one finger on either side. The length of each rod is a palm and a half, and there are two adjustments in the middle of the rods that are already fixed. These adjustments have a length slightly more than a palm and a half, and a width of two fingers or slightly more.
And these two attachments are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it can be opened with them when you rotate the two prescribed prongs. This passage explains how the tenaculum is used to dilate the cervix during medical procedures. The two adjustments or attachments on the rod are inserted into the cervix, and when the prongs are rotated, it opens the cervix. This allows for the safe and effective performance of various medical procedures.
Here is another form similar to that one, but more subtle and lighter:
It should be made of ivory or hardwood, similar to forceps. This passage suggests that the instrument being described is similar in form and function to forceps, but made of a different material. Ivory and hardwood were commonly used materials for medical instruments during medieval times due to their durability and resistance to corrosion. The use of these materials also minimized the risk of infection, which was a significant concern in medical procedures during this time period. However, at the end of it there are two extensions similar to those mentioned before, and the length of these extensions is one palm, and the width of each is two fingers. This passage describes the dimensions of the extensions on the instrument made of ivory or hardwood. The length of each extension is one palm, which is a standard measurement equivalent to the width of the hand from the base of the pinky finger to the tip of the thumb. The width of each extension is two fingers, indicating that they are relatively narrow and slender. This suggests that the instrument is designed for precise and delicate manipulation during medical procedures.
And when you want to use these to open the mother, then you have the woman lie on her left side with her legs hanging down and open her buttocks. This passage describes how to position the woman for the medical procedure using the instrument described earlier. The woman is instructed to lie on her left side with her legs hanging down, allowing easy access to her reproductive organs. Her buttocks are then opened, providing a clear view of the area where the procedure will be performed. And then open your hand with the instrument like you would with forceps, according to how much of the opening of the mother's mouth you want to achieve, until the midwife can do what she wants. This passage explains how to use the instrument to dilate the woman's cervix during childbirth. The midwife should open her hand with the instrument like she would with forceps, according to the desired degree of dilation. She should then continue to use the instrument until she can accomplish what is necessary for the delivery.
The form of forceps that the ancients called:
The form of an impeller that is used to push the fetus:
The form of an amnioscope, which is used to contain a large head. An amnioscope is a medical instrument used during childbirth to visualize the cervix and the fetus in the birth canal. It is a thin, tubular device that is inserted into the vagina and has a light source at the end to illuminate the area. The amnioscope can be used to diagnose and manage complications during delivery, such as a prolapsed umbilical cord or a large fetal head. It can also help to guide forceps or vacuum extraction during difficult deliveries. The amnioscope is typically made of metal or plastic and has a diameter of 1-2 cm. It may have a rigid or flexible shaft, depending on the specific design.
And it is similar to forceps with teeth at the end, as mentioned before, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this shape, as mentioned before, with teeth like a rasping tooth that is incised and contained. This passage describes an instrument that is similar to forceps but has teeth at the end, which can be used to grasp and hold onto the fetus during childbirth. Sometimes this instrument is made long like traditional forceps, and other times it has teeth like a rasp that are used to incise and contain the fetus's head. This type of instrument would have been useful in cases where the fetus was too large to be delivered vaginally or if there were complications during childbirth. The form of a small amnioscope:
Shape of a uncia having a spine:
Shape of a uncia having two spines:
Shape of a spatula having two ends for beheading:
Shape of two wide spatulas:
All of these instruments should be exercised (practiced with), and when they are multiplied in number and the species or types of them are prepared by the artisans, the lighter they will be to operate and more useful for people due to their quantity.
And do not hesitate to use any of these instruments when necessary, for their necessity is not to be questioned or excused.
On the extraction of the second tooth.
When the second tooth is impacted (retained), then it is necessary to perform an extraction by having the patient hold their breath and sneeze, while you apply pressure on their mouth and nostrils. If they are able to expel air despite this, it is a good sign.
And if not, then you should take a piece of cloth, make a hole in it, and place inside herbs such as chamomile, rue, aniseed, rosemary, Arabian scented herbs, cinnamon bark, and storax. Submerge all of these herbs or some of them in water in the cloth, and then place it over the fire.
And then place a reed cannula in the mother's mouth and hold it in place so that the steam reaches the cavity of her mouth.
And then perform the same sneezing technique as before, and the second tooth will be extracted with speed.
But if this treatment does not work and the tooth remains impacted, then you should instruct the midwife to immerse her left hand in oil of sesame or marshmallow mucilage, and then insert it into the mouth and probe around until she finds the second tooth. Once she has found it, she should grasp it gently and extract it gradually, according to proper technique so that the mother does not suffer from violent pulling. It is necessary that the wound be opened easily on both sides (left and right).
And if the mother's mouth is too narrow, we have already recommended treatment using sneezing and the application of a cloth with herbs.
But if it is not extracted with all the causes we have recommended, then make sure not to persist in trying to extract it further, but instead let what has come out of her mouth be left on the woman's thigh, and then apply a mixture of honey and theriac (a compound medicine) to it. This will cause it to rot over several days and eventually dissolve and fall out.
But when it is possible, the bad odor from it rises to the head and stomach of the patient, causing them harm. Therefore, it is necessary to administer appropriate sub-fumigations (medicinal fumes inhaled through the nose or mouth) at this point.
But the ancients already made use of sub-fumigation with nasal cones (nazitort) and dried figs.
Shape of an instrument with which a woman is sub-fumigated for the retention of menstruation and second tooth:
It can be made of copper or lead.
And the thinner end should be inserted into the cavity (conh) and the wider end placed over the fire, with the sub-fumigation being applied over the hot coals of the fire.
And hold it inside until the sub-fumigation is consumed, then repeat with another one.
On the treatment of an unperforated anal fistula in a newborn.
The anuses of infants are closed up and not yet perforated, which is why they become inflamed and swollen. Therefore, the midwife should pierce that swelling with her finger; and if not, then pierce it with a sharp spatula, making sure not to touch the sinew.
And then place some wool soaked in wine and oil over it (the incision); and treat it with a salve until it is healed.
But if you are worried that it may become swollen again, then place a reed in the opening for several days and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
And sometimes the anus becomes swollen due to consolidation of wounds or abscesses; in this case, it is necessary to cut open and drain the consolidated tissue, and then treat it with the methods we have described for wound care and lead (plom).
On the treatment of fistulas that form on the backside (buttocks).
The fistulas that occur in the lower part of the body are thick and large, which happen near the buttocks on the outside or in the groin area.
It is a fistula or abscess.
And when that knot (nodation) is old and results from the collection of watery white humor or fine powder, and sometimes these fistulas have penetrating branches.
And these penetrating branches are recognized by what exits from them through the opening and gas (ventosetat); sometimes the patient uses this evacuation, and it is quite easy for worms to exit from them.
And sometimes with these fistulas there are penetrating branches that extend into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and sometimes these penetrating branches enter the joint of the thigh, and into the bone marrow of the leg.
And how one can recognize whether a fistula is penetrating or not into the anus is by inserting your finger into the anus and introducing a thin probe of iron or copper into the fistula where there is no tortuosity.
But if there is twisting (tortuosity) in that one, then introduce a thin probe of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair on your finger.
And if you don't feel anything in it at all and there is no reason for evacuation such as worms or gas (ventositat), as we have said, then you can be sure that it is not penetrating, and so turn your attention to the cure.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or the flesh of the penis, then its meaning is an increase in urination from that area and a prohibition on it until the location has been treated with medicine to solidify it.
But if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the surrounding area (circuit), then its meaning is that the probe can enter easily into it where there is no twisting inside the bone, and there is pain in the surrounding area; and that fine white matter always comes out of it; and that no medicine will work on it, nor will it be consolidated with a plaster.
And in all penetrating fistulas, there is not a complete cure, and the cure for those ones is a great effort and futility of the foolish doctors who insist on it.
But in the one that is not penetrating and not old, healing with iron (cauterization) is expected, according to what I have told you and proven.
And it is necessary that the patient lie between your hands on their back and raise their legs into the air, with the thighs inclined toward their belly, and then insert a probe of lead or copper (if there is twisting in the fistula) until you know the location where the probe enters.
And if the patient feels pain around the anus (cuol), then it is necessary to insert your finger into the anus.
And if you feel on your finger that the probe has entered by itself and is clearly penetrating, rather than just feeling something between your finger and the fistula or flesh, then know for certain that it is penetrating; and in this case, do not work on it because there is no cure for it, as we have said.
But some say that it can heal in some men over time.
And the medicine by which healing is expected in it (the fistula) is that you make a fine cautery and adjust its size according to the width of the fistula, as previously described, and then insert the burning cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all the diseased flesh has been burned away and is similar to a bird's feather.
And then cure that with hot compresses wrapped in a cloth until all the burned flesh has been removed, and then cure it with medicines that promote tissue growth and consolidation, and if it heals, then it is good; but if not, then it will never heal at any time with any other treatment.
And if the probe enters but does not penetrate beyond your finger which is in the anus (cul), and there is a thin layer of flesh or membrane between it and the probe, and sometimes the fistula extends to the surface of the coccyx, then dry out the coccyx starting from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it drying with the probe, and keep the probe inside the fistula until the drying reaches the location where the end of the probe is, and use the probe to release and clean (catz) it.
And then clean the fistulous flesh which is similar to a bird's feather quill and let there be no residue from it for any reason.
But if blood flows sometimes when you are working on those (fistulous) flesh and you enter it, then let the milk (a substance used to stop bleeding) be applied, and for pus use a light instrument to cauterize with fire or sharp medicine, because cautery with fire has two good habits: it burns the affected flesh, and stops the flow of blood by drying out the moisture.
And approach to cure gout wrapped in padding or swelling inside which the leg is weak, and then heal the wound with hard flesh-growing and consolidating ointment.
And such medicines which have astringent and drying properties; when they are restored, the injury is healed and there is no fear of relapse.
But if the fistula has already penetrated to the depth of the anus and is protruding from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it with that.
And so, if you find that it is tense and there is a thin membrane or flesh in the way, close to penetration, then it is not surgery that should be performed on it but rather trust and hope should be relied upon.
The cause of this is to administer it in one of three ways: either by cauterizing it as we have said; or by drying it out until you reach the cavity so that it becomes possible for you to insert a curette and perform the necessary treatment, but do not make too large an incision for fear of cutting into the muscle containing the rectum, and causing involuntary egestion in the patient; or heal it with what we have said is very easy to heal; or by extending the membrane and cleaning out the pus that has formed inside, as we have said, either with a curette or another sharp instrument, and then clean the fistulized flesh within the incision where you can with percrustation; and finally, make every effort to restore the entire wound with an incision, but if the opening of the pus above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open at the parted anus, it will be easier for the patient. And sometimes the fistula ends in this way: when you insert the probe into the fistula, it is near the surface of the body around the edge of the anus, then take a probe with a perforated tip, similar to a needle for preparing hearts in this shape:
and insert it into the wound covered with pus or around it, then insert the probe with pus into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
But if it penetrates near the edge of the anus, then extract the pus from that hole and insert your finger into the anus, extracting the end of the pus and adjusting both ends to be level, stretching each one, leaving it like this for a day or two. And when you see that the pus has penetrated deep into the flesh, stretch the area around where the flesh between the two ends of the pus falls out.
Then heal the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it so by any means possible but not too deep to avoid cutting into the muscle. And heal it when it has been treated.
The shape of the spatula spine is such that the curve is very sharp and the other end is not, so as to avoid cutting what is not necessary, as sometimes happens.
Regarding the suture of hemorrhoids where blood flows from that incision.
Hemorrhoids are of two types: either they are inside the anus resembling charcoal, or they look like lumps of fat. And of these, some are small and others are large, and blood flows from them continuously and is one, and they are many, and are outside the anus, and at the ends of it.
But those that are outside the anus are of two types: either from dry months, where clear yellow water or a small amount of blood with constant flow is secreted and matches the color of the body.
And the treatment for those inside the anus is to command the patient to sit and apply pressure until the anus protrudes and the hemorrhoids become visible to you. Then you should sit and hold onto the protruding anus with hooks or use your fingernails to make small incisions on its ridges.
But if the hooks cannot be used on those due to their moisture and softness, then take some rough fabric or a piece of wood or wool cloth and extract them with your fingers, then make small incisions on them and sprinkle some hot powders over the wounds to replace cauterization; or cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterization. And treat those with the other treatment until they are healed.
But if the anus does not obey and expel its contents, then use a Christ-stick with a small bite on it and wash it with water that is in the anus to encourage gentle expulsion when the patient squeezes.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is light and is that you take them with your fingernail or with hooks, and make small incisions on them, and treat them as previously mentioned until they are healed.
And if there is an incision, then you must administer suturing in this way: take pus-covered thread and insert it into the needle, then use the needle to pull the hemorrhoids towards the edges above them, and pierce the other side with the needle, enclosing both ends of the thread on the edge below the needle, and horizontally; then tighten the hemorrhoid with strong tension, and then tie the thread and remove the needle.
And do this to all of them, leaving one untied so that the excess blood can flow out of it.
And then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the anus, and place it on the anus and instruct the patient to rest. And then leave it until it falls off, and when it has fallen off, heal the area with ointment or other treatment until it is healed.
And if they are old and not responding to treatment, then it is necessary to open the fistulas with the point of a spatula or your fingernail until they become moist and allow for the removal of excess pus on top, which prevents them from healing; and then heal them until they are consolidated.
Then use forceful pressure to open the fistulas with great force until they bleed and are scraped; and then heal them until they are healed.
Know that almesamir is characterized by redness throughout the body, similar in color to a clove bud, and it affects all parts of the body but is most noticeable in the areas below the feet and around the eyes. And to treat this pain, one must attend to its cause.
Then it is necessary to incise the area around the redness and extract what has formed there using forceps or hooks, and then heal the wound.
And if desired, cauterize it as described in its chapter.
But a wart is a small rough round protrusion on the surface of the body, and it often appears on the skin of children.
The treatment for it is to cut and incise the wart, or to tighten it with thread or hair until it falls off. And if desired, cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine as previously mentioned.
A furuncle is a small swollen or fistulous eminence on the surface of the body with the appearance of being pricked by a ant, and when the pus in it is touched, it feels like an ant bite, and it forms around the body.
The treatment for it is that you take a quill cannula from a goose or a vulture, and make sure it is strong, and place it over the furuncle so that the circumference of the cannula contains it entirely; then rotate your hand with the cannula until it draws out what is inside the circumference of the furuncle, and place it in the flesh, and remove the furuncle from its root.
And if you wish, do that with an iron or steel cannula in the following way:
Let the upper part of the cannula be very thin, blunt (that is, not sharpened), and covered with a material that makes the touch on it smooth, so that when you rotate the cannula, the sensation is not uncomfortable for the patient.
And if you wish to cauterize the furuncle as described in the previous section on cautery for abscesses, see the chapter on cautery.
On the form of the instruments used to perform surgery.
Some cauterizing instruments are made of silver or lead or iron that has been melted or hammered; and some are made in different sizes, both large and small, depending on the ones used for a particular procedure, because the instrument used to cauterize small children should be small; and those with sharp or pointed tips, the cauteries for these should be small.
The form of large and small cauterizing instruments is as follows:
The end of the cannula at the top, where the pouch is attached, should be wide in this manner; and it should have a clear marking indicating where the pouch is attached, as shown here.
And the lower end of it, which extends into the tip, should be blunt (that is, not sharpened) like a lion's claw, with two cuts on one side and one cut on the other, and the width of the cuts should correspond to the thickness of the rays [of flesh], and the largest one should be slightly smaller.
And let the pouch where medicines made from animal bladder or sheep's wool are placed be one hand-span in size.
And let it be pierced by many holes, just as it is rotated; and the space between the holes should be the width of a finger.
And then insert into these holes a strong cord of crude gall made from ten gallbladders or approximately that amount, and attach the pouch to it; and when the pouch is placed on it, let it be tightly secured to the end of the cautery instrument with strong pressure, and cauterize with each hole: But the way to cauterize with this is to fill the pouch with the medicine, which should be warmed according to the patient's tolerance; and make sure that it is not too hot or too cold.
And let the patient be lying on their back, with their legs raised and a support placed under them, such as a board or a bolster; and then anoint the end of the cautery instrument with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or similar substances; and then gently insert it into the opening with ease, and let the assistant take hold of the pouch and express it with two hands and squeeze it vigorously until everything in the cautery has been evacuated into the intestines; and then remove the cautery instrument and have the patient lower their legs from the wall.
And if the medicine causes an emission, wait as long as you can; and if it puts him to sleep for the entire night, it is even better.
But if you are cauterizing in cases of abdominal solution and the emission of it causes discomfort, then you should repeat the cautery until it is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then let the cautery be very fine and blunt, like those used for children.
On treatment of wounds.
I have already said in the division of the treatment of wounds what is necessary for this book, and I say now the treatment of those with my assistance and with medicines according to their needs.
Therefore, I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made from and according to the location on which the wounds occur.
And the causes for which many times plague/infections are made are similar to stone throwing, or cut with a sword or knife, or puncture with a spear, or with a stick, or with an arrow, or similar to these from many causes.
But the plagues that are in the parts of the body are like a plague called "plaga" which falls on the head, or neck, or chest, or belly, or thigh, and similar to these in the limbs.
And I am recommending the treatment of certain plagues so that you may apply this reasoning and rule to other plagues.
And I will begin with the simple plagues of the head, since the memory of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
So I say that when a simple plague occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a stone strike or similar, and the skull has been cracked only slightly, and it is a severe wound, and you are concerned about the development of an abscess in the patient, then you should quickly trepan the skull without delay. And extract from the wound according to the amount of blood that is flowing, if there is no other reason prohibiting trepanation, especially if the blood that has come out of the wound is scant.
And the trepanation should be performed on the side opposite to the affected area, and the patient should be kept from food and drink and heavy meals.
But if any reason prohibits minimal food intake, then the patient's diet should be reduced and they should avoid eating meat or drinking wine.
And place a poultice on the wound, if an abscess has developed, made from roasted oil or wine that has been boiled and then cooled to a solid state.
But if you are certain that an abscess has not formed, then place a poultice on the wound, if it is fresh and still bleeding, using the powder that I will recommend shortly.
But if the air has already changed since the wound was inflicted, then use other ointments until it is healed.
But if the wound is severe or caused by a sword cut and the edges are not properly aligned, then use stitches to close the wound as I will recommend in the section on suturing.
But if the wound has exposed the bone and is not just a contusion but rather a small flap of skin, then you should cut away the excess skin and treat the wound with medicine, restoring the flesh in place of the skull, and instruct the patient to avoid foods that are heavy or difficult to digest until the wound has healed.
And if you find putrefaction on the skull that has not attached to the bone, then you should cut away all of the affected tissue and remove it, and then treat the wound.
But if these plagues involve an artery or vein that is causing excessive bleeding, and it cannot be stopped with medicine, then you should locate the artery and, if you find it uncut, you should cut it using a spatula or tie it off. And if necessary, you can use cautery to stop the bleeding until the wound has healed.
And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is likely to be minor, so you can simply apply this powder to the affected area, which will help consolidate the wound before the air changes.
And the method for making this powder is as follows: take one part oil that has been boiled in a fire, two parts dragon's blood, and three parts unburnt chalk; grind all of these ingredients together thoroughly and sift them until they are fine, then fill the wound with the powder and apply gentle pressure to ensure that it adheres well. Allow the powder to coagulate with the patient's blood before dressing the wound.
And then bind the wound with bandages and leave it alone until it has healed completely, do not remove the dressing while there is still pus or infection present, as this will prevent the medicine from taking effect and healing the wound.
And sometimes you can use only cautery, when you do not have oil and dragon's blood on hand.
And this method can also be used in cases of severe wounds when it is necessary to apply it directly to the wound and bind it tightly, as long as the wound is fresh and still bleeding, and the air has not yet begun to affect it.
And if the air has already affected the wound, especially in summer, then it is not advisable to use this powder, but rather you should treat the wound with other methods as I have described, such as applying various ointments or using a poultice made from barley flour and water mixed with honey. This will help promote healing and prevent further infection in the affected area. And continue treating the wound with these methods until it has fully healed.
But if the wound involves a broken bone and is small, then you should remove it using gentle traction.
And I will discuss the treatment of skull fractures in this section on poisonous wounds.
Now I will discuss wounds and injuries of the neck.
But if the wound occurs in the neck, then treatment is similar to that of a simple head wound, with no significant differences in medical care.
But if the neck wound has cut nerves or an artery, then if it is nerves, do not attempt to treat them directly but rather avoid any treatment that causes strong stiptic properties, such as using zinc or lead, which are forms of vitriol and similar substances that can cause nerve damage and contraction. And do not apply any treatment that causes excessive cold to the wound, as the substance of nerves is sensitive to cold and their continuation is with the brain, which is the most important part of all the members.
And if it is something that can be cured with light medicines, such as washing with warm water, sometimes infused with oil, rose oil or not, and when washed with warm water and the other methods are used according to this method, and ointments are heated.
But if the wound is large, then administer stitches or bring together the lips of the wound and treat it with powders until it heals.
But if the wound is deep or pus has formed in its lower part, then lance it in the most depressed location.
But if an artery has been cut and there is a flow of blood in the wound, then separate it, dry it, tie it, or cauterize it if necessary.
But if the vertebrae of the spine have been cut, whether partially or entirely, but the veins of the neck are safe, then bring together the lips of the spinal cord with sutures on the axis of the spine without touching it; straighten and realign it to its natural shape, and strengthen it with gentle traction, leaving it in place for several days. Then treat it with ointments that have astringent and stimulating properties until it is healed.
But if the wound has reached the bone, then percuss it and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all that you can; and what is not attached to it, leave it inside until the wound dries up and is separated from it, and its swelling is relieved.
And if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle powder on it that has been recommended to you. But if a fistula has formed in the wound, then treat it with what is mentioned in its chapter.
If it is a wound from a lance or knife and sometimes its depth is visible, then consider if there is air coming out of the wound when the patient exhales; if so, know that the wound is fatal.
And if there is no depth to the wound and it is fresh with its own blood, then in the first hour put powder on it, but do not press it so that the blood does not get trapped inside and return to the heart, increasing the patient's pain, but instead apply an attractive ointment and loosen the edges of the wound twice a day.
And if the ointment is not available, then apply a piece of clean cloth to the opening of the wound so that it can absorb any moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound so that what is accumulated in it can flow out.
But if three days or more have passed since the wound and there is no spasm, tremor, or palpitations in the patient's heart, and other good signs are present, then know that the wound is healed; and then treat it with cupping glasses and other treatments until it is fully healed.
But if the healing process is delayed and there is continuous discharge, then know that a fistula has formed; treat it as described in its chapter.
And if the wound is caused by a spear or knife and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with stitches if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
But if it has reached the bone and there are fragments of bone inside, then twist the wound to remove those fragments, if they are separate. But if they are not separate, then leave them inside for the wound to dry up and make their removal easier.
And regarding other wounds that occur in other parts of the body, their treatment is similar to what has been mentioned.
About wounds in the abdomen.
The disorder that occurs in the abdomen is either severe, mild, or moderate.
A minor rupture is also difficult to treat in another way, and I know that the reduction of it is even more difficult if you do not take care of its prolapse into its location immediately because it swells and becomes thick, making its insertion back into place difficult.
And so the best disorder is a moderate one because the reduction of the intestine is not difficult in this case, unlike the difficulty in the two previously mentioned types.
And know that stitching in the abdomen is done in four ways, but two types of stitches are common and suitable for stitching other wounds in the body.
And two other types of stitches are specific to other wounds but are also specific to abdominal stitching.
And I recommend that you explain and describe each one.
Therefore, I say that when the wound is small and there is prolapse of the intestine through it due to some cause, and reduction of the intestine becomes difficult, then it is in one of two ways: either due to the small size of the rupture as previously mentioned, or because the intestine has become inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
And so when it is like this, then it is necessary to scrape the intestine in such a way that you immerse a sponge or cloth soaked in warm water alone, or in water with quince, cumin, and fennel, and introduce it into the intestine until its inflammation subsides.
And sometimes it is necessary to add astringent agents in the water to resolve the inflammation, which is better than using water alone for this purpose.
And so when you see that the inflammation has subsided, then moisten the intestine with water mixed with mallow and chamomile because it eases its insertion back into place with little effort.
But if it is difficult to insert the intestine back into place, then incise the rupture slightly with an instrument used for hemorrhoid surgery.
And the primary treatment is better when it is appropriate and does not involve cutting or removing a necessary part that may lead to deficiency or weakness.
Regarding the instrument, let me describe its shape:
One end of it is sharp and curved, while the other end is not sharp and blunt, with a fine tip that is not as thin as a spatula, but slightly more rounded at the end.
And so when the wound is large and there is prolapse of the intestine through it, then its reduction should be done according to its natural shape and location, if possible on top of it, because that is better.
But when the rupture is wide, and is in the lower part of the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on their side, and place their upper hips higher than their head; and if it is above the belly, then you place their head and feet higher than the affected area.
Similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two sides of the belly, then place your attention and consideration always on this so that the affected side is higher than the other.
And it is also necessary to administer this in both major and minor wounds/afflictions.
And in small wounds, place what is prepared for it, and ensure that the minister is close by your side, holding the wound with their hand, adjusting the lips of it, and ensuring that nothing comes between the suture or causes any other issue.
This is the common method of suturing: take a needle or count the number of stitches according to the width of the wound; then place it at the tip of the incision of the ring finger and pull the needle through with one hand, making sure not to pierce both ends of the thread, but rather the two ends of the skin behind the incision, until you make it penetrate from that side. And in this way, you have connected two ends of the thread and two ends of the skin, forming four rows.
And then pull the thread double through the needle's loop, and sometimes stitch together both sides at once, and then bring the two lips of the wound together in a neat manner; and place your finger inside and insert another needle into it, and tie it to the first one with thread in the same way as before. And do not stop doing this with the needles until you have completed stitching the entire length of the wound.
And the needles should be of medium thickness between coarseness and fineness because fine needles slightly cut into the flesh, while thick ones are difficult to insert into the skin. Therefore, it is necessary that they be medium in fineness and coarseness.
And it is not necessary for the needle to be inserted too close to both ends of the skin because this may slightly cut into the flesh and cause the wound to open up again before it has healed.
And the stitches should not be too long so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
And then make sure the ends of the needles are sharp so that they do not poke the patient while they sleep, and place cotton balls expanded on all sides over the stitches to keep the needle ends in place, leaving them there until you know for certain that the wound has healed.
And this type of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, as it may only require one or two stitches or so around the wound.
And the second common suture is to stitch together the four ends of the skin and thread in one go with a needle that has fine and coarse thread wrapped around it.
And then, when you have penetrated these four ends with the needle, bring it back out from that same layer of skin where you started, so that the thread retreats and exits from the upper part of the wound, making the stitches resemble those in fabric where the threads are pulled tight.
And place between each stitch a length of thread equal to the width of the small finger.
And this type of stitching is known among people.
And with this type of stitching, I sewed up the wound that a man had received in his belly from being stabbed with a knife, which was larger than a palm in size and had caused the intestines to protrude around two palms' worth of the middle part of the intestine and was located in the middle of the member. And this all occurred after the wound had been open for 24 hours since the intestines had come out.
And the wound healed within 15 days or so, and I cured him and he recovered; and as a result, he lived for many years and was able to carry on with his usual activities.
And the other doctors had judged that he would not recover; and it was a miracle, as I did not cure him with any ointment because it was in a location where no ointment or medicine could be found. Instead, I placed an old piece of cloth on the wound twice a day and frequently washed it with honey water until it was healed.
But I will tell you about two types of stitching that are specific to my practice, as described in the narrative of the Word.
And one of them is to start stitching from the skin and then insert the needle from the outer layer to the inner layer.
And as the needle penetrates through the skin and into that same layer of flesh in a straight and long manner, leaving the end of the thread where you inserted the needle; then insert the needle from the inner layer to the outer layer at the other end of the wound, forming a complete stitch.
And after you have made that stitch, then make another one in the same manner by inserting the needle from the outer layer to the inner layer at the same end of the wound; leave the end of the thread on this side and insert the needle into the other end of the inner layer, forming another complete stitch.
And make your incision with that instrument with which you make the incision enter into the abscess at the extremity of the member, which is at the opening, so that everything penetrates.
And begin from this side of the abscess, and with its extremity connect it to the other side, and extract the needle that is in the abscess, and return it to the abscess in this way, connecting the extremity of the abscess on the other side with this part of the limb; and extract the needle that is inside the patient's body.
And do this multiple times, and do it in such a way that you suture everything that is outside according to this example.
And the sum of this method of suturing is that you use suture made from animal gut to sew together the skin, in such a way that you suture the abscess once on the side of the extremity of the needle, and leave the other part open until it has been completed.
But the second type of suturing, which I mentioned earlier and highly recommend, is done in the manner described by Galen, as follows: you sew together two similar parts with such precision that the physician connects all parts to their corresponding parts in a way that is natural for them; and then apply the extremity of one part to the other extremity of the patient's body, in the manner that I have described.
It is necessary that you insert the needle in the extremity of the patient's body, on your side of the exterior part, and then make it penetrate into the interior part in that same location, leaving two sides of the wound exposed; and then turn the needle around and make it penetrate from the outside to the inside of the two sides of the wound.
And then turn those sutures around and make each of them penetrate from the interior to the exterior on two sides of the patient's body that are opposite each other.
And this method of suturing is better than the common light suturing, and it is the suturing that I previously mentioned.
This is Galen's method.
But they also said that suturing of the abdomen is corrected with two needles, so you insert a thread in each of them and begin with the needle on your side, making it penetrate into the other side according to the suturing method used for intestines.
And know that when there is a rupture in the middle location of the abdomen, then the suturing of it is more difficult than for other locations on the abdomen.
But the treatment of one type of plague is the judgment for other types of plagues.
The reason for this is that when you encounter the recent plague with its blood before the air alters it, and you return the intestines to their proper place and suture them properly, then you can apply a powder that promotes healing.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then apply a guiding ointment that is present before you until it forms a hard crust and drains the pus, and consolidates the abscess and wound; and treat it in the same way as the treatment for other types of plagues until it is healed.
But if you are not present with the medications, then apply it as soon as possible, since it begins to ooze pus, and change it every two days, as I have taught you, until it is healed, because you will not need any other medication when the plagues are simple.
But if you are afraid that the plague may spread to the main members, then it is necessary that you soak a lion's wool in high-quality bath oil or rose oil and apply it to the area between the joints and below the armpits.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, because many wounds have appeared, then apply a mixture of wine and black stiptic powder to it, especially if the putrefaction has spread into the intestines and created an opening that penetrates into its cavity.
And know that the intestine that is thick-walled heals more easily than the one that is thin-walled.
And it is difficult to heal because the intestine that is called "gallbladder" does not receive healing from any plague that enters it; and this is due to the large number of veins in it, as well as its large size, and the delicate nature of its body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if what comes out of the plague is pus and you encounter it fresh, then return it in accordance with your judgment, as you would do for intestines.
But if it has already spread and turned green or black, then you should strengthen it with a thread made of animal gut over the location that is darkened by it, so that blood flows from it, because in pus there are veins and arteries.
And then incise the other location and place the ends of the thread below the exterior part of the wound so that the attraction of it is relieved from the suturing of the tissue and the flow of pus from the wound.
Recapitulation of illnesses when they occur in the intestines.
When there is a rupture in the intestines and it is small, then it may be possible to restore it in some people, because I have seen this in a man who was wounded in his stomach with a lance and had an illness on the right side of his stomach, and the illness was old and had formed a fistula, and it released gas and feces.
Therefore I continued the treatment of it, knowing that it was not suitable for healing, but I ceased to thin it out until it healed and the area became solid.
And I, after seeing that the area had become solid, feared for the patient that he would experience an accident in his stomach; and none of this occurred because he was careful with his diet and continued to eat and drink in a healthy manner, and also took baths and exercised regularly.
And some experienced doctors have said that when a small illness occurs in the intestines, then it is necessary to bind it in this way: and that is, you take horseradish with large roots; and then you align the two lips of the wound and place one of those horseradishes, which has its mouth open, over the two lips of the wound; so when you press on it and close its mouth, cut off its head, because it adheres and is not dissolved.
And then place another horseradish next to the first one, and do not stop doing this with horseradishes, placing them one after the other according to the size of the entire wound.
And then return it and suture the wound, leaving the heads of the horseradishes attached to the intestines until the intestines are healed, and do not cause any harm to the patient.
And it is possible that the intestine is tied with thin bile which is done by attaching the intestine of an animal to it, since it is sewn on; and it is necessary for you to take hold of the end of this bile-covered intestine, and strip it of flesh, and tie the end of it with bile, wrapped around, and then insert that bile in needles and sew the intestine with those needles, and return it to its place.
And this method of suture with ants is only according to the way of trust and hope.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in a delicate intestine, then it will not be healing but rather further opening, and it will not heal completely.
On the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Know that every wound and abscess, when it becomes thin and old, forms an ulcer, and is not consolidated and always discharges pus, then, in any part of the body, it is universally called a fistula, and we call it this type of ulcer.
And a fistula is truly a hard and white nodule that is not painful and has a cavity like the shape of a bird's beak; and because of this, it is called a "raised ulcer," that is, a beaked ulcer.
And it is a moist ulcer in men, which always discharges pus; and the moisture is easily drained in some hours. And sometimes this moisture is abundant, and it is scarce, and it is thick, and it is thin.
I have shown all of these causes and their signs, as well as their treatment with medicines in the division.
And so it is necessary for me to inform you of the treatment of fistulas, which is done through surgical methods using the hand.
And know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body, as some affect large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the hip, or the intestine, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae in the back, or one of the joints such as those between the hand and arm; and others are close to the main part of the body.
And so among these fistulas, the one that is of this type is one of the difficult-to-heal diseases, and it does not receive treatment, and its management involves hard work and ignorance.
And if any of the fistulas does not reach these locations that I mentioned, and you hope for a cure and trust in it, and want to understand its condition, then take an iron or a probe, and if the fistula follows a straight path, search for it with this tool.
But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a thin piece of lead, as lead has lightness in its body and can be bent according to the twist of the fistula.
And if the fistula has many holes, it is not possible for you to recognize or understand it with the probe.
Therefore, purge the openings of the fistula with its own openings, as the moisture that you use for purging will flow through the other openings and clean them out as well.
And then investigate carefully, in any way possible, so that you can understand if there is bone or nerve in this area, and whether the cavity of the fistula is deep or shallow, or if it has multiple openings and covers everything with all your strength, attention, and inquiry, by observing the patient's reaction to compression with your hand on the affected area, and similar signs and causes related to abscesses.
And when you have carefully considered all of these causes and determined their validity, then consider the treatment based on your confidence, that is, assess whether it is an apparent or nearby fistula in a healthy location, far from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of the places that I mentioned.
And then you dry out the fistula as previously described in its narration, and remove any pus or dead tissue from it, as well as anything that has been born in the opening of the flesh, such as pus or other similar substances, and cure the wound inside so that it heals completely.
But if the fistula is of great depth and follows a straight path, then it is necessary to incise it in the preon as far as possible, and carefully clean out all of its dead tissue; and then apply hot compresses wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert those inside the cavity of the fistula that you have captured with iron.
And do this several times, until the sharp medicine has completely eroded all of the dead tissue in the cavity of the fistula caused by corruption.
And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it heals completely.
But if it is not healed by this method, then you should cauterize the wound as previously recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you are certain of this, then you should investigate and dry it out as previously recommended, unless there is any reason to prohibit such a procedure due to issues related to veins, nerves, or the main part of the body as previously mentioned.
But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption or blackness in it, then you should cut out the area where the corruption is housed; and then cure it with what encourages the growth of new flesh until it heals completely.
And if it is not healed and still discharges pus as before, then know that you have not yet achieved complete removal of the corruption; and so you must re-examine the area carefully and perform further analysis to determine the extent of the infection, and then thoroughly clean and cure it with your remaining strength. After this, restore it using appropriate treatments or dressings until it heals completely.
And so, if it heals, that is good; but if not, then know that the corruption is in the deep part of the body, which has not been reached, and therefore your efforts have not succeeded.
And if the corrupt bone is small or can be easily removed, then you should remove it with fine forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
And if there are multiple bone fragments, then you should carefully extract all of them, leaving behind no remaining cause with your strength.
But if there is any obstacle to the removal of moisture or in its incision, and there is no fear or mistake in doing so, then you should cut the ligaments or flesh that are present, and deliver the bones.
But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at this time, then place a poultice on the wound that promotes healing, and leave it in place until it surrounds the bones with flesh and ligaments. Then keep the wound open so that it does not close up, and maintain pressure on the section of the wound that you have incised during your procedure.
If you are afraid, then place a compress soaked in a solution of three parts wine and one part oil, or a compress soaked in Egyptian ointment, or any other green ointments on it, as when these ligaments rot, the bones will separate from them and the attraction will be relieved.
But if it is a large bone such as the bone of the thigh or hip, and only the surface of it is affected by corruption, then cut away the affected area with precision until the blackness and corruption are removed, and then restore the wound.
If the corruption that affects him is significant and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close off that area and have it incise where the corruption has spread, and then cure what is inside so that it becomes solid.
I recommend to you what to do for a man when his thigh swells up, so that you place an example and aid over your operation.
A young man of about thirty years old experienced pain in his thigh, and the part affected inside is on the matter within the body that has reached the thigh, and it is matter of an abscess with a large abscess, and it was not caused by anything external.
And then the time passed with that until the abscess burst due to the error of the doctors, and pus flowed out, and the cure was delayed until the leg became fistulized, and many wounds formed which all emitted pus and bodily fluids.
And then the young man was treated by many doctors for about two years, and they were not knowledgeable in the art, until I was called.
And I saw the leg of the man and the matter that was flowing from those wounds to a great extent, and his entire body was weakened and his complexion was yellowish.
And then I inserted my finger into one of those wounds and reached the bone.
And then I carefully examined all the wounds, and found that they were connected to all parts of the leg.
And then I considered and made an incision into one of those wounds until I exposed a portion of the bone, and found that it was corrupted and had turned to earth and become necrotic; and a part of the leg had also become corrupted, where it had penetrated the medulla.
And then I removed what I had exposed and prepared the bone that was now visible.
And I thought that the problem was not in the bone but rather in the corruption which had to be cut away and removed, and I had already started this process.
And then I attempted to heal the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, but it did not become solid.
And then I re-examined and found that the bone was still infected, even after my previous treatment.
And then I removed what appeared to be the infected material, and attempted to heal and restore the wound, but it was not restored.
And then I discovered even more infection and continued to carefully cut away the bone little by little until I had removed a significant portion of it, along with its marrow. I then used medicine to restore what was left, which healed slightly and became solid.
And there was no need for further operations on the wound and removal of tissue, except for the positioning of the sutures due to the patient's weak constitution and fear of death, as he frequently experienced fainting spells caused by excessive evacuation.
And so the wound healed completely, leaving no hardened flesh in its place, and the limb was restored to its proper position within the body, regaining its function and vitality. The patient also returned to his normal habits and did not experience any adverse effects or harm in any way.
But if there is a protruding bone in the wounded area, then it is necessary to proceed as follows: first, take a strong and flexible ligament and tie it around the end of that protruding bone, and instruct someone to pull on it. Then apply a thicker piece of linen over the skin near the bone, and extend the limb to draw the skin towards the wound. This will expose the flesh above the area where you wish to make the incision, allowing you to cut without damaging the surrounding tissue.
And place a piece of wood or board under the bone in a proper position, as this will not prevent the saw from cutting through the infected flesh.
And the sawing must be done gradually over the infected area, as the corruption may not be visible on the surface and could extend deeper into the bone, requiring additional sawing in other areas.
But if the bone is infected and not protruding, with one section connected to another, and the corruption is in the middle or a portion of it, then you must expose all the flesh from all sides. Then place a piece of wood underneath, and saw through the first section where the infection is, continuing until the other section is reached.
And the sawing should be done according to the location of the corruption as we previously mentioned.
And if the corruption is in a joint, then make an incision into the corrupted joint and saw through the bone where it connects to the other part.
And if the corruption extends between two joints, then it is not reasonable to proceed in this manner.
And if the corruption is in the chest of the hand or foot, it is difficult; however, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you and cut it out accordingly, cleaning it as best as possible based on your abilities, and ensuring that each action is appropriate for the situation, without causing any harm to veins or nerves.
And know that the instruments and saws used for cutting bones vary greatly depending on their location, preparation, thickness, fineness, size, rarity, and hardness, which is why it is necessary to prepare suitable instruments for each type of operation.
And know that this operation depends on the type of instrument you require; when you have extensive study and long experience in these methods of this art, as well as knowledge of various illnesses, then you will already have what is necessary for treating any ailment with appropriate instruments.
And now, at the end of this chapter, I will provide you with a list of instruments that you will need, including simple ones which you will use for your practice and experiments on others. Shape of saw:
Shape of another saw:
Shape of large saw:
Shape of file: The head of this file should be shaped like a star-headed nail, and its teeth should be similar to the points of an awl.
And it is not appropriate to use this file except on joint heads when they are corrupted or have a large and wide opening.
Shape of a smaller rasp:
Shape of a flat rasp:
Shape of another saw that is decently made: it should be shaped like an arc from the upper part and have a sharp edge of iron, and the member of it should be like a well-made dagger. Shape of it:
Shape of a rasp with a concavity:
Shape of another fine rasp:
Shape of another curved rasp:
Shape of a small razor similar to a thorn:
Shape of another smaller cutter:
Shape of another cutter; this one similar to a saw, and its tip is like a saw, it is used in many places in the treatment of bones:
Shape of a saw which is suitable for the treatment of one who has holes in their bones:
And its tip is triangular and sharp-pointed:
And it is made of Indian steel, and similarly, it is appropriate for all the causes mentioned regarding razors, cutters, and saws:
Of incisions at the tips (extremities) and of bone setting:
The extremities can become damaged either due to an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or when you have treated that corruption with medicines and the treatment is not effective, or sometimes the corruption spreads to the member which is not affected by any other cause. In such cases, it is necessary to make incisions in that member where the corruption has spread, so that the patient avoids death or a more serious affliction that could lead to significant damage to the member.
And the sign of one who is affected, is that the member turns black while it is being cauterized, as if the fire has already burnt it, or you can observe the darkness spreading within that member until it covers all the body; and then, quickly make an incision in that place.
And similarly, if the corruption is caused by some venomous causes such as a sea scorpion or a viper or a centipede and similar ones.
And if the corruption or the striking is in the extremity of the finger, then you should make incisions in the finger and not leave any space for the corruption to enter into the hand.
And similarly, if it affects the hand, then you should make incisions in that part of the wrist near the fireplace, and not leave any space for the corruption to enter into the forearm.
And if instead, insert the arm into the sheath at the joint. (I'm assuming "coyde" is a typo and should be "coxa," which means "thigh" or "hip bone" in Latin and was borrowed by French and Spanish)
If corruption has passed and the disease has spread around the thigh, then at this point the patient will die; and to administer another remedy for this condition in treatment is a matter of finding an effective cure.
Similarly, do the same for the foot when corruption has spread to the end of the toe; then insert that into one of the joints (or knuckles).[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/noze](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/noze)
If it takes hold on the skin of the foot, then insert the whole foot (into a treatment or medication).[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/pente](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/pente) But if it reaches the nail, then insert the leg into the joint of the nail (or "at the joint of the digit").[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/denol](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/denol)
And if the corruption has already reached beyond the nail, then there is no help for it but to let nature take its course and allow the patient to die.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/pervenguda](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/pervenguda)
And the method for inserting or binding the member is as follows: you should tighten the ligament below the part where you want to make the incision, and then tighten another ligament over the spot; and have an assistant stretch a ligament below the area, while another assistant stretches another ligament above it; and then separate the flesh that lies between these two ligaments with a space of about half a finger's width, so as to expose all the flesh; and then make the incision or binding.
And it is necessary that a cloth be placed on all sides of the wound so as not to touch it, and that the patient has a swelling or abscess properly treated with caution.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/li](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/li) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/leiso](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/leiso) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/apostema](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/apostema)
But if there is bleeding while you are operating, then cauterize the area appropriately, or place some powder that constricts blood on it; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/coytadament](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/coytadament) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/restrenhentz](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/restrenhentz)
And then bind the infected member with an appropriate ligament and treat it until it heals.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/plaguat](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/plaguat) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/convenient](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/convenient)
I advise you to treat the same condition in a man as occurred to me in my foot: this is when there is blackness in the foot, accompanied by dry heat that resembles a fire's burning (or "scorching").[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/endevenc](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/endevenc) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/adustio](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/adustio)
And this corruption first occurred in his toe, spreading throughout the whole foot.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/tendec](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/tendec)
And so that man prepared for himself the same kind of pus as was needed to treat the member with the intensity required by the pain and dry heat; he inserted his foot into the joint (or "incised it at the joint"), and then healed it.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/atrobec](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/atrobec)[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/inscidic](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/inscidic)
For a long time, that same corruption occurred in the nail of his index finger.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ma](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ma) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/indic](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/indic)
And so he came to me, and I treated him by performing a procedure that involved discharging the excess fluid with what I applied on his hands, in order to purify his body; but this did not work, and the excess fluid began to move to the other finger, starting at the hand. [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/superfluitat](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/superfluitat) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/mundificacio](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/mundificacio)
And he asked me to cut open his hand, but I did not want to do that, hoping for the success of discharging the excess fluid; and also fearing the incision of his hand might lead to death, since the patient's condition was already quite serious.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/cazement](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/cazement)
And because he lost hope in me, he returned to his homeland and later reported to me that the man had cut open his entire hand and then was healed.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/desperec](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/desperec) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/inscidic](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/inscidic)
I have only shared this story in order to assist those suffering from this disease and provide guidance on how it should be treated.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/adjutori](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/adjutori)
This sentence appears to be in Latin and it means "About the cure of sinuses and the quality of clysters with medicines."[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/sinuum](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/sinuum) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/clisterizationis](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/clisterizationis)[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/medicinis](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/medicinis)
When an abscess occurs in fleshy parts of the body and its space is elongated, forming a collection of pus, and it bursts and becomes perforated, and pus comes out of it, leaving a hollow area like a vessel, and the skin above it remains thin like a delicate cloth, and corruption has not reached behind it, nor does it affect bone or nerve or ligament; this is called a sinus, not a fistula.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/carnoze](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/carnoze) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/apostema](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/apostema) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/sania](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/sania) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/quays](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/quays) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/codena](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/codena) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/deriera](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/deriera) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/os](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/os) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/nervi](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/nervi) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/liament](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/liament) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/sinu](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/sinu) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/fistula](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/fistula)
But if the space is elongated to such an extent that corruption reaches a member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/esprema](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/esprema) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/zukem](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/zukem)
And the treatment for it is to cut open that skin entirely as it turns around (or "revolves"), particularly when it becomes thin and delicate like a cloth; and make sure that it does not stick to the wound due to its corruption.
But if you hope that the skin will stick and that corruption has not reached behind it; and there is a small opening in the skin, then treat this with an enema.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/clisteri](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/clisteri) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/spassitut](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/spassitut)
And consider the sinus, and if it is large, and its smell is fetid; then treat it with an enema made from Egyptian medicine that consists of oil, wine, and crushed seeds of cumin, which are mixed together and placed in a vessel, and heated over a fire until the medicine turns red and acquires the scent of honey. [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/fetent](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/fetent) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/egipciac](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/egipciac) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ziniar](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ziniar) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/partidas](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/partidas) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/specitut](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/specitut) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/mel](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/mel)
And then take what is necessary from it and dissolve it in water and honey; and use this solution to administer an enema to the sinus, while also closing its openings; and leave the medicine inside for a period of two hours.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/necessari](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/necessari) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dissolveys](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dissolveys) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/aygua](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/aygua) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/clisteriza](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/clisteriza) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/strenh](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/strenh) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/horas](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/horas)
And then extract the remains of it; and do this for so many days until the sinus is purified and the foul odor is gone.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/sprecio](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/sprecio) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/mundificat](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/mundificat) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/remauguda](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/remauguda) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/pudor](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/pudor)
And sometimes an enema is administered with ash water, when this medicine is not available to you; and you should take the ashes of vine branches and mix it with water, and then use that mixture for the enema until you are certain that the sinus has been healed.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/vitz](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/vitz) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/cola](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/cola)
And if the patient cannot tolerate Egyptian medicine or ash water, then administer an enema with water and honey mixed with cumin seeds, three hundred of them; and also use wine and honey mixed together, for it is the property of honey to cleanse and wash, while wine makes the sinus sticky, particularly when the wine has a surplus of astringent and dry qualities.
And when you do this several times and are certain that the sinus has healed, then administer an enema using a solution that causes flesh to grow in it.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/naysser](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/naysser)
And this is done by taking diaphoretic decoction and dissolving it in rose oil and astringent wine; or by administering an enema with various medicines and ingredients that have the properties described in the treatise on enemas.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/diaphoretic](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/diaphoretic) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/decoccio](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/decoccio) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/rozat](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/rozat) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/stiptic](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/stiptic) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/enguentz](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/enguentz)
And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and cannot receive the nozzle of the enema, then gradually widen it using a small iron instrument, while applying heat in the form of a cloth wrapped in Egyptian or basilicon ointment until it has been widened.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/calgua](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/calgua) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/egipciac](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/egipciac) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/basilicon](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/basilicon)
And similarly, if the opening is wide, then use stitches to narrow it and leave enough space for the nozzle of the enema to be inserted without adding anything else.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/sutura](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/sutura)
And if the opening from which the branch protrudes is located above, then dry it in the lowest part of the sinus so that the branch moves downward instead of upward, for when the branch is constricted in the narrowness of the sinus, flesh is generated in it.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/corr](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/corr) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/preondeza](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/preondeza) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/engendrada](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/engendrada)
And if you are unable to dry the sinus near the bone as desired, then it is necessary to prepare the member by making an incision so that the branch protrudes lightly and easily, without being retained in it by any cause.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/prepares](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/prepares) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/apparelhat](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/apparelhat) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/retengut](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/retengut)
But keep what is over the orifice of the sinus always raised to ensure that what has accumulated in the arm can drain out. And so that you know whether what is flowing from the arm is abundant or scanty, and whether it is digested or undigested.
And, in doing so, pay attention to the location of the sinus and check whether it causes pain for the patient or if there is a collection of pus (apostema) in it.
And when your treatment is continued in this manner and you see that the matter discharged on the orifice of the sinus has adhered or is beginning to adhere, then gently detach it or wait three days. When you detach the clot, change the dressing for a new one and apply fresh ointment.
But if the sinus has a deep space and emits subtle viruses, do not be alarmed by the adherence of these substances to it, as this is a sign that the healing process has started. This occurs in certain individuals who have a slow tissue generation rate in their wounds, while others experience the opposite effect.
If the sinus has been draining for several days and the discharge is undigested, then you know that it has not yet healed. If healing is delayed due to prolonged treatment, adjust the medication's level of dryness or wetness based on its substance and effect. For example, if the ointment is too wet or contains an excess of ingredients, use a drying agent like diascordium to balance it out.
The most important thing in treating the wound is to take diascordium ointment and dissolve it in roasted oil. Then, add some of this mixture to a powder made from crushed chamomile flowers and apply it to the affected area.
And in this action, when there is no discharge, use diascordium ointment or roasted honey until it becomes thick, and apply it to the wound. Alternatively, take myrrh, aloe, and resin, grind them into a powder while heating them over the fire, then mix the powder with honey and spread it on a cloth, placing it over the sinus. Do the same with the honey, grinding it until it becomes thick, and mixing it with powdered resin before applying it to a cloth and placing it over the wound.
And sometimes, use longarza root and lily of the valley (which is called lily of the valley) and powdered iris and centaury, using these simple herbs individually or combined, grinding them and sifting them over the honey that I mentioned earlier; then, apply it to the wound.
And if the sinus remains unhealed despite this treatment, it is a sign that corruption has spread to its core and caused an abscess in the bones or other hard tissues such as tendons. In this case, treat it with fistulization therapy, as described earlier.
Here is a treatment for paronychia (infection of the nail fold), onychia (inflammation of the nail), digital abscesses, and fingertip amputations:
Panaricia is an abscess that forms under the nail of a finger or toe, and it can also appear on other fingers. If prolonged and its treatment is undervalued, it may become an abscess within an abscess or become corrupted, causing pus to flow into the nail bed, which in turn can cause the entire nail to rot. This can lead to a foul odor as the corruption spreads to the bone, causing necrosis of the finger's tip and making it turn black.
Therefore, when you have the condition described earlier and find that your treatment is not effective, it is necessary to remove all of the excess nail using iron tools and then cauterize the wound with a hot instrument, as cautery is beneficial in this case.
However, if the bone is intact and the nail is healthy, but the overgrown portions of the nail compress the surrounding skin, causing it to be punctured and damaged, then you should make a fine incision just below the angle of the nail that cuts through the skin, raise it up gently, and cut into the affected flesh with ease. Apply corrosive burning medications on what remains of the flesh until everything is removed. Then, cure it with ointments until healed.
But if the corruption has already affected the bone, then it is necessary to cut into and extract the bone, as there can be no healing while the bone remains corrupt.
And if you see that the corruption and decay have spread to the finger, then you should cut into it at one of its nodes according to where it is most swollen, and treat it until healed.
But if the nail is subjected to percussion or friction and causes intense pain, then it is advisable to first perform a phlebotomy on the patient, and then dry out the nail with a sharp spatula by making a transverse section from top to bottom, ensuring that the cut does not reach the flesh underneath the nail. This is because such a cut could cause severe pain for the patient and lead to the growth of excess skin in the area, which would exacerbate the problem. Afterward, treat the affected area with medication to alleviate pain.
However, in some cases, the problem may be due to an ingrown nail, which is common in certain individuals and can cause excessive growth of flesh or bone, or even develop into a nail-like structure in severe cases.
And some are born in the joint's ligaments or in certain knuckles of the fingers. However, one born in the knuckles of the finger is not problematic, but if it occurs near the joints, there is a higher chance of complications.
And for those that are fleshy, the incision should be light and made along the edge of the flesh with a broad-edged spatula.
However, for those that are born near the joints, the treatment is difficult, and therefore, be cautious with its incision.
But for those that are born near the knuckles, it is necessary to make an incision at the beginning of the flesh along the edge of the bone with a round cut, and then use one of those suitable saws to remove the excess flesh, and treat it until healed.
However, if there is a consolidation that occurs in the fingers due to frequent injuries or by birth or due to wound healing or burn injury, then it is necessary to cut through the consolidation until the fingers return to their natural shape.
And then place between them cloths soaked in roasted oil to prevent re-consolidation, or place a thin sheet of lead between them until they are fully healed.
Similarly, if consolidation occurs in the palm of the hand, you should cut it away according to its shape and size, following the contours of the affected area.
Regarding incision of vice, they are varicose veins.
Vices are varicose veins, which are large, swollen veins filled with excessive melancholic fluid that appear in various parts of the body, most commonly in the legs, and particularly among travelers, laborers, and those who carry heavy loads.
Therefore, it is advisable to administer a strong purge of black bile several times, and also to bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
However, the treatment of varicose veins with iron tools can be done in two ways: one is to make an incision and draw out black blood, while the other way is to raise the vein and extract it entirely.
The incision is made in the following way: first, apply hot water to the leg up to the point where the thick blood has coagulated, which is a sticky substance in the calf. Then bind the patient's leg to the upper part of the thigh with a bandage, and dry the vein in one, two, or three places with a wide incision. Next, use the back of your hand to press on the dark blood from below the calf upward towards the wound until you have extracted the desired amount that you deem necessary based on the patient's condition.
And then bandage it, and instruct the patient to avoid foods that cause black bile production.
Repeat the treatment with phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is noticeable to the patient.
However, elevation of varicose veins can be done in the following way: You should raise the leg of the patient and check for any swelling. Then place them in warm water up to their waist and add hot water to the affected limb until it turns red and the veins become prominent. Alternatively, if a bath is not available, have the patient engage in strenuous exercise to cause sweating and promote circulation in the affected area. [6]
And then dry the skin in the area above or below the affected vein, either along the length of the vein near the ankle or behind it, or at the base of the foot near the heel.
And then use hooks to open the skin and extract the vein from all sides until you feel it in your touch, and this is apparent by the sensation of the ropy cord becoming darker in color.
And once you have removed it, you will see a white cord-like structure, which is the extracted vein.
Then place the vein below the incision so that it is raised and separated from the skin, and suspend it with a golden weight or lead.
And then dry another section above the incision for three fingers' width and extract the skin from above the vein until it is visible.
Then lift the vein and make an incision in the rear section near the heel, extract it from there and elevate it until it comes out through the second incision. Finally, extract the remaining portion of the vein above this incision.
And do this until you extract the portion of the vein that is highest or deepest among all incisions, until all of it has been removed, and then make an incision there.
If the patient does not obey your instructions to extract and elevate the vein, then insert a large needle with double-strength thread into it and tie it up, and extract it. Alternatively, place a rod under the skin below the incision and rotate your hand around it until the vein is extracted. But be careful not to cut it too deeply, as breaking the vein would make it difficult to elevate and could cause harm to the patient due to complications.
Once you have removed the entire vein, then apply wool soaked in vinegar and roasted oil to the affected area, and treat it until it heals.
If the vein is contracted with twisting and winding around its parts, which deviates from what we have described, then it is necessary to make incisions along the entire length of the twist and in the areas where it is wrapped, and suspend it with hooks until you raise it completely. [4]
And be careful not to cut the vein or damage it while making incisions, as this would make it difficult for you to elevate it later. Use your judgment and caution in performing this procedure.
Shape of the incision which has been dried up:
It is not the same shape as a hook or sharp-pointed, so that it does not harm the vein; and it has thick flexibility like a lion, because if it were too fine, it would cut into the vein with its fineness; it has an excess of thickness, as we have said.
On the extraction of the leg vein.
This vein is generated in the legs, in hot lands such as Egypt and Arabia, and in the dry lands of India and other similar places that have little vegetation or water.
And it is also generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And its growth is due to putrefaction that comes after the intestines, just as poisonous snakes and worms grow in the body, as well as lizards and worms generated between the intestines and flesh.
A sign of the onset of this vein is inflammation in the leg, followed by swelling at the site; and soon the location begins to resemble a small blossoming plant, as if a root has emerged from the swollen area.
And when the extremity appears, it is necessary to wrap a lead weight around it, weighing between one and two dragmas, and leave the lead suspended from the leg.
And as often as any pus or fluid leaks from the area, wrap it up with lead and bandage it again. And if it becomes very swollen, then cut a small portion of it and bandage the rest; but do not puncture the bulge itself until it has emerged completely, because if you do so beforehand it may contract and enter back into the flesh, causing abscesses, inflammation, and ulcers in that location.
Therefore it is necessary to treat it gently and extract it gradually, until it has been completely removed from the body without leaving any residue or trace behind.
And from this vein emerges in some men that is as long as five palms and has reached me that it emerged one of twenty palms.
And if it is lanced during the appropriate time for treatment, then insert the probe into the opening and pierce the vein with a long incision through the body, until all of the matter has been evacuated; administer putrefaction to the area for several days using medicines; and treat it as you would an abscess.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, and most often when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot itself, and many holes appear there, and each branch emerges from its own hole.
And so treat it as we have said in the division, and with what has been said above.
On the sectioning (cutting) of worms generated under the skin and it is called "bovine disease."
This illness is called "bovine disease" in some countries, because it often affects cows and is a type of worm that is born between the intestines and flesh, and moves throughout the body up and down, and is visible as it moves from one part of the body to another until it breaks through the skin.
And its generation is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, just as with the growth of worms and snakes and earthworms and tapeworms in the stomach.
And it is feared for its malice, because when it moves through the body and rises to the head, and reaches the ear, it easily enters and destroys the ear, and this happens frequently.
And so when you want to cure it and remove it, then do not do anything unless the worm moves and appears at the skin's surface where it can be felt, and then it is necessary to press firmly on top of it and on its sides with force, and dry it out and extract it.
And if it is embedded in the flesh and you cannot find it, then you should apply a hot cautery to the location until it dies, because the most feared aspect of it is its corruption, which can cause decay just as we have said.
But if you see it reach the head near the ear, then press firmly on top of the eyebrow with strong pressure, and dry it out and extract it; and the patient must use purifying medicines for their body that evacuate bad putrid humors, and avoid foods that cause putrefaction.
On the incision of "nafir" illness.
This illness is called "nafir" in our land and is a pain that appears in certain limbs and then moves from one part of the body to another.
And I have already seen the second thing that I will recommend to you. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small swelling in the great vein of the arm, and after it had been open for an hour, I saw that the swelling moved like a worm moving upward, but more gently than before, as if it were liquid silver flowing from place to place.
And then the pain moved from that location and entered the muscle, and it remained there for an hour.
And then it moved into the other part of the body until it reached the other arm.
And she told me that it moved through her whole body, as I had seen; and I was astonished at its movement and its speed from one member to another. And I had already seen something similar in my own experience, but I have also seen many instances where pain is moved from member to member. But I have not seen this with the feet as in the woman.
And I do not think that this is the case with the woman, because she is old and her body is dry, with exposed veins; and in her case, it appears that the sensation of the gas moving is more pronounced.
And it is necessary that this does not appear in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with narrow veins.
And as for the treatment of it, and when the patient feels the pain, then you should not treat it as I have described before; instead, you should apply pressure to that area and gently squeeze it until the gas is released and the pain dissipates, and cauterize the location.
But if you do not see it with your own eyes, then you should treat it with bodily evacuation and by inducing the expulsion of gas; and cleanse it with stinking pills and similar things, such as serapias pills.
Regarding the removal of arrows.
Arrows are varied in type, depending on the materials they are made of and the location in the body where they become lodged; for their diversity is such that some have large points, small points, concave points, blunt points, sharp points with three angles, pointed tips with tongues, or feathered flights.
And the signs of imminent death are when an arrow has pierced through bone and exited at the skull, which is located above the brain, causing violent swelling, blind spots in vision, dizziness, paralysis in the limbs, inflammation and pain in the tongue, spasms, confusion of mind, vomiting of bile, severe difficulty speaking and loss of voice, white fluid seeping from the wound like dust, and similar signs of decay in the flesh.
And therefore, if these signs appear, then you should refrain from treating the wound and extracting the arrow, unless it is absolutely necessary.
And the signs of an arrow that has pierced the heart, when it is near the left nipple and feels as if it has been lodged in a hard place and not one that is visible; and the movement of the arrow is similar to the pulse, blood flows from the wound, there is coldness in the extremities, chills, and fainting; therefore, know that death is imminent.
And the signs of an arrow that has pierced a lung are foamy blood flowing from the wound, swelling in the veins near the throat, a change in color in the patient, great difficulty breathing, and a desire for cool air.
And if the arrow has pierced the fascia, which is in the feet, then the pain will be located near the small ribs, causing intense and sharp pain, as well as difficulty breathing and sighing, but it will not affect all the limbs or muscles.
And if the arrow has pierced the stomach, then there will be signs of undigested food near the wound.
And if the arrow has pierced the belly and become embedded there, then there will be a tear in the wound or ripped tissue or intestines, and it is unlikely that the patient can be saved by extracting the arrow.
And if the arrow has pierced the bladder and caused it to release urine, and there are signs of infection or inflammation near the wound, then the pain will be severe, and you should know that this is a fatal injury.
But other parts of the body, such as the face, neck, shoulders, shoulder blades, vertebrae in the spine, collarbones, hips, and thighs, can be saved with favorable conditions if the arrow has not punctured a vein or artery and is not venomous.
And I will tell you what I have observed about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand my recommendations for treating them.
This is because I once treated a man who had been struck by an arrow in the lacrimal gland of his eye, near his nose; I extracted it from him at another location, below his ear lobe, and he was healed without any injury to his eye.
I also once extracted an arrow from a judge who had been struck in the corner of his eye, below the eyelid; the arrow was concealed and could not be seen except for a small protrusion attached to its shaft, and it was a large arrow with sharp points, like those used by Turkish archers, made of iron shaped like a lion without ears.
Yes, the judge, and his eye was not injured as a result.
I also once extracted an arrow from a Christian man who had been struck in the neck; it was an Arabic arrow with wings, and I carefully inserted my fingers around it to remove it, as it had become deeply embedded in his neck; but I was able to skillfully extract it, and the Christian man was healed.
I also extracted an arrow from a man who had been struck in the stomach, and I thought that he would die as a result; but after thirty days passed without any change in his condition, I carefully inserted my fingers around the arrow and gently removed it, and he was healed without any further injury.
I also saw a man in whom an arrow had pierced his back and become lodged there; the wound healed over, but after seven years had passed, the arrow emerged near his hip.
I also saw a woman who had been struck by an arrow in her stomach, and the wound had healed over without causing any injury or change in her condition, and she did not experience any difficulty with her natural functions.
I also saw another man who had been struck by an arrow in the face, and the wound healed over without causing him any significant pain or injury; there were many similar cases to this one as well.
I also extracted an arrow from the nose of a king's servant; it had entered near the middle of his nostril and veered slightly to the right, but the entire arrow was concealed within.
I was called upon to treat him within three days of being struck by the arrow.
When I examined him, I found the wound from the arrow to be quite small, and I carefully probed the area but did not feel anything; however, he reported feeling a sharp pain below his right earlobe, and so I realized that this pain must have been caused by the tip of the arrow. [15] E adonc yeu extrayssi la sageta entro le troys dias del cazement de lu per aquela extremitat la qual era en le golayro de lu; e apres yeu feyte alcuna curacio sobre aquella plagua, e es sanat.
I applied a poultice to the area that contained attractive and digestive properties, in order to encourage the formation of pus around the wound, which would help me locate the position of the arrowhead so that it could be removed more easily.
And there were no significant complications as a result of the arrow remaining in its position, and I continued to apply the poultice for several days without incident; the wound healed over during this time, but after many days had passed, the patient suddenly felt the arrowhead inside his nose and informed me of it. [17] E adonc yeu extrayssi la sageta entro aquel jorn per le razitz del nas de lu e apres feyte alcuna curacio sobre aquella plagua, e es sanat.
I then applied a caustic and penetrating medication to the wound for several days until it became raw, and when I probed it with my finger, I found that the tip of the arrow was still attached to its shaft.
I continued to apply this caustic medication to the wound until I was able to clearly see the tip of the arrow, and I persisted with this treatment for several months as necessary.
As the wound became larger and it became possible for me to insert forceps into it, I continued to probe and manipulate the arrow until one day I was able to extract it using carefully designed forceps, as will be described in greater detail later; and after removing the arrow, I treated the wound.
Many doctors believed that the cartilage in the nose could not be repaired, but I was able to restore it and heal the wound completely, such that the patient suffered no further injuries or complications as a result.
I have described the extraction of some arrows to give you an idea of the principles and techniques involved, but these methods are not comprehensively covered in this text, as they are beyond its scope and require further study and understanding of the art and its definitions.
The wise craftsman compares little to much, and the present to the absent; he finds new operations and instruments in response to unexpected causes that arise in the practice of his art.
And so I say that arrows are not easily removed from the members in which they have become embedded, but rather only by two methods: either by drawing out the arrow from the location where it has entered, or by moving it towards the opposite end of the member.
And when an arrow is removed from the location where it has entered, this occurs either by drawing out a flesh arrow that has penetrated deeply and become stuck, or else by extracting an arrow that has been shot into a soft tissue area. [1] E aquela que es gitada per le contrari de la autra partida so en doas manieyras: o per extraccio; o per trauccio.
If the arrow does not easily come out at the time it was shot in, then it is necessary to leave it alone for several days until the surrounding flesh has become less swollen and inflamed, making it easier to extract or draw out.
Similarly, if an arrow has become embedded in bone and does not come out easily, then it is necessary to leave it alone for several days and apply traction and movement to the area each day until it becomes dislodged.
And if the arrow still does not come out after several days, then it is necessary to carefully perforate around the circumference of the arrow in the bone until the surrounding area has become more swollen and inflamed, making it easier to extract the arrow.[1] E si la sageta es gitada a le partida del membre en quel loc de la plagua no so vuid, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela per alcus dias entro que poyresca le carn que es al enviro de lu.
But if the arrow is hidden within the body and is no longer sensitive to touch, then probe the area carefully, and if you feel it, then pull it out with appropriate instruments suitable for extracting arrows.
But if you cannot reach it due to the severity of the wound and the length of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein in the way, then enlarge the wound to make it possible to extract the arrow.
But if it is lodged in the ears and held there, then carefully cut away the flesh surrounding it from all sides using every means possible; and devise a plan to extract it, even if you have to break the ears or dislocate them forcefully in order to remove it.
And when you extract the arrow from any location, then use twisting motion with your hand and forceps on all sides to make it come out; and do so with great care and precision to prevent the arrow from breaking and to ensure a safe and easy extraction.
But if you cannot extract it at this time, then leave it in place for a few days until the surrounding tissues become more manageable, and then try again later when the situation has improved. But if attempting to extract it causes excessive bleeding, then administer the treatment for controlling bleeding as described in its chapter.
And be careful not to damage any veins, nerves, or tendons while extracting the arrow, and use every means possible to ensure safe and easy removal; and do so with ease, calmness, patience, and steadiness as we have recommended.
And therefore, try to extract the arrow in such a way that the patient's position matches the one in which the arrow was originally lodged, as this is more beneficial. But if that is not possible, then do what you can using any suitable positions.
But for arrows that have been shot from the opposite direction or that have begun to penetrate through to the outside, or if the tip of the arrow is protruding from the skin and can be felt or seen, then dry the area around it; and make an incision in accordance with the size of the forceps being used; and then extract the arrow carefully as it will come out easily.
But if it is lodged in the bone, then twist the blade against its direction of entry until the arrow moves within the bone, and gradually widen the incision until you can extract it.
But if that is not possible, then leave it in place for a few days and try again later when it has become more loose.
And if the shaft of the arrow is still inside, then push it further in.
But if the shaft has fallen out and you want to administer a push, then insert a suitable concave instrument into the wound to create a space for the arrowhead, and then use it to gently push in the arrowhead.
But if the arrowhead is concave, then insert a strong instrument into it to relieve it, and push it in gently.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to cut away all the flesh surrounding the wound if possible, and treat it with appropriate remedies.
And if the arrow has entered the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the ribs, and is close enough to be felt with probing, and can be safely dried, then do so; and take care not to damage any veins or nerves while extracting it, and clean the wound as necessary, and treat it until healed.
Shape of forceps used for pulling out arrows:
The ends of the forceps are shaped like bird's beaks, with serrated edges that grip the arrow firmly to prevent it from slipping out.
And various types of forceps are made for different purposes: large ones for larger arrows and smaller ones for smaller arrows; some with wide jaws for wider wounds, and narrower ones for narrower wounds; and some with stronger grips for more severe injuries and weaker ones for less severe injuries.
Like a rod or probe, to relieve any blockage in the concave arrowhead and push it in with ease.
On venesection (cutting open of veins).
The veins commonly used for venesection are usually three: [Note: in medieval medical texts, the number XXX was often used to indicate the saphenous vein in the leg or arm, which was a common site for bloodletting.] Of these, sixteen are located in the head: [Note: The precise location and number of veins in the head varies depending on the source.] Of these, sixteen are located in the head: two pulsating veins near the ears, called the temporal veins; two herb veins on the temples; two lacrimal veins at the inner corners of the eyes, called the aspicient veins; one frontal vein in the middle of the forehead; one nasal vein at the tip of the nose; two jugular veins in the neck; two labial veins above the upper lip; two labial veins below the lower lip; and two angular veins near the corners of the mouth, called the algelic veins; and two sublingual veins beneath the tongue. [Note: This list is not anatomically accurate and should be taken as a general guide only. The exact number, location, and names of veins in the head vary depending on the source.] But the veins commonly used for venesection in the arms are five: [Note: The precise location and number of veins in the arm varies depending on the source.] [Quan es en la cubita, e aquela que es entre le bra e laixella, e aquela que es aprop lo col, e aquela que es aprop le coratge, e aquela que es en le mieg loc del braz. Because one of these is the cephalic vein, which corresponds to the wild lettuce vein in animals; and it is commonly called "the head vein" and is superficial and small, formed by a branch of the basilic vein and another branch of the cephalic vein. And this vein is called "the vein of the whole body" by the people, while the basilic vein is the one that runs along the inner side of the arm and is named "citillar", and it is also known as "the abdominal vein" by laypeople; and the radial artery, which runs near the bone, is the one that is incised for venesection and is the most visible on the surface. And the median cubital vein, which is located between the cephalic vein and the little finger, has two branches in it. [Note: This list is not anatomically accurate and should be taken as a general guide only. The exact number, location, and names of veins in the arm vary depending on the source.]
And in the foot and calf there are three veins: one of these is located below the curvature of the big toe of the wild lettuce vein; the second is saphenous, and its location is below the calf of the domestic lettuce vein; and the sciatic vein, whose location is below the calf of the wild lettuce vein; and there are other similar veins in the calf. [Note: This list is not anatomically accurate and should be taken as a general guide only. The exact number, location, and names of veins in the leg vary depending on the source.]
The benefit of venesection near the ears is for treating chronic headaches, migraines, epilepsy, and old ulcers on the scalp. [Note: This statement should be taken as a general guide only and not as medical advice. Venesection has been largely abandoned as a medical treatment in modern times.]
The recommended method for venesection near the ears is as follows: have the patient lie down with their head resting on a flat surface and apply gentle pressure to the back of their head in the area where both veins are located using a broad cloth or bandage. Then, wrap a band around the patient's neck, pulling it taut enough so that the two locations near the ears become prominent. Next, use your finger to locate the veins and check for a pulse, which will indicate their correct position. [Note: This statement should be taken as a general guide only and not as medical advice. Venesection has been largely abandoned as a medical treatment in modern times.]
Then take the incisive scalpel and insert it just below the vein at the point where you want to perform venesection, penetrating down to the bone. [Note: This statement should be taken as a general guide only and not as medical advice. Venesection has been largely abandoned as a medical treatment in modern times.] Then raise your hand with the vein and the skin above it, making an incision with the scalpel at an oblique angle. [Note: This statement should be taken as a general guide only and not as medical advice. Venesection has been largely abandoned as a medical treatment in modern times.][Quan la vena es fleubotomada, e aquela que es fregat segon le recomtacions de tu abovesditas; quar per so que fleubotomar aquelas sia juvatiu, lahoras es necessari que les partidas de lu sian sanables, e no afectades de alteracio ne de corrupcio alguna. And make the incision about two finger-widths long, or thereabouts, and allow as much blood to flow out as you desire. [Note: This statement should be taken as a general guide only and not as medical advice. Venesection has been largely abandoned as a medical treatment in modern times.]
Then apply pressure with a compress to stop the bleeding, and leave it in place until the wound heals. [Note: This statement should be taken as a general guide only and not as medical advice. Venesection has been largely abandoned as a medical treatment in modern times.]
As I have already explained at the beginning of this book, incision and subsequent cauterization are the recommended procedures for treating veins. [Note: This statement should be taken as a general guide only and not as medical advice. Venesection has been largely abandoned as a medical treatment in modern times.]
But the benefit of venesection in the temples is for treating chronic headaches, severe and persistent pain, eye disorders, and swelling in the limbs caused by excessive fluid build-up. [Note: This statement should be taken as a general guide only and not as medical advice. Venesection has been largely abandoned as a medical treatment in modern times.]
The recommended method for venesection in the temples is as follows: have the patient tighten their neck muscles until both veins become prominent and you can feel their pulse beneath your fingers, then use your finger to locate the veins and confirm their position. [Note: This statement should be taken as a general guide only and not as medical advice. Venesection has been largely abandoned as a medical treatment in modern times.]
Then lift the skin above the vein with your index finger, insert the incisive scalpel at an oblique angle just below the vein, and raise it slightly as you cut. Make the incision in the same way as you did for the other two veins, allowing blood to flow out according to your needs. [Note: This statement should be taken as a general guide only and not as medical advice. Venesection has been largely abandoned as a medical treatment in modern times.]
Then release the patient's neck muscles, place your finger over the incision to apply pressure and stop the bleeding, and cover it with a compress or bandage, holding it in place with strong pressure until the wound heals. [Note: This statement should be taken as a general guide only and not as medical advice. Venesection has been largely abandoned as a medical treatment in modern times.]
As I have already explained at the beginning of this book, incision and subsequent extraction are the recommended procedures for treating these veins. [Note: This statement should be taken as a general guide only and not as medical advice. Venesection has been largely abandoned as a medical treatment in modern times.]
And the benefit of venesection in the frontal vein is similar to that of the cephalic vein for treating chronic facial pain, headaches, and fetid ulcers. [Note: This statement should be taken as a general guide only and not as medical advice. Venesection has been largely abandoned as a medical treatment in modern times.] [Quan es fleubotomada la vena del front, e aquela que es fregat segon le recomtacions de tu abovesditas; quar per so que fleubotomar aquelas sia juvatiu, lahoras es necessari que les partidas de lu sian sanables, e no afectades de alteracio ne de corrupcio alguna.
And the quality of the bloodletting for the patient is, as I have told you; that is, the patient should strongly hold their neck with a band until the vein appears, and then take the instrument named a lancet, which looks like this:
Place the prominent point of the lancet which is at the tip of the lancet over that vein and strike it with a downward motion or with another instrument in the manner of the lancet, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you want; and then loosen the patient's puncture wound and hold it firmly until it is healed.
And sometimes it is necessary to perform a bloodletting with a large lancet, but it is not required that the lancet have a sharp point like other lancets; instead, it should have a blunt tip and be inserted transversely, because bone is close and easily broken by the lancet when it is thin.
The benefit of the two veins that are located near the inner corners of the eyes (tear ducts) is for the treatment of scabies on the hands and scalp, as well as for diseases of the face. (Note: I'm assuming "scabia del huels" means "scabies of the hands")
The procedure for bloodletting is that the patient should strongly hold their neck with a band, and then you perform bloodletting on them while standing over their head.
And the bloodletting should be done diagonally (transversely) a little more than lengthwise with a small lancet, because there is no flesh in that location; and if the lancet is thin, it can easily break at its tip.
And then let the blood flow as much as is necessary and place a bandage over the wound, hold it firmly for one night, and then loosen the bandage.
However, bloodletting from the nasal vein is beneficial for acute fever and violent headache, as well as for diseases of the face and migraines that occur in the face, especially when they are old or long-lasting.
The procedure for bloodletting from the nose is that the patient should strongly hold their neck and you should place your left hand on their nose, then take a thin long lancet and insert it in the middle of the bridge of the nose following a straight path, because the vein cannot be felt there and bleeding will start immediately.
It is appropriate to gradually release the lancet with your hand and let the blood flow according to your needs; and then bind it up for one night because it will heal quickly.
However, bloodletting from the two jugular veins is beneficial for constriction of the throat, early stages of leprosy and many other diseases, impetigo and severe corrosive ulcers such as herpetromeno (a type of skin infection).
The procedure for bloodletting from the jugular veins is that the patient should strongly hold their head back with a bandage and lie down on a bench or chair; the doctor should stand over the patient's head and make sure they are comfortable.
And then perform bloodletting on the vein with a wide, slightly curved lancet slowly and gradually; and draw out the correct amount of blood according to the patient's condition or as needed; and do the same for the other vein.
And then loosen the bandage and bind up the two veins with gentle pressure to prevent excessive bleeding; leave it on during the day until the wound is healed.
The benefit of bloodletting from the veins in the temples is that it relieves small boils and pustules in the mouth, gum decay, bad ulcers, and fissures; as well as severe ulcers in the nose and ears.
The procedure for bloodletting from the veins in the temples is that you should have the patient sit in front of you, hold their head with a bandage, and then gently pull open their lips to reveal two veins; one is located near the right corner of the lip and the other near the left corner. You can identify them by the darkness of each vein, especially if there are small black veins nearby. Then make an incision on each vein with a scalpel or lancet.
But if you are unsure which one to choose, then make an incision on the larger of the two veins and on the more prominent one of them.
And do the same for both veins that are located above the lips.
However, for the two veins that are located below the tongue, bloodletting from the cephalic vein is beneficial for swelling in the throat, disease of the uvula, and diseases of the mouth.
The procedure for bloodletting from those veins is to follow the patient while they lie on their back and gently lift their tongue with your hands, looking underneath their tongue to see two blue-colored veins; one on each side, and the color of each should be a bluish-black.
And then perform bloodletting on each of them, taking care not to press too hard with your hands while performing the procedure, as there are arteries located beneath those veins.
And the veins that are commonly bled in the armpits are those which all men have, and bloodletting from these veins is done in two ways: either by applying a mildly astringent substance like myrtle or olive with a lancet; or by using a surgical knife to dry up the area, known as "secar am fleubotomi cutellar", and this is what it looks like: [Here I would insert an image of a surgical knife].
The myrtle lancet should be as long and sharp as necessary, and used to open up concave veins that appear full and large; these are the veins that contain thick, turbid blood.
The olive lancet has a smaller width and sharper tip, and is used for bloodletting from thin veins that contain thin, light-colored blood.
However, bloodletting from the basilic vein, which is one of three veins in the arm, is beneficial for extracting blood from diseases located below the throat and abdomen, such as swelling in the legs or bloating in the stomach.
When bloodletting from the basilic vein, it is important that the surgeon takes great care and avoids any errors as there is an artery located near this vein. If the incision goes too deep and punctures the artery, it can cause excessive bleeding, so it's best to use a surgical knife rather than a lancet for bloodletting from this vein.
If the basilic vein is not visible or cannot be found, it's best to move on to another vein or look for a branch of the vein. Another option is to perform bloodletting at the end of the arm where the vein is more prominent and can be easily located. Once the vein is found, use a surgical knife to dry up the area as previously described.
However, if you want to perform bloodletting on the median vein, which is located in the middle of the arm, first touch the area between the bend in the elbow and the wrist to locate the vein. Then place your hand on the area and feel for a pulse; next, extend the patient's arm and dry up the vein using a surgical knife with a concave incision as previously described. It's important to ensure that the percussion does not hit the area near the artery.
When you notice an increase in pressure or swelling in the area that you marked with your hand, this indicates that you are touching the artery and not the vein. In this case, avoid bloodletting from this location.
If you notice that the blood flowing from the incision is thin and red like a child's urine, this indicates that you have accidentally cut an artery. In this case, immediately apply pressure with your fingers to stop the bleeding, and if necessary, use a bandage or cloth to cover the wound until it heals.
Take care of the patient's health and be vigilant in monitoring their condition for several days after bloodletting until they are fully healed.
If the bleeding has not stopped after bloodletting and you do not have any medical supplies on hand, it is necessary to locate the artery and incise it to stop the flow of blood. Alternatively, you can use a piece of leather or cloth to create a tourniquet, place it over the location of the vein, and tighten it with a bandage and small stones for support until the bleeding stops.
If the bleeding has stopped, that's good. But if not, then treat the wound with a substance that can stop bleeding, as mentioned earlier in the section about blood-stopping powders.
Stopping the flow of blood can be difficult in many cases due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of swelling in the arm.
Bloodletting from the fusca vein is beneficial for extracting blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body, as it is composed of branches from both the basilic and cephalic veins, as previously mentioned.
The person performing bloodletting should be very careful when working with the fusca vein, as there is a nerve located near this vein. If the incision accidentally cuts the nerve, it can cause numbness or paralysis in the patient, making healing difficult. Therefore, it's best to use a surgical knife for bloodletting from this vein and take care to avoid cutting the nerve.
If the vein is located between two nerves, then it's best to make an incision along the length of the vein.
The benefit of bloodletting from the cephalic vein is that it extracts blood from the head and alleviates diseases in the hands.
It's best to use a myrtle or olive lancet when performing bloodletting on any vein, as these instruments are less likely to accidentally cut an artery or nerve.
However, it's also possible for a boil or abscess to develop in some people if the vein is not properly located and incised during the first attempt at bloodletting, although this may not be immediately noticeable.
The first thing to know about bloodletting is that it should only be administered for the preservation of health and as a precautionary measure against illness, and should be performed on one of the veins in the arm: cephalic, fusca, or basilica. It's best to perform bloodletting at the beginning of spring, after fasting in early spring and autumn, and during winter meals when signs of repletion appear.
And bloodletting should be performed every third day or on the first day after three hours have passed since dawn.
Bloodletting should be administered when it is necessary and appropriate, whether that is at night or during the day, at any hour and in all seasons.
And it is necessary that a child not be bloodletted until they are 14 years old, and a woman who is pregnant should not be bloodlet if not between the fourth month and the seventh, and the elderly should not be bloodlet who have already passed 60 years.
And if someone wishes to be bloodlet in any way, it is necessary that they cleanse their bowels beforehand with a clyster of lion's dung, especially if there is a retained motion in the bowels, so that the veins do not expel impurities during the bloodletting of the purified bowels, and so that they do not pollute the principal members.
And those with nausea, sacred fever, or inebriation should not be bled, nor should they be bled during illness or drunkenness until that has passed, nor should those with dropsy be bled, and moreover bloodletting should be avoided in cases of colic passion, vomiting, abdominal pain, and increased production of urine and bile, as well as exercise, fasting, vigils, and any cause that weakens the strength, whether it be corporeal or animal.
And also consider in the refinement of humors beforehand if the blood is thick, with food and drink, and with medicines if that is possible for you.
And also enter into a bath if no other cause prohibits it, or engage in exercise to refine the blood.
And perform the bloodletting on them at the feet of the day, that is around the hour of terce, as we have said.
And make sure that the feet of that person are protected on that day from all accidents, whether they be animal, such as anxiety, anger, fear, or corporeal, such as pain, excessive effort, urination, and similar things.
And at their bedside, let there be present the causes of which use is customary among men with aromatics and fragrances and with balms and similar things according to the degree of possibility.
And let the bloodletter sit on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the one who is to be bled.
And also extend your arm, and rub that with the bloodletter's hand two or three times; and then strengthen the ligament with a strap and wrap it two times.
And let the tightness be moderated, for if the tightness is too loose or there is an excess of it, then the flow of blood is prevented; or if it is loose and flabby, then the body's loss of blood is prohibited.
And also let the tightness be such that the one who is to be bled rub their hands together between them until the veins are filled and become perceptible to touch.
And let the bloodletter anoint their lancet with a little bit of antique oil properly; and let them place their left index finger over that vein, below the location where they want to make the incision, so that the vein moves slightly away and the percussion is lessened, for then you will know which vein it is that you have found, as the cord recedes during incision; and of those that are full of windiness and when you press the lancet over them contract, let the bloodletter release; and the bloodletter should not open the vein, and if they do open it, it will be narrow.
And so, it is necessary for the bloodletter to be steady and attentive in all these causes.
And let the bloodletter wait, but if the vein is found in one pass, then that is good; and if not, you should try again a little lower than that location or above it with haste, if the location is not infected.
And if the location is infected or the patient becomes frightened, then you should leave it alone for a day or two and not strengthen the ligament, for it will easily draw infection to the incision or enter into the bath.
And let the bloodletting be repeated if necessary.
And if the aperture is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will be released, then you should repeat the incision in that same location according to what is right and just, and adjust the aperture slightly, and do so quickly before the location becomes infected, for in many men the location becomes infected with a small aperture.
But if you see that it has become infected, then do not repeat the incision in that location, for there is no reason to do so; and place a small piece of cloth soaked in oil over part of the wound, for this will ease the body's loss of blood. And it is better in this location than other oils.
And similarly, administer a wound of oil in all bloodletting where you open the veins to prevent excessive loss of blood, and do this with theriac of Alphadoc and sage when it is placed on one of those over the location, for the blood becomes thinner and more fluid when it is thick.
And if a large abscess is generated in the location of the bloodletting, as often happens, and more so in those who are not naturally disposed to bleeding but only in that location, or in the incision of the vein slightly, then you should bind it and place a sponge soaked in warm water and salt over the location, and bind that for an hour, for this will dissolve it.
And it is necessary that this be done after the issuance of blood from that vein, with the completion of it or another vein.
And if there remains in the location for several days any blackness or greenness, do not be concerned about it; and if you wish, place over it some remedy of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or a remedy of mint juice or chamomile or similar to that.
And often abscesses and swellings occur, which must be bled in the bloodletting of the basilica.
And then place your hand on it, and if you find softness there, increase the pressure on it. If that elevation is bad and harmful, be careful to place your hand on the cause of what we have mentioned, because blood will easily flow from the sanctioned artery.
Apply a plaster with styptic properties, so that the area hardens, and treat that area with another remedy until it is healed.
And it is necessary to extract blood from every person according to the amount of their strength and the color appearing on the blood, as appropriate.
Because if the blood is black, you should let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if it looks thick, you should let it flow until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, until its acidity has been removed.
And it is necessary for a person who is full and strong and needs bloodletting in one location, that the incision of the vein be widened and the incisions be large.
And for someone who is weak, the opposite should be done, and it is necessary to extract blood from them in multiple locations, and that the incision be narrow.
And the best approach in venesection is that the incision be transverse, not puncture.
And this method of venesection is safe from blood flow and nerve injury, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than venesection according to length and width.
And for the person who is accustomed to fainting from venesection, it is necessary that you treat them beforehand with a little bread infused in wine of millet or simple scalded oxymel; and extract only a small amount of blood in three or four draws.
And if it is a cold complexion, then take before venesection bread infused in electuary of myrrh or electuary of honey flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or in aromatic and fragrant electuary.
And if a fainting spell occurs during venesection and it is caused by the removal of too much blood, then it is necessary to drink water from meat and fragrant electuary; use aromatics with aloe, and apply linen to the person's chest.
And use the other causes that we mentioned in the division in the chapter on fainting for evacuation.
And for those who wish to cleanse their arms and dissolve their blood in stages, it is necessary for the person undergoing venesection to do so gradually over time, as long as their strength allows it.
But for those who wish to cleanse their arms and remove their blood again, and their body is strong, then they should do so approximately seven or nine hours after the first venesection.
But for those who wish to draw the blood from their body in the opposite direction of its natural flow, it is necessary to do so on the second or third day after venesection.
But for a body that has too much blood that is already congealed and thickened and causes fever, it is necessary to remove a large amount of it in one procedure, with an incision that is wider than usual, up until the point where fainting occurs. This is because you will have followed all the rules of venesection; and place your hand over the person's pulse during the procedure, so as not to cause death instead of fainting, since many times this happens when the practitioner is ignorant or negligent.
And it is not necessary when you want to cleanse the arms and remove blood in stages, as the orifices of the vein are already closed and it becomes difficult for the blood to flow, that you press with force on top of it and bend it slightly, because this is harmful.
Leaving it as is until the second venesection can be performed; or maintaining the sharpness of the incision to allow the blood to flow from the coagulated vein; or placing a poultice of treacle and saffron, and applying light pressure until the blood has flowed out.
And if the vein is swollen with pus, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the swelling has subsided.
And if necessity compels you to perform venesection again and there is no way to avoid it, then bleed the person on that limb or on the other arm in a different vein.
The vein called the "funis of the arm" should be used for venesection instead of the cephalic or basilic veins when they are not found or are hidden, because it is made up of those two.
The quality of venesection is that the patient should immerse their hand in warm water until the fingertips turn red and the vein becomes clearly visible.
And then the practitioner should apply firm pressure on that spot with a moderate amount of tension; and perform venesection in a transverse direction, not longitudinally or laterally.
And make the incision wide and perform venesection with the one you use to bleed that vein near the joint of the hand.
And if the flow of blood is forbidden, then immerse your hand in warm water and allow the blood to flow into the water until you have achieved your desired effect.
But if you are in the summer days, then you are excused from immersing your hand in warm water, and instead the body of the person is placed in warm water during winter.
And venesection of this vein is safer than all other veins because there are no pulsating veins or nerves located below it.
And venesection of the cephalic vein in the right hand is suitable for liver diseases.
The quality of venesection is that you should apply firm pressure to the limb or to your hand, after immersing it in warm water until the vein becomes engorged and clearly visible; then perform a transverse incision on it, and even if it is deeply embedded this will not cause any harm.
And take care not to sever your hand with the venesection tool, because below it are the nerves that are devoid of flesh.
And then immerse your hand in warm water and allow the blood to flow into it, because if you do not immerse your hand in warm water, the blood will congeal in the orifice of the vein, which is forbidden.
And when blood is let according to the necessary quantity, then place salt and oil on the vein to prevent clotting; and similarly, it is necessary to do this in every tight location.
And the benefit of bloodletting from the vein in the left arm is that it is beneficial for illnesses of the spleen.
And do similarly in bloodletting from him, just as you have done with the other one.
And the benefit of bloodletting from the saphenous vein is for illnesses in the lower part of the body, such as ailments of the womb and retention of menstruation, and for illnesses of the testicles and old ulcers on the thighs and hips, and similar ailments.
And the method of bloodletting from him is that the patient should place his foot in warm water and make friction until the veins become visible; then he should tie a bandage around the ankle, and the location of the vein should be marked clearly with a finger; and its branches on the surface of the foot should be many and prominent.
And therefore, let blood from the large vein below the knee and above the calf, for this is better and safer.
And if you let blood from that one on the surface of the foot, then be careful not to cut the nerves that are below it on the surface of the foot, and perform your incision perpendicularly as if you wanted to penetrate it.
And let bloodletting be done skillfully.
But if bloodletting is forbidden, then immerse the patient's foot in warm water and allow the blood to flow freely until it has been evacuated.
But if the bloodletter makes a mistake in the first incision, then make another one nearby with the lancet, for the location is safe; and do not be afraid of causing harm, but rather be careful not to cut the nerves as I mentioned earlier.
And do similarly on the saphenous vein of the other foot as well.
And the location of the sciatic vein is as I mentioned earlier, below the calf on the outer side of the leg.
And the benefit of bloodletting from him is for pain in the hip caused by clotted blood.
And the method of bloodletting from him is that the patient should enter a bath and quickly and strongly contract his thigh with a long, thin band above the calf above four fingers' width from the ankle; this should not be visible except for the swelling.
And therefore when the swelling appears, then let blood from it according to each individual case that is possible for you and perpendicularly, which is better; or incise it with an incision or cut it with a section, for the location is safe.
And it is often narrow in many men; and if you find it, but do not feel anything, then let blood from one of its branches, which is the one that appears on the back of the foot towards the little finger and ring finger.
And be careful not to cut the nerves, and let as much blood flow as you want.
Then release the constriction and place your hand over the site of the bloodletting and strengthen it, for it heals easily.
On cupping and its methods.
Cupping is used for boils, or for swelling, or for inflammation.
And cupping is done in two ways: one of them is with scarification and the extraction of blood, and the other is without scarification.
And this cupping therapy that is without scarification is also done in two ways: one of them is with fire and the other is without fire.
And for the cupping therapy that is done with scarification and the extraction of blood, there are 14 locations on the body: one of them is the place where cups are applied, which is at the nape of the neck; another is in the middle of the neck between two sides of the collarbone; a third is below the chin below the jaw, below the mouth; a fourth is for the bladder, and is above the buttocks; a fifth is for the kidneys, and is on both sides of the lower back; a sixth is for the spleen, and is on the left side of the abdomen; a seventh is for the liver, and is on the right side of the abdomen; an eighth is for the stomach, and is on the upper part of the abdomen; a ninth is for the lungs, and is on both sides of the chest; a tenth is for the heart, and is in the center of the chest; an eleventh is for the armpits; and a twelfth is for the thighs.
And cupping therapy does not extract blood from the veins, but rather from the small, scattered vessels in the flesh; and for this reason, it does not lose its virtue as much as with bloodletting; nor is it necessary that cupping therapy be done with fire or without fire in any illness caused by repletion until the whole body has been evacuated.
But if necessity requires cupping therapy for illness or congestion, then perform it at any time at the beginning and end of the month, and in the middle of it, and at some point during it.
And therefore when you see any of these causes, and particularly if it is in the third or middle of the month, then order cupping therapy to be performed more than two or three hours after sunrise.
And the benefit of cupping therapy on the nape is that it helps to alleviate heaviness in the head and what accumulates in the limbs; but it is necessary that this be accompanied by evacuation of the whole body.
And this cupping therapy is in the location of bloodletting from the cephalic vein.
And it is not allowed to use cupping therapy on someone with skin irritation or a cold, for this can cause great harm.
And therefore it is not necessary to use cupping therapy on the elderly, especially those with frail health.
But for someone who has cupping therapy performed continuously on the same place, there is a risk of forgetfulness; and therefore it is necessary to order the person performing the cupping therapy to move their hand slightly away from the cup at the edges, so as to avoid causing forgetfulness.
But cupping therapy on the back is in the location of bloodletting from the fusca and basilica veins; and for this reason it helps with asthma, constriction of the windpipe, and cleft palate, cough, and congestion.
And it is necessary to move the cupping therapy on the back slightly, for if it is placed too low, it can cause weakness in the body and stomach.
And cupping therapy on the temples helps with accidental pain in the head and eye inflammation, migraines, and pre-headaches, and toothache; and it is performed at the site of bloodletting from the basilica vein.
And it is necessary to order the person performing cupping therapy not to press their hand too hard with incisions, so as not to cut the artery and cause excessive bleeding.
And cupping therapy below the chin helps with halitosis in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar ailments in the mouth; and it is performed at the site of bloodletting from the aliphatic veins that are on both lips.
But cupping therapy performed above the collarbones helps with headaches caused by congestion of heat.
And cupping therapy on the lower part of the shoulders helps with bloodletting from three veins: the basilica, fusca, and cephalic; for this draws blood from all the smaller vessels that are in the flesh, as well as from the smaller branches of the larger veins until the drawing reaches the three main veins.
And instruct the lancer not to proceed too aggressively with the incision, for the place is stripped of flesh, and only nerves and arteries remain.
And it is a cupping glass with which one cups over the haunches and alleviates piles of the anus and foul ulcers below.
And it is necessary that you instruct the cupping glass practitioner to use a large cup, made of iron, for the location requires strong suction; and lightly make small incisions with a lancet before using scarification.
But cupping glasses of the legs should be applied with care, for they draw blood from the entire body and alleviate chronic pains of the loins and liver, and of the bladder; and they promote menstruation, and alleviate flatulence and indigestion; and they serve as an alternative to venesection (bloodletting) with two veins, at the height of both shoulders.
However, they weaken the entire body and cause fainting spells in some men.
And as for cupping glasses, those of the shoulders are most beneficial to the patient, similar to those of two legs.
And the quality of the placement of cupping glasses is that you place the cup initially upright and allow it to suction gently, and do not maintain the position of the cups for too long, but rather remove them lightly and replace them as needed, allowing the humors to come to the location through gradual accumulation. And do not cease repeating this and continuing until you see the location turn red and swell and the appearance of the flow of blood.
And then make small incisions and repeat the suction gradually, and consider the disposition of the body.
For a man who has tender flesh and is prone to scarring, it is necessary that you make incisions only once and not more, so as not to cause ulcers in the location.
And instruct the cupping glass practitioner to widen the incisions and deepen them slightly, and moderate the suction with ease.
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to make incisions twice, for in the first incision, the pathway of subtle suction to the blood and its watery fluid is opened. But in the second one, the careful examination of the extraction of thick blood follows.
And if the blood is very thick and sticky, then a third incision should be made to ensure complete extraction.
Finally, when you wish to extract blood little by little or a small amount, a single incision will suffice for us.
And if you wish to extract a large amount of blood, make many incisions; and if you know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to make deep incisions.
And the limit of incision, which reaches only the depth of the skin.
And if the person has thick and hard skin that is dark in color and their pores are small, it is necessary to apply a milder and more resolving ointment to the locations of the cupping glasses; during summertime, use aloe oil or violet oil, or oil from crushed apples, or cumin seed oil; and if it is winter, use narcissus oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or blood-colored oil, or similar oils.
And if there is a large amount of superfluidity (excess fluid in the body), then use bitter oil, or balsamita oil, or aloe oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
But if the cupping glass practitioner has wide pores and tender skin, then it is necessary to prohibit the use of oil for them, and instead, for these people, the locations of the cups should be washed with water infused with southernwood or chamomile, or cumin seed water, or borage water, and similar substances.
And for a person whose blood is very watery, wash the cups with sour wine or myrtle and sumac water, and similar substances.
And for a person who has a large amount of superfluidity (excess fluid in the body), wash the cups with old wine or water infused with marjoram, or with a decoction of anise, or chamomile, and similar substances.
And it is necessary that cupping glasses be applied before bathing; they should be administered immediately after bathing for an hour or two, and it is necessary to sleep afterwards with the cups still on.
What is meant is that it is necessary that the person who will undergo cupping or bloodletting should be properly regulated (prepared) before the procedure.
It is necessary to consider the following at the beginning: if the cupping glass practitioner or the one who is to perform bloodletting has a choleric temperament and there is acute and inflamed blood, then it is necessary to take cooling agents, such as sour grapes, endive with vinegar and lettuce, scordalbin, julep, and similar substances.
And eat foods such as chicken, birds that are light to digest, and dishes seasoned with sour flavors, and similar substances.
And for a person who has a cold temperament, it is necessary to take oxymel (vinegar and honey mixture) with scordalbin seeds, sumac, and moderately fragrant wine between verjuice (unripe grape juice) and new wine; and they should be advised to drink and eat in moderation, and avoid eating chicken, capon, partridge, quail, and pigeons.
And it is necessary that the person drinks more on the day of cupping or bloodletting than they eat.
And it is necessary to give some people theriac (medicinal compound) or medicines containing musk, such as muscada or alcelita, before cupping or bloodletting, in order to comfort the main members and make the blood more subtle; but they should not take any heating substances.
But cupping glasses that are used for incisions should be placed over the liver, on the spleen and gout, above the navel, in the groin area, and on the pudendal region of the anus, as these areas cannot withstand scarification (incision) directly.
And this method is not intended for drawing blood from a member, but rather for the attraction of blood from the area, as when a cupping glass is placed on the breast in illness with blood flow from the nose; and it is used to dissolve cold congestion in the member, as when a cup is placed on the abdomen and navel; for this method rarefies the member, warms it up, and removes pain by alleviating congestion. [Here are all the translations together, with some light editing to ensure consistency and fluency in English:
And a cup is placed over the loins when there is congestion or pain, for by virtue of its attractive force, it gently draws out congestion and removes pain from its location.
And similarly, when a cup is placed over the liver or spleen, it alleviates congestion that is trapped inside them.[Here are all the translations together, with some light editing to ensure consistency and fluency in English:
And these cupping glasses are administered with suction only; and sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered full of warm water in illnesses of the spleen.
And this is why the cupping glass is filled and becomes larger, that is to say with warm water alone or with water in which suitable herbs have been steeped.
Form of cupping glass administered with fire: the width of the orifice should be two fingers, as we have made it; and the quantity of air should be that of a palm; and it should be in the middle of the body, in the area that is within reach, its diameter should be equal to it, the opening should be small according to the quantity that can enter it a needle.
It should be made of iron or citrus wood, with wide and thick edges, of a lion-like color and smooth to ensure that it does not harm the member during its positioning over it.
And in the middle of it there should be a transverse bar of iron or of fire, where a candle with fire is placed.
And this cupping glass should be larger than the one we recommended earlier, and smaller according to the illnesses and the condition of the person using it.
And the cupping glasses for children and weak individuals are different from those for young and strong adults.
The technique for placing this cupping glass with fire on the member is to stretch the skin with a decent piece of wood fire in front of a small candle of wax, and place it in the middle of the transverse bar in the middle of the location of the cupping glass, so that the fire is lit around the edges, to prevent the patient's flesh from burning.
Then it should be placed over the patient's member, with the finger on the opening we mentioned, until when we have the cupping glasses and do not need to keep our finger on the opening and the steam rises from it, then the cupping glass will be removed immediately.
And similarly with fire, using your technique, and repeat that if necessary.
But in the cupping glass that is administered for pleurisy, with water, without a transverse bar or opening, and it is not administered but filled with water and placed over the member only.
And this is its form: And the larger this cupping glass is, the better it is, because it can receive a greater quantity of water.
Chapter cxlvii (or 97)
Leeches are not administered on many members but only on those where the positioning of cupping glasses is not possible due to their small size, such as the mouth, gums and similar; or in a member without flesh, such as the finger and nose and similar parts.
And the technique of using those that have been found, leeches that are in clean muddy waters.
And let them be left in dirty water day and night until they are hungry, and that there is no food left in their belly; and let the body be evacuated at the beginning with bloodletting and cupping glasses; and let the member of the patient be rubbed until it turns red; and then place them on it.
And when they are full and satisfied.
And if possible suction from the location with a cupping glass, it is more effective in treatment.
If not, then wash the area with sour wine and then with clean water; and rub and press it.
And if the body of the leech remains on the wound for a long time and oozes, then take a linen cloth dipped in cold water and place it over it until the oozing stops.
And if the bleeding is excessive, then sprinkle vitriol trissat powder or other stiptic causes on it, until the bleeding stops; or place over the location large amounts of roasted and dried beans, and let them stay until they stick to the location, and the bleeding will stop. [](note: Vitriol trissat is a historical medical term, the modern equivalent would be copper sulfate)
And it is necessary, if needed, to repeat the application of leeches, when it is possible to change them.
And if the use of leeches is prohibited for suction, then rub the area with fresh blood or place a needle in the location until it bleeds; and let them be placed, because when they feel some blood, they will immediately withdraw.
And when you want them to detach, sprinkle a little bit of aloe trissat powder, or salt, or ashes on them and they will fall off immediately.
Thus begins the section on restoration, which is the third division of the text. This chapter is of the utmost necessity in the art of medicine, and deals with the restoration of fractures and dislocations caused by accidents to bones.
Oh, my son, be wise that the foolish doctors and the uneducated boast of this chapter, those who never look at the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
And for this reason, the method of these scholars in our land is private; and I have not forgotten it at any time, and have not used anything that came after, but only through long study of the books of the Ancients and contemplation of their understanding, until I extracted the science from them.
And let me continue to direct myself towards experimentation and study throughout my life.
And I have described in this chapter everything that my science contains and on which I have conducted my experiment, since here I have summarized it for you and relieved myself of the task of lengthy explanation; and I have summarized it at the end of summary; and I have shown it at the end of demonstration; and I have formed many forms of instruments that are administered in this, as is done by addition of demonstration, just as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Chapter one.
"Summaries and collections concerning bone fractures, from which a preliminary discussion is necessary before we begin to remember the members that are broken and diverse aspects of each one." "It is therefore necessary that in the prologue of this chapter we say the summaries of the speech, and the chapters whose understanding at the beginning the craftsmen are forced and stationed on the truth of them; so it is for you and those who are ready to know or learn this noble art from you."
"And so I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain occurs, it is necessary that you first consider with bloodletting or alleviating the area, or one of these together, if no cause prohibits it, such as debility of virtue, or this is the person to whom it happens infancy, or old age in decrepitude, or it's a time of violent heat, or of violent cold."
And let him be satisfied with a diet of herbs and birds' meat and crab meat; and forbid heavy meats and filling himself with food and all food that fills the veins with blood, until you are sure of a safe abscess formation, and if there is no fear of effusion of matter to the member.
And then return the patient to their usual diet that is customary for them.
And as the broken bone begins to be restored, it is then appropriate for the patient to eat nutritious foods that are thick and heavy, in which there is stickiness, such as foods made from wheat cooked with water, rice, beans, peas, cow's udder, marrow, fresh fish, thick wine similar to those, and with this regimen, the coagulation of the fracture occurs more easily and quickly.
Know that broken bones in men, whether it is in the elderly or infirm, are not able to be continuous and consolidated according to their nature due to the dryness of their members.
However, nature adjusts and remembers to glue the broken bone from any part with a cause similar to glue in which there is stickiness that adheres and strengthens it together until they are consolidated and joined together, until they reach the end of strength and firmness, such as fire at the beginning, until any cause does not prevent it from its function.
And for this reason it is necessary to stop the patient's food, foods which are heavy and sticky and thick, as we have said.
And know that the types of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of members, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the chest is different from a fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly all other members are diverse among themselves.
I will come with a reminder of every type of fracture, explained in its own separate chapter.
There is also a diverse variety of fractures within itself. And the types of fracture of bone are diverse in themselves; for there is a curved fracture, another which occurs by chance; and some are made according to the length of the bone: and these are the star-shaped and splintered fractures, as well as those that come from and do not come from, similar to what happens when a wound is prepared to be written, and it is a fracture with wound and disruption in the head, and it is a small fissure fracture.
And for every type there is proper pain or distress in its restoration, according to what will come as a reminder of it in its own place.
There are signs of bone fracture. And for that reason a bone fracture is recognized; it is the crookedness of it, and the prominence and appearance of it in sensation, and this can be felt when you press it with your hand.
And therefore when there is no crookedness or appearance in the location and it is not done, then when you touch the bone with movement and the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not a fracture here.
It is possible that there is crookedness or a small fissure, then it is not necessary to harm it with your hand and compression of everything; but instead pause over it with the medicines which come to mind at that moment that are suitable for the location; and let it be tight by subtle stricture.
And know that the location when it is curved and not split in two or anything else that does not happen to it with swelling, as if the whole part of its comparison, then you must begin from this hour to rectify it having in mind that an abscess will form there.
And if an abscess forms there, then let it be for several days until the abscess ceases; and then treat it in every way that you can with lightness and painlessness.
And know that the restoration of it and treatment of it is easier than of the bone in which swelling has occurred.
And strengthen it according to what comes to mind as a reminder of it.
But if there is swelling in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts, whether it is the arm or the leg; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two ropes or with one rope and your hand.
And your position should be with which you place the member in its natural location while the parts are extended from the broken member, then make sure that you cause those additions to return with gentleness and in every way that you can in their places.
And take care according to your strength that there is no pain or injury to the patient from your operation; and make sure that you align the one bone with its companion in the best way that you can.
And it is necessary that at that hour you touch it appropriately with your hand, and if you see any other cause there, correct it and treat it according to the amount of your strength.
And avoid violent extension and compression, as many foolish doctors do who often cause abscesses to form due to their operation, or cause contraction in the member, as we have seen from the operation of many of them.
And the quality of the stricture of the relaxed member is what I recommend; for you should know that broken members are diverse in their smallness and greatness and in the shape of them.
And for those that are small, such as the arm and finger and thumb and similar to them, then it is necessary that the wrapping be of soft fabric.
But for those that are large, such as the thigh or leg, then it is necessary that the wrapping be thick and hard, for rough binding connects the large member and strengthens it from all sides with even stricture, so that in it no rot enters.
And then begin, perform an appropriate evacuation of alignment, pause appropriately for that, on the location of that fracture with three wrappings or four according to what the member requires; and strengthen your hand a little with the binding.
And then come to the upper part of the location of the fracture, and strengthen less than before with the binding with which you strengthened the location of the fracture. And then extend yourself with wrapping from the location of the fracture a little, and gradually loosen the binding, until you take a large part of it.
And then take another bandage and wrap it around the other side of the fracture with wrapping, and come to the wrappings at the lower part of the fracture; and let your operation in the binding of the wrapping and in loosening of that be according to what we said in the first wrapping above.
And then pause between the wrappings with soft wool or fabric that is even so as to straighten the crookedness of the fracture, if there is crookedness in it; and if not, do not put anything else in it.
And then put another bandage over it, and evenly place these star-shaped bandages just made if there is no swelling or abscess in the location, and if so, then put something that will draw out the abscess and remove the swelling; and leave that for several days; and then you strengthen it with these star-shaped ones.
And let the rods for the treatment machine be made of cane of equal size, and formed with wisdom; or of wood from trees; or of palm ribs; and let the width of each rod be according to this form and figure:
However, it is necessary that the rod placed over the fracture be thicker and slightly wider than the other rods, and the length of the rod according to the size and smallness of the member; and place a band strengthened over the rods with another binding according to your first tightness; and tie it on top properly according to what we have said about tightness, and let your tightness be according to the location of the fracture, and the less space there is from the fracture, the lesser the tightness.
And it is necessary that the threads be moderate in thickness and delicacy, and be made of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen some foolish people using cords of twisted thread during surgery, this is a great error, when the tension is not equal.
And also thin threads are not suitable, because you will not be able to achieve the desired tension with them, and it is not appropriate for there to be less than a finger's width between rod and rod.
And if the patient is harmed by the ends of the rods at the tightening in their sensitive areas, then place a piece of soft leather or red wool underneath to prevent injury.
Some types of fractures are with pus, and this leads to a rupture in the wound, and I will come to remember this in the chapter on special cases.
And know that not all broken members should be straightened with rods on the first day; the reason for this is that when the member is large, it is not appropriate to place rods on it immediately but rather wait 5 or 7 days or more, depending on your certainty of the occurrence of cautious pus.
And this is the method of poultices with which the ancients restored, which were placed on fractures and dislocations and twists.
Method of poultice commonly used for the restoration of fractures, suitable for many complications and mostly for women and children, as it is made from something that does not generate heat or friction: take some flour dust from a mill, which is the medulla of the flour ground by the movement of the mill against its walls.
And make it like this, sifted with egg white, and place the mixture not too thick or thin, and use that.
Another method of applying a plaster to heal fractures and dislocations and twists: take assafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, migrach (which is wild marjoram), all in one dragma; myrrh and aloe each in five dragmas; aloe in twenty dragmas; then grind and sift them and mix with almond oil or egg white if the patient's complexion is scaly; and then use this plaster, as it has a good composition and restores broken bones easily, and benefits many people.
Another method of applying a plaster to heal fractures and twists: take migrach, half a dragma of white mallow; five dragmas each of myrrh and aloe; six dragmas of acacia; and twenty dragmas of Armenian bole.
All the ingredients should be ground together in a mortar with moderate force, then sifted and combined with water or egg white to make a paste, which can then be applied.
Here's the translation of the text you provided:
However, this poultice does not have the power to heal or remove pus, but rather alleviates pain directly.
Another method of poultice that heals broken bones: take leaves from a wild poppy tree and fig tree, grind them together to make a poultice.
Here's the translation of the text you provided: Here's the full recipe for this poultice:
However, if the skin is dry or scaly, then it's better to make a poultice with coltsfoot water or simply with water and use that instead.
Here's the translation of the text you provided:
However, Hippocrates does not mention in his book that a poultice should be placed on the broken member for its healing. Instead, he recommends using a cerate made of wax and oil without any other ingredients, and it should be moderate in thickness.
However, Galen has observed that poultices can be placed on the broken member for its healing and these poultices contain ingredients that are drying with a little heat, such as myrrh, spikes, and similar substances to those previously recommended.
Here's the translation of the text you provided:
However, the amount of time that the poultice should remain applied depends on the severity of the injury. If there is no pain or swelling, and the bone is not broken or out of place, then you do not need to change it for several days. If there is severe pain or swelling in the area, then you should immediately remove the poultice and replace it with a new one.
If there is swelling and severe pain, take a cloth and a wet sea sponge, soak them in warm water, and use it to gently wash the area until the swelling goes down and the pain subsides. Then let the member rest for an hour. After that, apply a compress of soft wool soaked in vinegar, oil or rose oil, and leave it on for a night until you are sure that pus will not form, the inflammation is reduced and the pain has subsided.
Then gradually loosen the tight bandage and poultice that you applied initially and replace it with a lighter one, using gentle strokes until it is healed.
If you see that the abscess, redness, pain, inflammation and all other symptoms have completely subsided, then gradually loosen the poultice and bandage as you did in the beginning, using gentle strokes until it is healed.
However, if nothing unusual happens to the member and there is no reason to change the poultice, then you should not remove it for three to four days or up to one week. And sometimes everything is left on for 20 days, depending on the condition of the member, until the fracture has healed and the flesh around it begins to coagulate.
Then gradually adjust the tightness of the bandage to be tighter than your initial bandage and adjust it according to the swelling of the patient's limb, as previously discussed.
However, if you see that the area of the fracture is drying up and becoming thinner than it should be, then you know that nutrition is not able to reach it. Therefore, soak that area with warm water every time you change the bandages, for three days. This will help to alleviate the tightness and allow the nutrients to reach the affected area, promoting faster healing.
However, when foolish restorers of broken limbs fail to heal it properly at the beginning and instead heal it in a twisted manner, this is an error according to their methods and a great cause for concern. If they had done it correctly from the start, the ancients would have expanded upon it in their books and achieved better results.
And I have not seen anyone do this among them, which makes it more reasonable to not do it.
Chapter two: On fractures in the head.
Chapter two: On skull fractures.
The severity of these two types of fractures can be mild or severe, and there is also the type of fracture caused by compression or friction. This third type of fracture is caused by blows with a blunt object or falling onto a hard surface, among other similar causes.
And this type of fracture can be penetrating, reaching the periosteum which is below the bone, or it can be on the surface of the bone. The severity of these two types of fractures can also be mild or severe.
There is also another type of fracture that occurs in the fine bone structure and is called "capillary fracture" due to its small size.
And it is a fracture that is made either by force or by impact of a stone and the like, which makes a shard of the bone enter the inner parts, and it is made in the concave location just as it happens to the tiles of earthenware when they are struck and their fragments enter into the inner parts.
This is most commonly done in warm bone structures, such as the heads of infants.
And all these types of fractures are painful, just like separated stars. I will come with a remedy for all this in its place.
And we identify all these types of fractures through inspection, and by examination with tests, as well as removing any corrupt flesh that is on them.
And the type of fracture called "capillary" is known by this sign: it appears as if something has been scraped off the bone, and there is a black mark left behind after cleaning and wiping the area, because the break in the bone is visible.
In the treatment of fractures, it is important to consider the overall condition of the patient at the beginning of care, and then if you see signs that indicate a serious concern, such as vomiting of bile (indicating internal injury), excessive sweating, loss of consciousness, loss of voice, fainting, high fever, swelling or redness of the extremities, or other symptoms in more severe cases, then do not proceed until the patient has been stabilized.
And if you do not see any concerning signs, then you can begin treatment of the fracture.
This is because if the patient has come to you in the early stages of the fracture, as it was when it first occurred (and this happens often during winter months), then it is important that you wait 14 days before conducting any bone examination, regardless of the specific circumstances.
And if the injury occurs during summer months, then you should wait only 7 days before conducting bone examination because the warm weather speeds up healing process and it's important to ensure that the tissue around the break has not become infected (corromput) or necrotic (pannicol). Additionally, be mindful of the symptoms you have been warned about.
And if the fracture has reached the membrane covering the brain (panniculus), and it is fragmented into small pieces and crushed, then it is necessary to cut away the fragmented and crushed parts as I will instruct you to.
And it is important that you examine the head of the patient and clean the wound by removing any debris from the bone as much as possible according to your skills and abilities based on the shape and location of the injury, being gentle with the patient.
And if you detect bone fragments, pus or swelling during the examination, then it is important to stop at this point and take appropriate action: apply a compress of linen soaked in vinegar and rose oil to the wound, allowing the injury to rest until the swelling subsides and ensuring that there is no longer any bleeding. Once this has been achieved, you can begin the process of manipulating the bone and removing any fragments or infected tissue.
And this should be done in one of two ways of operation:
One method is to cut the bone with a straight-edged chisel and this is done by first administering one incision with a thinner chisel and then following it with another incision using a wider chisel.
And then use the wider chisel to make the incision.
It is important to have a variety of chisels with different widths, some wider than others, and some shorter in length and sharper at the tips, made of iron or steel.
And use them easily when striking the chisels, so as not to damage the skull and injure it further.
And if the bone is hard and dense, then it is necessary to drill holes around its circumference before making the incisions with the chisels, using drills called non-penetrating drills.
And these drills are not called that way because they do not reach the end of the bone in the head, but rather because their tips have rounded edges and are not sharp like a point or small circle, which prevents them from going all the way through and damaging the other side of the skull.
And it is advisable to have a large number of these drill bits, each with a width that corresponds to the thickness of different bones, so that you always have one available that matches the thickness of any bone in the skull, and has a sharp tip that is proportional to the thickness of that particular bone.
This is the method for using three types of drills: The technique for drilling holes around the circumference of a broken bone is to place the drill on top of the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you feel that the bone has been penetrated, then move the drill to another location, and place what is between all the holes the width of the drill bit or thereabouts.
And then use chisels to make incisions between each hole in the bone, making them as fine as possible for ease of removal, as previously described. Use your hand or some other tool such as tongs or forceps that you have prepared for this purpose to extract the bone fragments.
And it is important that you take great care to ensure that the chisel does not touch any part of the brain.
And once you have drilled holes around the bone and separated it from the brain if necessary, and extracted it, it is important to shape and smooth the bone's surface with a tool similar to a chisel but thinner and more delicate than the others.
And if some parts of the small and fragile bones are dislocated, then gently move them back into place using the instruments that you have; and then take care of the wound with linen and ointments, which we have mentioned.
The other method of operation is gentle and safe, known as "Galician" and highly praised; and this is its description: it is necessary for you at the beginning to reveal the fractured part of the bone in the location where the break is most severe and obvious. Once you have uncovered that area and placed beneath it the tip of this blunt and slow-moving scalpel, which has this shape:
And the lunate shape is for the bone end and should not cut anything, while the sharp edge should be facing forward in two layers, as needed; so that the lunate shape is aligned with the tip and the sharp edge faces the bone.
Then strike the scalpel with a small mallet once, firmly and confidently, until it has completely cut through the bone easily, as long as you are careful not to injure the surrounding tissue in any way. And if the physician is the most foolish and ignorant of all people, even if he is sleeping.
And if there is any tissue attached to the bone in certain areas, cut it away with the rounded end of the scalpel easily and carefully, freeing it from harm and fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the tissue, but rather the detached or broken piece of bone is its surface, and there remain roughnesses and fine splinters, then you must remove those roughnesses and pull out those splinters with fine razors that you have prepared in advance in various sizes, so that it will be possible for you to apply them appropriately and correctly according to the location and shape of the broken bone.
And it is necessary to begin your incision with the largest of the razors and then gradually move on to the finer ones, continuing in this manner until you reach the smallest and finest razor.
But in all other minor and fine fractures, you should administer care according to what is necessary for the correction of the injury.
And it is the reason why not everyone who has studied this art is equal. And this is what we have shown in the treatment of major fractures.
And if the tissue is torn when you extract the bone, then you must take a piece of cloth according to the size of the wound, soak it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound. Then take another cloth that has been folded or tripled and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth, doing this as gently as possible so as not to damage the wound. And then apply a moderate amount of heat, but do not force it, only enough to keep the wound warm.
And leave it with this care for a day or two until you are certain that the abscess has healed. Then remove the cloth and administer medicines that alleviate excessive dryness, such as lint, flour of iris, powdered eggs and licorice, and similar remedies.
And make a powder from these medicines and sprinkle it over the wound while it is still dry. And in general, administer all medicines that have the property of drying out and preventing infection.
And be diligent in ensuring that the wound is kept clean during your treatment and not exposed to any dirt or other contaminants, and do not allow it to become infected with virulence, for if it comes into contact with the tissue of the brain, it will corrupt it and lead to great danger for the patient.
And this leads to infection in the skull, when the bone is exposed and especially if care for it has been neglected, leading to blackening on its surface. Therefore, if these symptoms are present in the patient, know that it is a sign of impending death.
And if there is no blackening from infection but rather from the medicine that has been applied, and it is because of the properties of that medicine that this has occurred, then you must take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil. And wrap it with linen and place it on the head, then care for it with healing spices until it is healed.
Chapter 3.
Chapter 3: On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not actually broken unless there are two pieces that have been raised up together, or one of them has been crushed, because in it there are two bones, and the lower part is made of cartilage which can be bruised and bent but not broken, leading only to roughness and curvature.
If one of the two parts of it is broken, you should insert your finger into its nostril and reduce the fracture from inside using your index finger and thumb, until its nose returns to its natural shape. And do this with ease, and be careful not to cause further pain to the patient during your operation.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and it does not reach there, then you should use a rod that is slightly thicker than the width of the break.
And if the fracture involves two parts, then you should proceed in a similar manner.
You should attempt to restore it in the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, you should return on the seventh day for a recheck of the cauterized wound.
And then insert a piece of linen thread into the nostril if the fracture is in one part, or place two splints if the fracture involves two parts, with each splint being thick enough to fill the nasal cavity.
Some ancient healers have recommended that the splints be wrapped in a bandage and changed every day, but I do not agree with this approach. Instead, the thread should be soaked in egg white mixed with powdered chalk and left in place until the bone is healed and the cartilage has hardened.
And in some cases, small sticks made of lion's skin-covered wood may be inserted into the nose instead of splints, especially if the fracture is severe and the patient has difficulty breathing through their nose.
And this method is not necessary in your case; you may choose to use it if you wish, or not, as you prefer.
And if another abscess forms after the cauterization, apply a compress made of wax or clay mixed with vinegar and rose oil, or aloe.
But if no abscess forms after the cauterization, then you should apply a compress made of sesame flour and ground eggshells mixed with egg white to the outside of the nose, and place a lion's skin stopper over it, but do not cover the nostrils.
But if the bones in the nose are broken or merely splintered due to a small fracture, then you should saw over them and extract the pieces using appropriate instruments; then suture the incision, heal it with materials that promote tissue growth and solidification, and apply appropriate compresses.
And if a wound forms inside the nose, then you should treat it with splints and insert lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On healing the jaw when it is broken.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture does not involve a wound, but rather is only on the outside, without being separated into two parts or curved inward, then its recognition is easy.
And so, if the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, then you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth, and similarly, if the fracture is on the left side of the jaw, then insert your right index finger into the mouth; and gently push the swelling of the fracture from the inside out with that finger, while using your other hand to hold the outside part of the bone steady.
And if the jaw fracture is already separated into two parts, then you should apply traction to both parts in a straight direction until it is possible to align them.
And if there is dislocation of the teeth due to concussion, then strengthen those that you think will remain with gold or silver or lead wire; and place a wax seal over the broken jaw, followed by a double layer of cloth, and then a thick piece of wood or a solid sole plate made to fit the length of the jaw; and tie it in place with a ligature as is appropriate for the situation until the swelling subsides.
And command the patient to rest and remain calm, and prohibit them from consuming solid foods.
And if you believe that the shape has been altered in some way, then examine and untie it on the third day; and correct what has been altered in it, and apply a compress made of powdered chalk, egg white, or sesame flour, as long as you have removed the wax seal, and place a woolen cloth over the compress.
And once the compress is attached and properly positioned over it, and the bone has not been altered, leave it in place until the fracture is healed and strengthened; because many times this type of fracture is healed in three weeks.
And if another abscess forms after the cauterization, then administer what we have said many times in the treatment of it until it is healed and the abscess has resolved.
And if the fracture involves a wound, then consider whether it is a piece of bone that has been separated or crushed; and be careful to remove any crushed pieces with appropriate instruments during the removal process.
And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with a fleam as much as is necessary for your purposes.
And once you have removed the crushed pieces and there is no longer any remaining debris, then close the wound if it is wide; or place a compress on it if it is narrow, one that promotes healing, until it is healed.
Chapter V.
On healing the collarbone when it is broken.
Many times the collarbone is broken in front of the muscle, and this type of fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Because it is either broken, or separated into two parts without any crushed pieces; and this type of injury is easy to heal; or there are also crushed pieces present, making it difficult to heal; or the fracture involves a wound.
And the operation for this type of injury, when it does not involve a wound, is to have two assistants present; one holds the patient's head steady and supports the broken collarbone, while the other extends the neck towards the injured side.
And then align the fracture using your fingers until it is in its proper shape, ensuring that there is neither too much prominence nor depression.
And if you require additional traction, then place a roll of cloth or wool under the patient's armpit, making it the size that is necessary for your purposes; and extend, lift, and compress the collarbone with your hand while aligning the fracture as needed.
And if you are unable to pull the end of the collarbone towards the outside because it has reached the chest wall, then have the patient recline on their neck and place a medium-sized cushion under the affected muscle.
And the assistant should press the muscle towards the inside until the end of the collarbone that is against the chest wall is lifted up; and then you can realign the fracture and align it using your fingers.
But if you feel abscesses on the collarbone and they are bothersome, then it is necessary to lance above it and easily remove those abscesses.
And if it is lodged in the bone, then you must devise an incision with one of the scalpels that you have prepared for this purpose, since you had placed the instrument used for cupping below the collarbone. This instrument is made of wood or iron and has the following form:
And it is similar to a bowl, of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to what is necessary for it, depending on the size of the bone or how small it is.
But the length of it should be according to what is possible for you during the operation; it should have two ends that are similar, and one end should be wide while the other should be narrow.
And if the rupture of the wound that you have made when you removed the abscess from the bone is wide and there is a risk of infection, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound with stitches.
And if the rupture is small, or you are afraid of infection, then you must fill the wound with cloth and powder according to the size of the incision in the wound.[Reference(s):
And if an infection occurs, then apply a cloth soaked in vinegar and rose oil to it, and place it over the infected area.[Reference(s):
And above all, make sure that the splint is not causing harm to the broken bone, so it's necessary to check on the patient every day. When you notice that the swelling has gone down or see that the splint has become loose, then you should adjust it and tighten the bandages accordingly.
And then, place the patient's head on a pillow, and put a small cushion under their lower back to keep them slightly elevated during sleep, so that the injured area is raised with the help of this support. This can be done by placing a rod or stick under the pillow or mattress to create an incline, or by propping up the patient's arm on a pillow. The goal is to raise the fracture above the level of the muscle or shoulder joint in order to promote healing and reduce swelling.
And do not remove the bandages unless there is pus or an abscess in the area within 12 days.
And then, renew the plaster if you see that it has worn off, and adjust it to fit snugly around the injury site, and leave it on until the bone has fully healed and the fracture has completely coagulated.
And the bone will be strong and stable after 28 days, although in some cases it may take less time for the bone to heal fully in certain individuals.
Capital VI:
On restoring a fractured shoulder:
A spatula-shaped piece of wood or bone is broken at the side of it, and not through its entire length, but only along the edges.
And so when the break occurs in the middle of the object, and is not visible but only detectable through touch, then you must determine the shape of the fracture and prepare yourself accordingly to reduce it back into its natural position, using any means or methods that are within your power.
And then, apply a poultice made from flour and egg whites, along with a lion's paw, to the affected area. Additionally, place a double layer of cloth over it, followed by a thin wooden board that is slightly smaller than the size of the spatula or just slightly larger.
But if the wooden board has a concavity in one of the areas where it meets the spatula, then you should fill that concavity with a lion's paw and make sure that the board is level and evenly aligned with the rest of the spatula.
And then, wrap the entire area with a long bandage that is neither too tight nor too loose, and make sure that it is securely fastened to the wooden board so that it does not move or slip out of place.
And check the bandage every day, and if it becomes loose or soft, then rewrap it and adjust the wooden board to ensure that it remains in its proper position.
And then, have the patient lie on their good side.
And the spatula will be healed in 20 or 25 days.
And when this number of days has passed, then you can remove the bandages and be assured that the bone or object in question is not at risk of further damage or disintegration.
And if pus or inflammation is present in the area of the bone, then you should make an incision and drain it, and remove any infected tissue or debris, following the same procedures outlined for treating an abscess or infection in the collarbone.
Capital VII:
Of the restoration of a broken limb. (based on the context, I'm assuming "pietz" refers to a limb or bone)
Sometimes a limb is broken in its middle part, which causes significant delay (in healing); however, the ends of the limb are more likely to become crushed and comminuted (fragmented).
And when the middle of a limb is broken, it often leads to displacement towards the inner side and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, shortness of breath, and vomiting blood; and it is apparent from the cavity in the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation. (Here, "sentiment" likely means that the injury can be felt or detected.)
And the restoration of it is that the patient should be placed on their back, and a cushion should be placed under their shoulders; and the muscles should be pressed, and the ribs adjusted with hands from both sides during the operation, in a subtle manner as much as possible and appropriate, until the shape of the bone returns to its original form. (Here, "operacio" likely refers to the medical procedure or treatment being performed on the injured limb.)
And then place an emplaster and cotton on top of it, and place a splint made of soft wood such as pine or cedar, and wrap it in cloth; and be careful when wrapping the splint around the broken bone so that no harm is done to it; and use bandages with rounded edges on the back, and tighten those bandages moderately; and always keep an eye on the bandage, and when it becomes soft, tighten it again. (Here, "liadura" likely refers to the bandages or wraps being used, and "emplastre e estopa" may refer to a medical dressing or padding.)
And if necessary, you should unwrap the bandage due to corrosion or suppuration, or pain, or inflammation that occurs in the area; then you should carefully unwrap and remove the medical dressing and correct any issues that arise from it with a healing method; and reapply the bandage if the wound requires it; and adjust the tension as needed until it is healed. (Here, "corrossio" likely refers to decay or degradation of the bandages, while "pruziment" may refer to an abscess or swelling.)
Chapter VIII.
Of the restoration of ribs when they are fractured. (Here, "trincadas" is likely a variant spelling of "trencades," meaning broken or fractured.)
Know that rib fractures do not occur except in large areas that are next to the back; and in their ends or on the front side, there is no such breakage unless they are cartilaginous. (Here, "catz" means "happens," and "contricio" likely refers to a fracture or break.) And knowledge of it is not hidden from sensation due to the investigation of it with the aforementioned signs. (Here, "amaguada" means "concealed," and "inquisicio" likely refers to the process of examination or inquiry.)
And the restoration should be done by aligning the fracture with the aforementioned methods as much as possible, until it is healed according to what is appropriate; and use an emplaster and tighten the broken bone with a splint if necessary. (Here, "enguales" means "align," and "strenh" means "tighten." "Stela" likely refers to a wooden splint or brace.)
And if the rib fracture is displaced towards the inner side, then the patient experiences severe pain and piercing sensations, like a piercing sensation that occurs in someone who has pleurisy, and this is because the bone touches the lining; and it also causes difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this is difficult to cure. (Here, "pleureci" likely refers to pleurisy, which is an inflammation of the lining around the lungs.)
And the ancients were clever in using such clever words. (Here, "antixs" likely refers to ancient medical practitioners or scholars.)
And according to what they said: it is necessary to feed the patient with foods that produce inflammation and flatulence, so that their stomach becomes distended and expanded, which in turn pushes the fracture outwards. (Here, "imflacio" likely refers to inflammation, and "ventositat" may refer to gas or flatulence.)
But we avoid that (i.e., feeding the patient foods that produce inflammation and flatulence) because it can easily cause abscesses or suppuration if not done carefully; and if it does occur, then we should assist with that. (Here, "apostema caut" likely refers to an abscess or collection of pus.)
And they (i.e., ancient medical practitioners) also said that it is necessary to apply a blister over the wound and ensure that it drains well; this is similar to logical reasoning, but there is concern that the blister may draw excess fluid to the area due to weakness. (Here, "alcus" likely refers to a blister or collection of fluid on the skin.)
And they (i.e., ancient medical practitioners) also said: it is necessary to cover the area with wool that has been soaked in cauterizing oil, and place powders between the ribs until it is filled; and the bandage should be wrapped around the area according to its contours; and then the patient should be treated for pleurisy with food and medicine. (Here, "caut" likely refers to a type of oil used for cauterization or burning.)
And if the constriction caused is very severe and unbearable for the patient, and the bone punctures the lining with sharp pain, then we must be concerned for the patient; in this case, it is necessary to make an incision over the area, expose the broken rib, place a tool that preserves the cavity over it (the memory of which is preceded), and insert the instrument gently to ease the bone out, and extract it.
And then we should adjust the two lips of the wound if it is large with suturing, and treat it with emplasters until it heals.
And if an abscess occurs inside (the wound), then you should apply and press powdered herbs mixed with oil onto the area, and treat it as necessary for the internal abscess.
And let him (the patient) lie on his side on the mattress where he sleeps, until it heals.
Chapter IX.
Of the restoration of a broken vertebra of the back and neck.
Sometimes the bones of the neck become fractured, and this can lead to grinding (between the bones), and similarly for the vertebrae of the back. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if it will heal or not, then consider whether the person's limbs are already weakened, numb, and without sensation, unable to move or extend them, and when you press on those limbs or prick them with a needle and they do not feel pain, then you should know that it is not healing, and in the worst cases, this can be fatal.
But if they (the limbs) move and the person feels pain when you press on those areas or prick them with a needle, then you should know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover with treatment.
And if you see similar symptoms in the vertebrae of the neck and want to know if it will heal or not, then consider the person's feet.
And so if you see that they are already weakened and experiencing symptoms similar to those described in the previous section (i.e., difficulty moving or feeling pain when pressed), and when they lie down, they experience bloating and involuntary bowel movements, and sometimes they are turned onto their backs and want to urinate but cannot, then you should know that this is fatal, and therefore there is no need to treat them.
But if none of those symptoms are present, then it is better and less serious.
And the treatment of it is that you pierce for the sedation of the abscess that you place on the swollen or rubbed spine, either with a little amount of oil or with mouthfuls of horsehair; place it on that spot and leave it there until the abscess has been sedated.
And then apply one of the soothing and healing plasters, and strengthen it on the limb; and instruct the patient to rest and remain calm and not to sleep on the side where they feel pain until it has been healed.
And if it happens that the attrition of the bone is involved or some other cause that has become separated from it, then it is necessary to cut into the tendon and remove that bone; and then align the two lips of the wound, with stitches if it is large; and then treat the pus-filled wound, until it has been healed.
But if the back of the bone in the heel is broken and it is at the end of the leg, then it is necessary for you to insert your left hand into the buttocks and use the other hand to align the broken bone as best you can; and then apply a plaster and splints, if needed, and strengthen them.
And if you feel gritty sensations in it (the wound), then cut into that area, remove what is there, and treat the wound with the prescribed treatment until it has healed.
Chapter 10.
Chapter on restoring the width (of a wound).
The bones of the width (of the body) are often broken, and if they break, then the fracture is not only in the extremities but also sunken into the length and tilted towards the inner parts; and it happens to the patient that there is pain in the area and puncture, and the leg becomes numb when it is fractured.
And restoring it (the width) involves you placing your hand over it, in line with the fracture, which represents its shape.
And if the fracture is only in its extremity, then you should align it according to what is appropriate for you, using a splint, until it matches its natural shape.
But if the fracture is in the length or already tilting towards the lower parts, then you should make the patient lie on their stomach while you prepare the restoration of that fracture. And so when you have aligned it (the fracture), apply a plaster over it and place a splint of wood or tendon on top of it, securing it with strong binding that does not cause penetration or displacement of the splint.
And align the concavity with what fills it until it is properly secured, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or side.
But if an abscess occurs, then stop any attempts at extension or restoration until the abscess has been sedated, and apply what is necessary to heal it as previously described; then return to restoring it and secure it properly.
And if it becomes gritty or shattered (the bone), then you should treat it.
Chapter 11.
Chapter on restoring the fracture of the adjutor (a muscle).
The adjutor is the muscle that lies between the thigh and the top of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then there are two ways to restore it, one of which is that you take a flat piece of wood, about the thickness of a finger, in this shape:
And they should be tied at both ends with two ligaments and then suspended from an elevated location.
And have the patient sit on a small stool, then extend their broken arm over the wood until it reaches the middle of the stool where the curvature of the wood is located.
And then suspend it with some heavy object or have the nurse extend it towards the lower parts; and then the doctor should carefully align the fracture with their hands until it is properly restored.
And the other way is for the patient to lie on their back with their neck raised and have their hand suspended by a ligament; and then instruct two assistants, one of whom should hold what is above the fracture with both hands, while the other holds the lower part and each extends their respective parts.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then bind the fracture with two ligaments and have each assistant pull on both of their respective parts.
And so if the fracture is close to the muscle's extremity, then half of the ligament should be placed on the middle and the other half below the fracture towards the thigh.
And similarly, if the fracture is close to the thigh, then the ligament should be placed on that spot and over the thigh.
Align it (the fracture) with ease and without difficulty, and once it is properly aligned according to what is necessary and applied with good application, then secure it in place as long as there is no abscess.
But if an abscess occurs, then leave the alignment for seven days and apply clean wool soaked in vinegar and olive oil over it until the abscess has healed; then secure it in place.
The method for securing it is to apply a plaster over the fracture, then wrap an envelope of new cloth around the plaster; and then place the arm over the adjutor (muscle) and leave the hand open over the patient's own muscle.
And then wrap it (the arm) with the cloth and secure it in place over the adjutor muscle, ensuring that the arm is in a natural position, unless there is some reason preventing this due to the broken bone.
And then use splints.
And place the splint over the fracture that is wider and stronger than the others; place a space between each splint equal to the width of a finger, and make the length of the splints match the length of the fracture with an addition of three fingers on either side.
And then secure the splints with binding as I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And ensure that the binding over the site of the fracture is tighter. And the longer the fracture, the less tight the binding should be.
And so if you see that the splints and binding are as I have described when restoring the limb to its original position, then proceed.
But if you are concerned about an abscess, then leave the binding and splints in place for seven days as I have mentioned.
And then monitor the ligaments in all parts for three days to ensure that no inflammation or swelling occurs, and prevent food from reaching the limb due to excessive binding; and correct any issues as I have described.
But if you are confident that there will be no issues, then do not loosen the binding for at least three days or more.
And let the patient's sleeping position be on their back with their hands over their stomach.
And place a cushion filled with clean wool over the adjutor (muscle) and monitor the shape of the broken limb at all times during the day or night to ensure that it does not become weakened or dissolved, or that the ligaments become soft; correct any issues as you are able.
And provide the patient with food according to the order that I have previously mentioned, ensuring that it is soft and easy to digest at first, until they begin to regain strength; then gradually increase the richness of their diet.
And it is customary for the adjutor and its corresponding leg to be strengthened in 40 days; and then they should be loosened, and a bath should be administered and they should be treated with ointments that will help heal them.
But if the fracture is very serious, then do not loosen the binding or splints for one to two months.
Chapter 12.
Chapter on restoring a broken arm.
The arm is made up of two bones called the two humeri; one is small and is located at the wrist, while the other is larger and is placed below the smaller bone near the lower part.
It is common for only one of the bones to be broken, either the larger or smaller one, but it is also possible for both to break at the same time.
And when the little flame is extinguished above, its restoration is easy, and its healing is quicker.
And when the flame inside the fracture is extinguished, the break becomes bad, and its healing is difficult.
And even worse is when two bones are broken at the same time.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small flame above, then it is appropriate for the doctor to facilitate its restoration by applying gentle traction before it heals.
But if the large flame is what's broken, then strong extension is required.
And if both flames are broken together, then you must apply very strong extension.
And you must position the shape of your hand as if to restore and extend it over a cushion, with your fingers above all others, and the ear closer to the ground than any other part of the body, while the patient lies on their side.
And have a cushion placed before them at their level and height, to prevent the patient from straining themselves.
And then the assistant extends the lower arm with their hand or limb, and another assistant similarly extends it from above.
And then the doctor heals the bone so that it can be restored to its best possible shape.
And if there are abscesses in the fracture, then you must pierce and draw out all of the pus from its location with your strength.
And if a separate abscess appears that cannot be healed and is not hopeful for recovery, then you must open it and remove it in the manner we described above.
But if the fracture is infected with gangrene, I have already discussed a separate chapter on this topic, and therefore follow the treatment for that.
And if you encounter an abscess at the beginning of your treatment, then you should lay a cloth soaked in a mixture of roasted oil and white wax, with a balance between fineness and subtlety, over it with gentle tension until the abscess subsides. Then remove the cerot and apply a prepared plaster made from powdered molasses and egg white, along with star-shaped pieces; and the star should be placed over the fracture with the sharpest and strongest points.
And know that the number of stars for the arm is six in the most common arrangements, or when the fracture is in one piece or two pieces together.
And then apply strong and firm pressure over the location of the fracture, and when it is necessary to adjust the extension above or below the fracture, loosen the pressure slightly as described at the beginning of this chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and warm, and not hard or rough, and the oil with which they are strengthened should be of moderate thickness, between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and its movement for several days. And if any cause requires correction, such as a sprain that occurs in the limb, then you should immerse the member in warm water until the swelling subsides.
And leave the member unrestrained so that it may rest, and then gradually reapply pressure.
And when the extension has been loosened and the bone has healed and is similar to those around it, then you should correct everything with your strength.
And consider if the nourishment is unable to reach the member due to excessive pressure, then you must loosen it slightly and leave it for several days so that nourishment can flow to it, and then gradually strengthen it.
But if the patient does not experience any of the causes we mentioned, then it is not necessary to loosen the pressure for 20 days or thereabouts.
And then the patient's arm should be suspended by its own power of movement and made to sleep on its back.
And know that this fracture is healed in 30 days or 32 days, or it may heal more easily in 28 days, and all of this depends on the arrangement of the complexions and the strength of the patient.
Chapter 13.
On the healing of fractures of the thumb and fingers.
And know that the thumb of the hand and the knuckles of the fingers are susceptible to frequent abrasions but not usually fractures.
And when the hand experiences a break or sprain, then it is appropriate for the patient to lie on their back and place their hand over the affected area with even pressure.
And then the assistant should straighten the broken bones, and the doctor should set them with good alignment.
And now it is appropriate to apply plaster and cotton, unless pus formation is prevented by cauterization; and also place a pillow on top, according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in a cloth.
But if the incision is in the inner parts, it should be done on the belly of the palm, and then make a sort of cloth ball, and command the patient to squeeze that with their clenched palm; also tie it securely with long cloth.
And let there be a piece of raw meat with cloth underneath so that the meat is applied to the palm; and squeeze it as necessary.
But if the fracture is in the outer parts, then it is necessary to place a pillow on top and another under the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; and also apply a bandage, as the hand is turned with the movement of the wrist.
And if a fracture occurs in one of the knuckles of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, let it be bandaged as necessary and also squeezed with the palm; and if you want, place a small pillow underneath to raise the fracture and prevent damage.
But if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as in the middle finger, or in the index, or in the little finger, or in the ring finger, then let it be bandaged and tied with the same finger that is swollen; or bind them all continuously, which is better; or place a small pillow over it, as mentioned earlier for the thumb.
And consider, in your treatment, the disposition of pus formation that is prevented by cauterization and opposed with the appropriate operation when any cause of it occurs, as mentioned in the account of it.
Chapter 14.
Of the treatment of fracture of the thigh bone.
The thigh bone is often broken and it is evident from the sensation as it turns to the front and upper part.
And the treatment of it is done in such a way that the bandage is tightened over the fracture and another bandage below the fracture, and the patient lies on their stomach and face.
And then let the assistant extend all the bandage to its part according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if it is close to the root of the thigh, then let the bandage be close to the groin at the end of the pubis, so that the extension falls on it, and another bandage below the fracture.
Similarly, if the break is close to the groin, then let the bandage be close to the groin and the extension fall on the parts below.
And then the doctor should bandage the bone with both hands inside to reduce it according to its natural shape and let the bones join well; then apply plaster and a bandage, unless pus formation occurs in the member. But if pus formation occurs in it, then let it be for several days until the abscess is resolved by cauterization and then return to your treatment.
And let the bandage be done in this way: it is necessary to wrap a hard bandage over the fracture, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap the thigh until it reaches the shin and groin.
And insert a long piece of cloth between the thigh and the bandage close to the groin on the lower parts, and let the ends of the cloth come out from the upper part of both sides; then wrap the bandage around the thigh and leg so that any excess falls off.
And then place pillows on the thigh at the site of the fracture and place one pillow over the shin bone of the leg.
And then fill the spaces between the thigh and the leg with soft cloths, so that the bandage is tightened.
And then start the tight bandage in the middle over the site of the fracture with three or four layers, and as you move away from the site of the fracture with the bandage, let it be less tight, lighter, and softer.
And then extend the ends of the cloth to both lower parts until it reaches the ankle bone, and tie both ends of the pillows on the other side so that the bandage does not move from its place.
And then leave the bandage in such a way that there is no corrosion, abscess by cauterization, or inflammation and similar things in the member; and if any of these occur, then be careful to release the bandage immediately and correct what happened as quickly as possible, as mentioned many times before.
But if there is a wound in the bone and it gets infected, then it is necessary to cauterize it if possible; and if not, remove it and cover it, and cure it with what was mentioned before until it heals.
And sometimes this thigh bone fracture is tightened with pillows in such a way that they are adjusted to it, as mentioned earlier for the assistant and arm.
But in the treatment of it done in this way, the patient does not suffer from a limp; and if it heals on its own without applying the other leg, then it is necessary for that person to always walk with a limp.
And know that the thigh bone heals in 40 days or a little more or less, and all this depends on the diversity of complexions and other dispositions.
Chapter 15.
Of the treatment of fracture of the ankle bone (malleolus).
Know that fracture of the ankle bone takes a long time to heal, but it often causes severe swelling.
But if it is a fracture, then it is nothing but a fissure or crack in its parts, and this can be with one wound or several wounds, and everything depends on the sensation.
And the treatment of it is to cauterize what has been broken in its parts with the mentioned things until it is joined and healed as much as possible according to ease, equation, and construction.
And then apply plaster and place a round pillow over it if necessary; and tighten it with an appropriate bandage.
And then consider all the dispositions that have been recommended in other fractures, such as abscess by cauterization and similar things so that it is opposed to any accident with what is appropriate for it until it heals.
Chapter 16.
Of the treatment of fracture of the shin bone (tibia).
Know that in the shin bone there are two bones, one is thick and is named the calf bone; and the other is thin and is named the fibula.
And sometimes both bones of the shin bone suffer from different types of fracture, and then the treatment is done as for a fractured arm, and the operation is the same.
And if both bones are cut together, then the shin bone is turned in all directions.
And if the thin bone is broken, then the shin bone turns towards the front parts.
And if the thick bone is broken, it falls downwards, and this is one of those cases that are not minor.
And then administer extension and traction of the tendons according to that regimen.
However, if the fracture of the leg is old with significant adhesions, then the extension should be minimal and gentle, and relieve it as much as you can.
And if there is any reason for surgery on the leg, such as tendon lengthening and performing the entire operation, then you will use wooden pegs placed below the causes that are placed on sole stirrups, made exactly from the palm branches; lighten those with small girth and not thick, and their length should be according to the length of the leg, and from the heel to the place below.
Then wrap each leg with two layers of bandages according to its length and place one on the lower part of the leg from one side and the other on the other side, so that they are in the area from the heel to the bottom of the foot.
Then tie the two tendons in three places at both ends and in the middle, because with this tension, the leg is prevented from bending to the right or left, and remains stationary.
And then a splint of the appropriate length for the leg is administered, and it is placed on the patient so that it maintains its mobility.
And you should do this especially in a fracture, and when it is an actual wound.
And then consider the leg every day and study it carefully to prevent inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of these causes occur, you should stop what is necessary until it heals.
Chapter 17.
About the fracture of the ankle and bones of the foot and toes.
The ankle does not usually break completely; but the bones of the foot sometimes break; and the toes rarely break, and they do not usually break, except for bruising in the case of dislocation.
And if a break occurs in the bones of the foot and sometimes those bones are raised above each other, then the patient should place their foot on the ground prepared as if walking. [**Translation note**: I translated "ayssi cum anant" as "as if walking", but it could also be translated as "in the way that they walk normally" or "the way they walk".]
Then place the other foot on something raised above those bones, and then press and bandage them until they return to their place.
Then apply a compress and cover it, and place a small board under the abdomen of the foot with two flat ends.
Then strengthen that with the foot held in gentle tension, because you have wrapped it with bandages and other necessary means.[**Translation note**: I translated "am strectura descent" as "with gentle tension", but it could also be interpreted as "in proper position". The context is not entirely clear.]
And after three or four days have passed, then you should loosen the bandages because you will find the bones bandaged together, or broken or dislocated, and the operation on them is as you know.
But if some of the toes are broken, then you should restore them and bandage them as I have instructed you in restoring the fingers of the hand. Then place a splint on the broken toe according to its length and make it slightly longer than necessary, and then place a small board under the foot as I have recommended to you, and hold it in proper tension.
But if more than two or three bones are broken, then place a splint on each toe according to its length wrapped in a linen cloth, and hold the board at the bottom of the foot and stand one end of the board under the abdomen of the foot so that it remains well supported.
And it is important that you do not forget all the causes I have mentioned to you in other fractures and injuries we have discussed, and respond appropriately to any situation that may arise. [**Translation note**: "opausa te" can be translated as "respond appropriately", but it could also be interpreted as "take action" or "intervene". The context is not entirely clear.]
Chapter 18.
About the fracture of the neck of the femur, the head of the thigh bone and the shaft of the male. [**Translation note**: I translated "del conh" as "of the neck", but it could also be interpreted as "of the collarbone". The context suggests that the former is more likely.]
When the neck of the femur is broken, then place the patient in a recumbent position with a pillow under their head and slightly inclined to one side, and have them lie on their back. [**Translation note**: I translated "cezela cayrada" as "recumbent position", but it could also be interpreted as "lying down" or "prone". The context suggests that the former is more likely.]
Then the midwife should fill the broken neck of the femur with cotton, and it should be done as if filling a pipe; and then have the woman rotate their hips slightly to help move everything out from in front of the fractured neck so that the broken bone can return to its proper position. [**Translation note**: I translated "concutida" as "rotating", but it could also be interpreted as "shaking" or "moving". The context suggests that the former is more likely.]
Then place a cushion under the patient's back and when they need to urinate, make it easy for them by removing the cotton and allowing them to urinate, then replace the cotton and return them to their original position as before, and then return them to their original cushion. [**Translation note**: I translated "retorne al sieu pulvil primier" as "then return them to their original cushion", but it could also be interpreted as "then return them to their original pillow". The context suggests that the former is more likely.]
Then do this for seven days or thereabouts, because the patient will be healed by then. [**Translation note**: I translated "quar aquel es restaurat" as "because the patient will be healed", but it could also be interpreted as "because that is the cure". The context suggests that the former is more likely.]
If you wish, take a bladder from a sheep and attach a reed cannula to it; then insert the entire bladder into the broken neck of the femur, and then blow gently through the cannula with strength until the bladder is inflated within the fractured area, because this will help the bone return to its proper position. [**Translation note**: I translated "ensuffla" as "blow gently", but it could also be interpreted as "infuse" or "inject". The context suggests that the former is more likely.]
Then fill it with cotton and leave it in place for several days as we have recommended, until the patient is healed. [**Translation note**: I translated "segon que havem recomtat" as "as we have recommended", but it could also be interpreted as "according to what we have said". The context suggests that the former is more likely.]
And if the thigh bone of a man or woman is broken, then administer in the restoration and alignment of it what we have recommended for the hip bone. [**Translation note**: I translated "agulacio" as "alignment", but it could also be interpreted as "straightening" or "adjustment". The context suggests that the former is more likely.]
And what is right is not hidden in these common and infrequent fractures, especially for those who have some knowledge, skill, and understanding of this book; because the nature of the fracture indicates a more straightforward restoration and alignment on the right side, so understand well. [**Translation note**: I translated "dreyt" as "straightforward", but it could also be interpreted as "right" or "proper". The context suggests that the former is more likely.]
But when the shaft of a man's thigh bone is broken, take goose grass and wrap the thigh bone in it; then place an wrapping of cloth over it and bandage it tightly, leaving it in place for three days or thereabouts until it heals. [**Translation note**: I translated "guarguamela de auca" as "goose grass", but it could also be interpreted as "gooseweed" or "goosefoot". The context suggests that the former is more likely.]
Chapter 19
Of the restoration of bone fractures when they are broken.
It is appropriate for the person who has suffered a fracture to seek immediate medical attention, especially if it is a large bone such as the thigh bone or the shin bone, or similar in nature. They should be cautious and seek a surgeon whose qualifications are known to them, just as we have previously mentioned.
And if the fracture results in bleeding, it is necessary to take care to stop the bleeding by applying a powder of three times ground zegi (possibly a type of herb) to it, unless there is another cause for concern.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay, unless an abscess occurs.
However, if an abscess forms, you should delay the restoration of the fracture until the ninth day, until the abscess subsides. Do not approach it on the third and fourth days, as this can lead to negative consequences.
But if the broken bone protrudes above the skin and is exposed, it is necessary to take care to reduce and bandage it with ease and minimal extension, using your hands.
But if the extension is not sufficient and there is a gap between the bone and the skin, then you should reduce the bone with this tool, which is made of iron and measures seven or eight fingers in length, and its width according to the size of the fracture. And it is necessary for the surgeon to have three or four such tools, depending on what is required for the treatment of any type of fracture.
And it should be round, and not too thick, to prevent it from being bent during the operation.
And it should have a sharp point with an edge at both ends; and the upper part of it should be thicker, and taper towards the middle.
This is its shape:
And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem," which translates to "a small palette."
It is necessary for the sharp end of the tool to be placed above the protruding end of the bone, so that it can reduce it effectively.
And then push it gently until the bone returns to its proper position, and bandage it with appropriate tension.
And therefore make sure to bandage the ends of the fracture together, and if the broken end is thin and cannot be easily reduced with the tool, then it is necessary to incise the skin at that point so that the tool can have enough power to do so.
But if you are unable to reduce the bone using the method described, then you should use incisions as necessary with the scalpel that I mentioned earlier; or saw through the bone with one of the saws in whatever way is possible for you.
And then remove any roughness or small fragments from the bone.
And when the bone is reduced and the patient still experiences severe pain, it indicates that the bone has not returned to its natural position. In this case, take action to greatly benefit the patient.
After completing the restoration of the bone, place a cloth soaked in vinegar steeped with black stiptic (a type of herb) over the wound, especially during the summer months. Do not use any ointments or other substances that contain oil on the wound, to prevent putrefaction and corruption from developing.
And then administer styptic (a type of medicine) during the completion of the bone restoration, and leave the wound exposed so that you can make incisions with forceps and use bandages as needed depending on the size of the wound.
And be sure to take care not to injure the wound with the fracture, as many foolish doctors have done this and caused their patients to suffer death or a corrupting illness, also known as gangrene. And if the wound is of light, soft, and different from the stiffness of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or severe and you are concerned about negative consequences as previously mentioned, and there is pain in the area, it is not advisable to use styptic. Instead, apply a hard cloth bandage to the area instead of using styptic and secure it with that.
And when after one or two days the wound begins to generate pus, it is necessary to remove the cloth that was placed over it with vinegar and administer warm compresses. Use ointments such as tetrafarmacon or similar substances, which are commonly used for treating wounds according to our custom.
It is important for you to loosen the bandages and examine the wound every day morning and evening until it has healed and solidified, and ensure that the limb is positioned in such a way that pus can easily drain from it.
If the wound does not heal after several days and there is still pus present, it is likely that there are deep-seated abscesses. In this case, it is necessary to carefully examine the wound with a probe. And of these abscesses, those that are separate and protruding should be removed, but if they are not separated and cause the member to become swollen and result in pain, then it is necessary to carefully incise them if possible.
And if the wound becomes ulcerated or liquefied, that is to say, infected with pus or putrefaction, it is necessary to apply one of the following treatments as needed, which are described in their respective chapters.
And now I will conclude my discourse and you must consider what I have said: when the large bone is fractured, it protrudes above the member like the thigh bone or shin bone and similar bones of large members. Do not attempt to pull it out or extract it, as many people have died from this. Instead, leave it alone for as long as possible, as it will likely fall back into place on its own after 20-30 days. And now treat the wound if you are able, and if not, leave it alone.
Chapter 20.
Of the treatment of nodules that form at the site of a fracture wound.
It is common for nodules to form at the site of a fracture wound, especially near joints and obstructing the shape of the member, which can easily hinder its natural function.
Therefore, consider if the nodule is recent and administer medicines that have stiptic properties such as aloe, gum arabic, myrrh, etc. Choose some or all of these remedies and mix them with vinegar or egg white, then apply the mixture to a piece of cloth and place it over the nodule. Secure the cloth in place with a bandage to provide good compression. [20] De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura
And leave the bandage on for several days and then change it to a new one until the nodule has been reduced. Alternatively, apply a thin sheet of lead over the nodule, as lead has the property of restoring anything that is inflated in the members.
But if the nodule has turned to stone and is hard and tight, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut into the top part of it carefully and remove any excess or protruding parts with a razor until it has been reduced in size. Then heal the wound that remains.
Chapter 21.
Of the restoration of bone fractures when the member is still thin and weak after healing.
When a bone fracture has healed but the member remains thin and weak, it is usually due to several reasons: one of which is an insufficient amount of solution or ligation during healing; another reason may be excessive tightness of the ligaments that restricts blood flow to the member; yet another cause could be excessive use of ointments; or movement at the wrong time; or a lack of blood in the patient's body and debility.
The treatment for this is to provide the patient with nourishing food to build their strength, administer baths, and engage in activities that bring joy and pleasure to lift their spirits. It is also important to address any underlying conditions such as anemia or poor circulation that may have contributed to the weakened state of the limb. In some cases, physical therapy or other interventions may be necessary to help restore function and strength to the affected area. The key is to approach the treatment holistically, addressing both the physical and emotional well-being of the patient in order to support their recovery.
And apply a plaster to the member, allowing it to draw out excess moisture and bring nutrition to the area, or continue with an ointment made with warm water, until blood flow is restored and the member returns to its natural shape.
Chapter 22:
Chapter on the treatment of fractured bones when they heal in a crooked manner and prevent their normal functioning, including the necessary steps to correct this problem.
If the restored member has a problem with healing in terms of crookedness and prominence of the fractured bone, as well as nodules, which affects its shape but does not hinder its natural function, then one should not believe the words of someone who claims that the member is newly fractured.
But there have been many foolish doctors and bone setters who have made this mistake in our land, and this operation is highly reprehensible, leading to great fear as its consequence can be fatal.
But if the limping and nodules are recent, then they should be treated with warm water containing softening herbs such as elder flowers and root of yellow dock, and mellilot. A plaster made from a good quality softening paste can also be applied, or crushed marshmallow root mixed with gum of guaiacum or olive oil can be used as an emplaster. Alternatively, ripe figs can be mashed and combined with dove dung, and similar remedies that are named to promote consolidation.
And sometimes it is dissolved with gentle continuous friction using wet hands, and movement of the affected part should be administered in all directions at all times.
But if the joint has become so twisted and fixed that it has turned into bone and requires surgical intervention using iron, then it is necessary to create pus above it, and the continuation of the bone should be dissolved, and any excess material from the nodule at that place should be cut with subtle scalpels. Additionally, ease should be provided for that area by means of solicitude and study.
Chapter 23.
On speech in dislocation.
A dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints from its proper position, which prevents movement and distorts the shape of the limb, causing significant pain and injury to the patient.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to act quickly to reduce it and not delay the reduction, as doing so can lead to infection and make reducing the dislocation more difficult.
And for this reason, it is not advisable to move or stretch the affected limb during the formation of an abscess, as it can cause spasms and sharp pains.
But when this occurs, it is necessary to perform bloodletting on the patient and allow the abscess to form. Additionally, the affected limb should be soaked in warm water with added oil and reduced gently and carefully.
And the entire limb should be treated with a remedy that will be recalled when necessary.
And I have arranged the chapters on dislocation according to what was previously stated in fracture, from the uppermost part of the body down to the lowest part.
Chapter 24.
On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
Both mandibles can become dislocated if not careful, and the dislocation of both is made in one of two ways: either they are partially removed from their positions with a little manipulation and become slightly relaxed, or they are completely dislocated, becoming loose at the joint, causing saliva to flow from the patient's mouth, preventing them from closing their mouth, and causing the tongue to be wrapped up in speech.
But when the dislocation is minor, it often returns to its proper position on its own with little cause.
But if the dislocation is complete and severe, then gentle reduction must be administered promptly without delay.
And the caregiver should hold the patient's head, while the doctor inserts his finger of one hand into the dislocation site of the lower jaw inside the mouth of the patient if the dislocation is on one side; or that he inserts both fingers together if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers of his hand should be outside to guide; and commands the patient to relax their jaws and release any tension from all directions. The doctor then gently manipulates the jaw with their fingers, guiding it back into its proper position.
And if reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are severely dislocated, then administer vaporization with warm water, mixed with oil, to make the reduction process easier and avoid delaying it, as previously mentioned.
And when they return and are in place, and the patient's mouth is closed and not relaxed, then place compresses of cloth with heated resin over it, and use wax and oil to make a gentle massage; and also bind it lightly with soft bandages.
And let the patient sleep on their back, with a pillow under their head, positioned between two earplugs, to prevent twisting or turning during sleep. Also, do not force them to chew any food until the discomfort and swelling have subsided, allowing them to eat soft foods like "lion's paws" (a type of pastry), until they are able to chew properly again.
And this treatment should be administered with ease and not cause difficulty in opening the mouth for eating, drinking, or speaking, until the jaw has healed and fully recovered.
And if it is difficult to reduce both jaws when they are dislocated at any time and not returned to their proper positions, then often fevers and constant thirst occur, and the patient's stomach is easily upset, and they may experience vomiting of pure bile.
And when you observe this, then you know that it is a grave situation; and many times, the patient dies within ten days of experiencing these complications.
Chapter 25.
Chapter 25: On the reduction of dislocation of the collarbone and the end of the muscle.
The collarbone (furcula) is not dislocated from the side within its continuation with the chest (latz), but rather, it can be dislocated on the outside, and this can be detected by sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms. And then press firmly on the area with your palm to help it return to its proper position.
And then place a compress or bandage on it and apply pressure to strengthen it.
But the end of the muscle that is attached to it and continuous with it cannot be dislocated in any day, therefore it must be reduced and repositioned as we have said and as your skill allows.
And then place a compress or bandage on it and apply pressure to strengthen it, and command the patient to maintain stillness and rest until it has healed.
And with this medical treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it becomes separated from its location.
Chapter 26.
On reducing the dislocation of a muscle.
Know that a muscle is not dislocated unless it is in one of three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the tip to the bottom part.
And the second way is when it becomes dislocated from the upper part of the muscle, and this happens rarely; and it is not dislocated at the back parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
And most commonly, it becomes dislocated and exits at the lower parts below the tip, and this is especially true in those in which there are few fleshy parts; thus, it is easily dislocated; but in those with many fleshy parts, it exits with difficulty.
And often it happens to some men due to a blow or fall that a muscle becomes inflamed with an abscess and is swollen due to the abscess; and this indicates that it has become dislocated.
Therefore, you should suspect that this is the case while you are still examining it, and then proceed with treating it.
And the dislocation of it is recognized when it is at the lower parts below the tip; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal muscle, for you will find between them clear differences; and you will find in the head of the muscle a depression or cavity below the tip below the touching of the head of the muscle similar to an egg, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his own ear, nor can he move it at all.
If it is dislocated towards the foot or above, then you will find clear evidence of this, and it will not be hidden or concealed.
And this dislocation is easily reduced when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
And the reduction of it is performed by the minister raising the patient's hand toward the upper parts; and then placing his fingers below the tip of it, and lifting the joint with strength to its location, while the minister raises the patient's hand and extends it out; and he gently places it down so that it may return easily.
But if, despite following the aforementioned steps, it does not return to its proper location, even after several days have passed since the dislocation first occurred, then it is necessary for the patient to bathe in warm water and be administered an ointment that softens and relaxes, similar to costus root, fenugreek, and melilot in water; this should be administered.
And the patient should be reclined on his back with a woolen ball placed beneath the tip of it; this ball should be moderately firm and not too tight, and made from fleece. The doctor should then place his knee on the ball and use strength to lift the head of the muscle, pulling the patient's hand so that it is not injured at its lower parts, while another minister holds the patient's head to prevent injury to its lower parts; soon enough, it will return to its proper location.
And if you wish, you can reduce it using this method: have a man who is taller than the patient present and stand at his side; then, the taller man should insert his muscle beneath the tip of the affected muscle, lifting the tip toward the upper parts until the patient is suspended in the air. Another minister should pull the patient's hand from the lower parts of his abdomen. But if the patient is lightweight, then it is better for him to be suspended by some other cause, so that he may weigh down upon the dislocation; this will help it return more quickly.
And it can also be reduced in another manner: place a long rod on the ground with a round top, similar to a mortar pestle, but not too thick or thin. Place the patient over this rounded tip; then, drape linen cloths over the top of the rod and have the patient stand along its length with his arm extended downwards toward the other end. Using force, extend the rest of the patient's body on the opposite side, causing the joint to return to its proper location quickly.
And if reducing it proves difficult due to any of the reasons mentioned above, then use this treatment: take a rod that is two cubits long and four digits wide, with its girth adjusted at the tip in this manner:
And place linen strips over the rounded top so that the rod does not injure the patient.
And place the patient's tip below the rod, extending his arm or forearm over the rod toward its lower parts, and then bind the rod to the support, along with the arm and the end of the hand.
And place the arm on a step of a ladder according to its width, with the hand extended toward the lower parts while suspending the rest of the body on the opposite side; this will cause the joint to quickly return to its proper location.
And once the reduction method has been completed according to any of the ways possible for you, then place a woolen ball beneath the tip, followed by applying an emplastrum prepared from powdered moly and egg white over the entire muscle, massaging it gently onto the surface. Place a bandage below the tip with moderate tension; cover the emplastrum with another bandage, and secure the patient's hand to his neck, allowing it to remain in place without moving for seven days.
And the patient's diet should be limited to simple foods until the affected area has healed, as this will speed up his recovery.
And the food should be gradually increased in quantity after seven or five days, and gentle exercise may be introduced; if it remains firm and does not soften, then it has already healed.
But if the joint becomes dislocated frequently due to an excess of moisture or for some other reason, then it is necessary to apply cautery with three incisions in that area, as previously described in the chapter on cauterization.
And if all of these steps are taken and yet, after seven days, the bandages become loose and the joint remains unhealed, with the emplastrum and tension applied multiple times without success, and if the patient cannot lift his arm above his head, then you should know that the nerves located at the muscle's head have been cut, stretched, or softened. This means that the joint will never return to its proper location.
The reduction of a dislocation in the foot or breast, or at the back, is performed by pulling and stretching with the hands until it returns to its proper location.
And apply appropriate tension to that area, and treat it until it heals.
And if there is significant heaviness in the affected limb and slowness in its movement during the healing process, then the patient should bathe frequently until the heaviness subsides and normal function returns.
Chapter 27.
Chapter 27: Treatment for Hip Dislocation.
Know that the hip joint is dislocated with difficulty and likewise returns to its proper location with difficulty; it can become dislocated in all directions, but most commonly in the front and back. The dislocation of the hip is not hidden from view, as it will be apparent below the prominent bones or soft tissues, depending on the direction of the dislocation. When you adjust the dislocated hip with your hand, it will be clearly evident, for the joint will be concave and unable to bend at the elbow or touch its own muscle.
And it is necessary to act quickly and reduce the dislocation before an abscess forms, for if an abscess does form, reducing the dislocation will be difficult and complete healing may not occur. This is especially true when the dislocation occurs in the back, as this type is the worst of all, causing severe pain and often leading to death.
The restoration of the hip joint, when reduction is possible, involves extending the patient's hand with two fingers, expanding his arms, and placing the doctor's hands on the hip joint and beneath it. The doctor should then push the joint back into place using his fingertips or the edge of his palm until it returns to its proper location.
But if the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it so that you bend the arm with your arm, until you hit the quadriceps with the tip of your palm.
And if the dislocation does not respond to reduction, then apply strong extension and forceful motion.
And have two assistants stretch the arm, while two others maintain that extension to prevent it from slipping back during the stretching.
Then have the arm rotated in all directions, since it is wrapped with a long folded cloth over their hand or loosely.
And when the physician touches the joint with their hand, anoint it with some oil to help with the lubrication of the joint for ease; and then strongly push the joint until it returns.
And the reduction should be followed by placing it on a plaster containing stypticity and exsiccation with egg white albumen, then bind it firmly with descending pressure and suspend the arm from the neck, allowing it to rest for several days.
And then loosen it; and so, if the joint is formed in its place, then you should unbind the bindings and leave those alone.
And if you see that the joint is not strengthening, then reapply the plaster and bindings, leaving it on for several days until it dries up; and then loosen it.
But if the reduction of the joint causes distress, and the disposition is restless, then apply moist heat in a bath and gentle friction with ointment, and compression until it subsides; or place an elevated cushion under the joint, that is, a fatty pillow; and then have them bound, leaving it on for the day and night. And then apply heat and put them in the bath; when they are dry, then rub the joint with moderated friction, and gently reapply the cushion several times: first, second, third... Corruption has already occurred in the interior of the tooth beneath the gum line, before it can be lined.
And if you like, place it on the fresh and scarified cow's split with butter and gently rub it in several times, as this is moistened and returns to its disposition.
Chapter 28. (This line may refer to a new section or topic within the treatise)
On the treatment of dislocation of malasen, that is, the joint between the arm and hand.
The malasen of the hand is often dislocated; however, reducing its dislocation is simple, but on the contrary, it applies to other joints. Still, there must be quick action in the reduction within the hour that it becomes dislocated before it develops into an abscess or causes a cauterized abscess. [System.Collections.Generic.List`1[System.String]]: []
And the reduction of this dislocation is as follows: place the patient's hand on a table and have an assistant extend their arm. Then place your hand or palm over the prominence of the joint, pushing it back into its location.
However, one must consider whether the palm is already facing the abdomen of the hand; if so, have the patient rest their backside on the table for extension and reduction. If the dislocation is at the rear side of the hand, position the patient's arm intrinsically on the table, allowing your arm to land over that joint prominence.
And therefore if it returns quickly, that is good; otherwise, strengthen it with an abscess-reducing plaster and leave it alone. Do not repeat this, for it will be unbearable and impossible to continue reducing the dislocation even after several days.
However, the joint may remain dislocated due to its tortuous nature; and you will not notice any cause in the patient other than a weakened arm that cannot exert force; if so, understand that the nerves are pinched or trapped, and then do not try to reduce it with force but instead cauterize near the affected area, which will greatly help alleviate the issue.
Once the malasen is returned to its place, then apply the recommended plaster and allow it to rest for five days, and then unbind it, allowing the arm to be exercised.
But if the movement is obstructed and causes distress, then gently apply warm water with gentle friction several times until it subsides.
Chapter 29 (This line may refer to a new section or topic within the treatise) [System.Collections.Generic.List`1[System.String]]: []
On the treatment of dislocation of toes (or fingers).
Sometimes, toes are dislocated in all directions. (This line may serve as an introduction to the topic of dislocation of toes)
And when a toe is dislocated at the side or under it, then stabilize that digit and gently push its dislocation back into place with your fingers until it returns to its proper location.
And then hold the toe's head, suspend the affected area where it is dislocated, and leave it alone for two days.
Then suspend the digit and extend it until it is properly aligned in its place by that day. (In this context, "dreyt" could mean straight or correct.)
And when the night comes, bind it in the described manner and continue to unbind, loosen, and exercise with movement during the day, binding it again at night; do this for several days until it becomes strong. (In this context, "narracio" may refer to the specific description of how the digit should be bound or positioned)
Perform the same actions if it is dislocated at the palm of the hand, bind it to that side and perform the same initial operation until it heals. (Here, "tieua" may refer to the first or previous procedure)
Perform similar actions when it is dislocated in other areas (or locations).
Chapter 30 (This line may refer to a new section or topic within the treatise) [System.Collections.Generic.List`1[System.String]]: [] [
On the treatment of dislocation of vertebrae in the back (or spine).
When a complete dislocation occurs in any of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and many of them are displaced from their positions, then there is no cure for that condition, as it leads to death for the patient. (This line highlights the seriousness of spinal injuries) [System.Collections.Generic.List`1[System.String]]: []
And the sign of this is that the patient's excretion is expelled involuntarily without their will, and they cannot hold it back; and often, some of the patient's limbs or both legs or one arm are weakened or paralyzed, or a vertebra has slipped from its place, as many have slipped out of place in four directions. (This line describes symptoms associated with severe spinal injuries) [System.Collections.Generic.List`1[System.String]]: []
And that has slipped out of place in the back and is called gelbozitat (or "gibbus", which refers to an abnormal spinal curvature).
But the treatment of this is that you should consider if the gibbus deformity occurred during childhood, as there will be no cure or healing for it in such cases. (This line highlights the difficulty in treating spinal injuries that occur at a young age) [System.Collections.Generic.List`1[System.String]]: [] [
However, in cases of injuries that occur due to accidents, falls, or similar causes, the ancient methods for healing have been described at length, from which much benefit can be gained; although I have abbreviated it for the sake of brevity, as there is little need for more explanation. My intention here is to expose and make clearer the various tools used in the procedure I will show and elaborate on with examples.
And those injuries are not curable except for those occurring in the back directly, with the method I will recommend. (This line implies that there is a recommended treatment or procedure for certain spinal injuries)
And the procedure involves having the patient lie on their stomach over a soft cushion close to the wall, with the lower body extended using the medical tool away from the bed or table. (In this context, "esturment" could refer to an instrument or tool used for extending the lower part of the body) [System.Collections.Generic.List`1[System.String]]: [] [
And then position an upright rod placed on the ground near the head of the cushion and another rod at the foot of the bed on the other side of the cushion. (In this context, "fust" refers to a rod or stick) [System.Collections.Generic.List`1[System.String]]: [] [
And the assistant holds onto the rod and is not fixed in place; another assistant holds onto the other one in a similar manner (In this context, "ministre" may refer to medical assistants or helpers)
And then wrap the patient's head with soft cloth bandages, leaving their nose and ears uncovered. Extend one end of the bandage to the rod near the head and tie it there; Then tighten another bandage around the thighs, knees, and calves, adjusting all the bandages and tying them to the other rod that is near the feet. (In this context, "liament" may refer to a bandage or cloth strip used for binding) [System.Collections.Generic.List`1[System.String]]: [] [
And then each assistant extends the bandage towards their respective rod, ensuring that both rods and their attached bandages remain in place, without being tightly fastened as previously mentioned. (In this context, "cascu" may refer to each individual or helper)
And the physician places their hands with strength on the vertebra to return it to its place or places a board under it and adjusts their weight on the board until the vertebra returns to its proper position. (In this context, "taula" may refer to a flat wooden surface used for support) [System.Collections.Generic.List`1[System.String]]: []
But if it does not return to its place with this method, then take a table that is three cubits (or about 4-5 feet) in width or length and make an opening in the wall close to the patient where the end of the table can fit in. (In this context, "brassa" may refer to a measure of distance equivalent to about 1.6-2 meters) [System.Collections.Generic.List`1[System.String]]: [] And then place the end of the table on top of the vertebra and have the physician put their weight on the other end, pushing hard until the vertebra is compressed and returns to its proper location. (In this context, "metge" may refer to a medical practitioner or physician) [System.Collections.Generic.List`1[System.String]]: []
And if you wish, open the roll that is wrapped with your hand; and place two rods, each one arm's length, under the patient's head at the back of the pillow, and two more rods under their neck, with a space equivalent to the width of a palm between each rod. Each rod should have a hole drilled into it for the roll to pass through, and they should be securely fastened in place so that they do not move. (In this context, "torn" may refer to a scroll or roll of fabric) [System.Collections.Generic.List`1[System.String]]: []
And there should be a round rod with the roll wrapped around it, placed in the holes of the two rods. (In this context, "redon" may refer to a cylindrical or round object)
And at the end of it, there is a hole where the rod fits in, with a length of one palm's width and also has holes in two other rods that match this one. (This passage describes the configuration of a medical device used for treating spinal injuries)
And then tighten the bandages you have tied at the patient's feet to the hole near their head and the bandages you have tied at their thighs to the roll near their feet. (This passage refers to a medical procedure for treating spinal injuries, with specific instructions on how to adjust the bandages)
And then each roll should be held by an assistant who turns it with their hand, and applies gentle pressure on the vertebra as previously mentioned (In this context, "ministre" may refer to a medical practitioner or assistant)
And after the vertebra has returned to its place and is healed, then apply a drying plaster with egg white albumen and cotton; and then place a piece of wooden board over it, with a width of three fingers or thereabouts, and a length that covers the affected area, placed over the site of the vertebra. (This passage describes the application of medical treatment for spinal injuries, including the use of a drying plaster and wooden board) [System.Collections.Generic.List`1[System.String]]: []
And apply a linen bandage, which we mentioned, and feed the patient a delicate nourishment until they are healed.
If there is any residual swelling in the area at the end of the healing process, then it is appropriate to administer medicines that soften and cleanse through long-term administration with meals, which we have recommended; and a sheet of lead has already been administered to that location.
And sometimes it happens that swelling occurs at the base of the vertebrae of the back, and it is caused by a dislocation; and it is that bone that is protruding, which must not be pushed back into place with this medicine, because it would cause you serious harm and could even lead to death.
Chapter 31. (Note: This appears to be a heading or chapter title in the text)
On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle only involve dislocation, and do not involve what happens with other joints of small displacement and concavity.
And the hip joint can be dislocated in four ways, which are: dislocation inward, outward, forward, or backward.
And it is most commonly dislocated inward, and rarely forward or backward.
And the sign of dislocation inward is that when you align the healthy leg of the healthy person with the affected leg of the patient, the latter appears longer and more prominent than the former, and the patient cannot bend their knee, and it is the location where the inflammation has formed a swollen bump, because the head of the femur has moved upwards.
And the sign of dislocation outward is that the symptoms are opposite to those of inward dislocation.
And the sign of dislocation forward is that the leg extends as far as it can, but there is pain in the knee and the patient cannot walk on it, and their urine is retained and they have a swollen bump, and they must be made to walk on their toes.[5]
And the sign of dislocation backward is that the knee does not extend, and they cannot bend their leg in front of their thigh, their leg is shorter than the other, the thigh is flaccid, and the head of the femur has moved to the back.
However, in reducing the dislocation, you should consider if it is old and chronic, in which case you should not force a reduction, but rather wait for the body to heal itself over time; and in this case, do not attempt to push the bone back into place.
But in the case of a recent dislocation that is one of the four types mentioned earlier, you should strive to turn the joint and extend it outward and inward, and then move it from side to side, because it will easily return to its place without requiring further treatment.
But if it does not return to its place in this way, then you should prepare to use force and extend the leg downward, or with their hands, or with a linen bandage placed above the knee; and another person should extend their hand upward under the thigh to reach the genital area; and you should pull strongly on the ligament tied around the thigh, while keeping another person steadying the other end of the ligament.
And the extension should be from the thigh to the calf, or from the back of the thigh to the small of the back.
And all these extensions should be done at once, so that the patient is raised from the ground with their body suspended in the air.
And this type of extension is common to all four types of dislocation.
And so if the dislocation returns with what we have said, that will be good; but if not, then it is necessary for each type of dislocation to follow its own course of treatment.
In reducing a dislocation that is inwardly displaced, it is necessary for the patient to lie on their side; and then place the ligaments over the hip bone in the location between the head of the femur and the area below the knee; and then extend the ligament from the calf to the highest point of the thighbone.
And then have another person strongly grasp the patient's arms and pull on their hip bone, extending it outward forcefully so that it returns to its proper place.
And this type of dislocation is the easiest to treat and reduce, compared to the other types.
But if the patient resists and does not follow the instructions for this type of treatment, then it is necessary to tie both of their legs together firmly with a linen bandage around their ankles and calves.
And let each leg be tied together with a bandage that is four finger-widths long, and let the affected leg be extended more than the other by two finger-widths. [5](https://www.loyno.edu/~history/journal/1987-01/robertson.htm)
And have the patient suspended by their head over a wooden beam, with their body facing downward, and at a height of two arm-lengths from the ground.
And command a strong young person to push down on the patient's hip bone with force, while another strong young person supports and pushes up from below, causing the joint to return to its proper place quickly.
But in reducing a dislocation that is outwardly displaced, it is necessary for the patient to sit on a stool as we have recommended after they have urinated; and then tie the ligaments firmly around the affected thigh and chest. [7](https://www.loyno.edu/~history/journal/1987-01/robertson.htm)
And place two rods, one under the feet of the patient, and the other at their head; and place adjusted rods at the middle of the peak covered with a damp cloth, so that the patient is not harmed by the rod between their thighs, so that the extension to the lower parts is not restricted.
And let each assistant extend their part, and the doctor with his hand guide the reduction according to art.
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then it is necessary to slightly extend the leg and place it as described on a mound; and place the palm of your right hand on the patient's shin, and with that pressure, pull down on the lower part towards the ankle.
And if the dislocation is in the back parts, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended in the lower parts and should be raised from the ground; it is necessary to place them on a firm surface, as is also necessary if the hip is dislocated outwards, as we said about placing them on two supports; and have them lie on their stomach with the ligaments stretched, as we said before, without delay.
And it is necessary to administer pressure with a board on the spot where the joint is located.
And when the reduction is completed as necessary -- and the sign of the member's reduction is not hidden from you, and that is if the patient extends two legs, and when you see them aligned and the patient stretches their leg and expands their knee, then you know that the member has been returned as necessary -- and then adjust two pillows and place a paste and stretch with bandages so that the hip is not injured in any part; and have the patient rest for three or four days.
Then release the ligament and paste, and compare one leg to the other.
And if you see them aligned in this way, then you know that the dislocation has been fixed, and then allow the patient to get up.
And if you see any sign of softness, then return and reapply the paste to that area, and stretch it as before, and leave it for three days.
And then release it, and have the patient delay in walking for some days, until they are strengthened.
Capital XXXII. (This could refer to a specific chapter or section number in the medical treatise)
On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outwards, inwards, and downwards towards the back; but it is not dislocated forwards.
And the sign of ankle dislocation is that you command the patient to bend their leg towards the hip; and if you see that they are unable to do so, then you know that the ankle is dislocated.
And the restoration of all the ways of ankle dislocation is that you make the patient lie flat, so that they can extend their leg if possible; then attach their heel to your shoulder and place their foot between yours; and then firmly hold the patient's ankle with both your palms, and pull it towards you with force, while another assistant extends the patient's other leg to allow the ankle to return to its place.
And the sign of reduction is that their leg attaches itself to the hip with ease and without laborious effort.
And then apply a paste and attach the leg to the hip, and then bind those limbs together with a bandage for three or four days, and then release it.
And have the patient avoid walking for several days, until they are healed and strengthened.
But if reduction is not possible for you, then administer strong extension with ligaments, as described in the treatment of the hip that was mentioned before.
Capital XXXIII. (This could refer to a specific chapter or section number in the medical treatise) [**Translation note: The following translations will be for new sections or chapters, based on the format of previous sections.**
On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle bone (talus)
The ankle bone (talus) can sometimes be elevated by a small displacement, and in some cases it is dislocated according to its full extent; and the dislocation of the talus can occur either inwards or outwards.
And the sign of talus dislocation is that you see it sunken on the side to which it is dislocated.
But the treatment of talus displacement is relatively easy to reduce and consists of extending it gently with the hands and aligning it back into place while applying a guide.
But in the treatment of talus dislocation to its full extent, it is necessary to make the patient lie flat and have a strong and capable assistant stand behind the affected side in the middle of the patient's back.
And then you place your right hand on the patient's upper leg and your left hand below the knee in the area of the calf.
And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and do this twice with your left hand, and extend it; and push the heel of the foot with your right hand towards the calf without laboring.
And do that two times as we have described.
And then push the heel of the foot against the calf for the third time, and you be at the calf.
And if the foot returns in one or two times with this method and you see it aligned properly, then that is good; but if not, then repeat the operation as necessary because it will eventually return to its proper place.
But if reduction of the talus is not possible with the methods described, then have the patient lie on their side on the ground and place a firm cushion beneath them to support their pelvis and trap it between their thighs, and make sure they are well-covered with a blanket so as not to cause them any discomfort.
And have an assistant of the patient hold their thighs and another extend the leg with their hands or a band placed above the knee; and have each assistant apply pressure against extension on their respective side, while keeping the cushion between the patient's thighs to prevent their body from being pulled down by the extension.
And let the doctor guide the reduction with their hands and another assistant hold the healthy thigh downwards to facilitate the return of the talus to its proper place.
And when the dislocation returns to its proper place and you are satisfied with the success of the reduction, then apply a strong bandage over it and bind the leg to the thigh with a ligament.
It is important to be cautious of the nerves that are located behind the talus bone, and not to apply the bandage too forcefully over this area in order to avoid causing any damage or excessive pain.
And then let it rest for two or three days; and if the bandage has become loose, replace it.
And then release the binding on the third or fourth day and forbid the patient from walking for 40 days. But if the patient is forced to walk before this period, there is a risk that the dislocation may become worse and unresponsive to treatment.
If the patient develops an abscess at the site of injury, then it is necessary to follow the previous instructions on incision and drainage in a separate location before proceeding with further treatment.
Chapter XXXIV. (This could refer to a specific chapter or section number in the medical treatise)
Of the treatment of dislocation of the toes. (based on the context, it seems like "ditz" could be a variant of "ditos" or "digitos", which means "toes" in Catalan and Spanish)
It is necessary that the dislocated (thing) be bound with little tension in its place; and this is not difficult, beforehand it is easy.
But if the dislocation is in the joints of the back of the foot, then it is necessary to make the patient lie down with their affected foot over a level surface or table, and remain still as if walking.
And then you stand with your weight, place your foot on what is above the joints, and apply pressure with your foot with strength until it returns (to its place), and make sure that it is already bound and nothing protrudes from the area.
Then place below the patient's foot a board that supports the entire foot, with two ends, and apply traction with appropriate and firm stretching for three days; then release it and make sure the patient rests from walking for several days until recovery is assured.
Chapter thirty-five.
Of the types of dislocation that are caused by wounds, or fractures, or both together. (based on the context, "plaga" could mean a wound, cut, or injury)
When any of these causes occur, and you attempt to cure or restore the affected area, often the result is death. (this sentence seems to warn against attempting to treat certain types of injuries)
And for this reason, one should not be overconfident in treating the injury and restoring it, but rather someone who is wise in art, experienced over a long period of time, merciful and compassionate, slow, not hasty nor presumptuous; and who uses medicines that only reduce swelling at first, leaving the patient to divine judgement, unless there is hope for salvation from danger, with alleviation of illness, and some sign of recovery. (this passage emphasizes caution, experience, and humility in treating serious injuries) And therefore strive to perform the reduction (of the dislocation) as soon as possible at the onset of the injury, before swelling occurs.
And if the limb returns as desired, then administer a regimen that reduces swelling and treats the wound with appropriate drying medicines. (this passage assumes that reduction of the dislocation has been successful, and now focuses on treating any associated wounds and preventing further inflammation)
And if the dislocation is accompanied by fracture and there are separate pieces of bone involved, then you should perform the treatment of them, and do as we have said in simple injuries (that are) preceded in their places. (this passage seems to advise following standard procedures for treating simple fractures and dislocations, when both occur together)
And take care and avoid as much as you can any internal harm in the ways of fear, according to what my teaching has preceded; for this is better for you, your Creator, and more permanent for your glory, and truer health for your body during your lifetime. (this passage seems to emphasize caution, humility, and reverence for God in medical practice) Thus ends the words of Albucasis perfectly, may God be blessed. (this passage seems to acknowledge and praise the work of a famous Islamic physician and surgeon, Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi, also known as Albucasis) Yes, "Amen" is often used in religious contexts to express agreement or approval with a prayer or blessing, so it seems appropriate here.
