Since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of medical science, by doing so it will be perfected in you, and by studying it, and by declaring it, I believe that I should transmit this treatise to you regarding surgery.
Since surgery is completely absent in our region and our time, there is a great danger to science itself, as well as the instruments of it; not only will they disappear, but they have already been obscured, reduced to a few scattered descriptions in the books of the ancients, which have become obsolete and led to errors and confusion until the intentions of them are misunderstood and their strength and art are weakened.
I see that I should organize this treatise in an orderly manner according to the method of explanation, declaration, and abbreviation; moreover, it is necessary to include the forms of the cautery instruments and other tools required for the work, as well as their preparation.
One reason that a good craftsman with his art cannot be found in this time is that the art of medicine is long and requires its practitioner to be well-versed in anatomy, which includes knowing the joints and forms of members; the conjunction and separation of them; having knowledge of bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, as well as their arrangement; and understanding the pulse and quiet veins, and their locations.
And according to Hippocrates, a word is a small thing, but in the work of the hand it is much more important.
Moreover, we have already said about this in the introduction of this book; for whoever is not familiar with anatomy will inevitably fall into error and endanger people's lives, as I have often seen many who were educated in this science but lacked experience in it.
For I have seen a foolish and experienced doctor make an abscess called scrophulus on the neck of a woman, and cut some arteries in her neck so that much blood flowed out until the woman died among them.
And I have seen another doctor who thought he could extract a stone from a man in his condition, and the stone was large; it came out and he cut a piece of the bladder while doing so, resulting in the man dying on the third day.
And I called for help to extract it and saw that due to the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, he knew that he would die.
And I have seen another doctor who received wages from one of our dukes for surgery, and he treated a black-skinned man with a fracture in his thigh; and, armed with ignorance, the doctor cut through the fracture, using sutures and staples with a strong structure, but did not allow the wound to breathe.
And he tied it according to his desires, sutured and bandaged it, and kept it closed for several days as instructed; however, the thigh and leg became abscessed, resulting in harm.
And I was called to him, and upon removing the bandages, calmness and relief were achieved, and his pain diminished.
However, corruption was already confirmed in the limb, so that it could not be stopped, and the corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the patient's life was endangered.
And I have seen another doctor who opened an abscess called cancer, and it was ulcerated in just a few days, amplifying the wickedness of it with its master.
The reason for this is that cancer is free of melancholy humor, therefore it must be treated with caution and not completely removed from the body, but rather an affected member should be left behind as much as possible.
And for this reason, my son, it is necessary that the work of the hand be divided into two categories: one is the operation associated with health, and the other is the work that poses a greater risk in its execution.
I have already emphasized this throughout the book in operations where there is error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to take note of this and be careful not to fall into such errors and dishonor.
And so, take up your arms with humility and with God's protection, and your patients with kindness and firmness.
Use the best way for God's grace to save and bless, and leave behind terrible diseases difficult to heal, and withdraw your weapons from that which makes you fear, so that the examination of faith and in your name does not escape you: for it remains for your glory, and moreover in this world and after in your sanctity.
Furthermore, I say to some monks: "Do not treat bad illnesses, so that evil doctors do not take credit for it."
And you have now completed this book according to three chapters.
Here begins the division of the book, and the first of the first part. The first chapter is ordered regarding feet, in the shapes of instruments and the ironwork of cauteries, and what is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on abscesses and perforations, blisters, sores, and extraction of stones and similar cases, all categorized by the shapes of instruments.
The fourth chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and the treatment of twists and similar cases, categorized by the shapes of instruments regarding feet.
It is necessary for me to discuss the quality of the materials used in that cautery and its disadvantages, as well as when cauterization should be prohibited.
Therefore, I say that the discussion of the quality of the material for cautery and its disadvantages is a long, complex, and subtle topic, requiring knowledge, and it has already been discussed by many wise men, with disagreement among them; as for me, I will only touch on one of their discussions, fearing tediousness.
And so I say that cauterization generally pertains to all universal aspects concerning the material or materials, except for two cases, which are those with the absence of material.
In the case of dry and hard matter, there is disagreement; for some say that cauterization is beneficial in this case, while others say the opposite, that cauterization is not suitable for an illness characterized by quality and dryness, as the nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it is appropriate for a dry and hard illness to be treated with something wet.
And he says the opposite, that cauterization is beneficial in all dry and hard illnesses that occur in the bodies of men, for when you compare the body of man and its moisture with the nature of fire, it cools the body of man.
And I say from my own experience that this has been verified for me on several occasions.
Nevertheless, it is not necessary for me to come back to what has already been proven and exercised in the chapter on cauterization in previous work, and to know the diversity of human cases and the locations of their diseases, as well as the causes of those diseases, the characteristics of them, and the space of time of those diseases.
However, in other cases, there is no cause for concern, and more so in wet and cold illnesses, as all doctors have already agreed on these, and there is no disagreement about the treatment of those diseases with cauterization.
And know, sons, that the secret of healing by cauterization with fire and the goodness of it are due to cauterization with burning medicine, because fire is simple; its action does not reach beyond the member being cauterized, but only causes minor damage to the adjacent members.
However, the action of burning medicine reaches to those adjacent members, and it quickly brings pain in the member with difficult healing and quick healing.
However, fire, due to its sublimity and inherent goodness, does not produce such results; this has been known through experience and long years of study on the nature of causes; therefore, I am excused for the length of my speech, except that it is not suitable for this book in this pause to reveal secret knowledge about fire, and the quality of the operation of it in bodies and its expulsion of diseases, with a philosophical demonstrative argument, which would sharpen your thoughts.
Understand, my sons, that they disagree on the time when it is appropriate to do cauterization and pause the best time of early spring.
It is said that cauterization is appropriate at all times, so the disadvantage due to the accidental time is submerged in the advantage of those who do cauterization being ready, and even more so if the cauterization is for pain or necessary pain, strong or fistulas, which cannot tolerate delay, since it is feared that the evil that comes with delay may be greater than a small disadvantage entering through time.
And do not doubt in your hearts, or my sons, that they do not believe this except for the vulgar people and foolish doctors, since that sickness which is cured by cauterization is not a remedy at all times and it is best to pause its consequences.
And the cause is not as they think for that reason, because cauterization is not a medicine that alters the complexion and dries out the moisture that causes pain.
Nevertheless, cauterization is superior to medicine because of the greatness of its effect and the value and virtue of its operation.
It is possible that the patient's sickness returns at some point in time, depending on the patient's complexion and the location of their sickness, as well as the virtue of the medication prepared for them, and what has been achieved through their diet and similar factors, unless the sickness to which cauterization is administered is a subtle one in a few parts with little excess moisture (such as cauterization of a tooth for pain, etc.), it is possible that the pain will not return there, but rather it will be minor.
But it is a common belief that cauterization is the last resort in medicine, and this opinion is incorrect, not because I do not understand it, but because they believe that it is not a cure that benefits from medication or any other reason for using cauterization.
The cause is actually the opposite; and my understanding is that the belief that cauterization is the last resort in medicine only occurs when certain healing methods have been attempted for some illnesses, and those medications do not work, and at the end of the cause, cauterization is administered, which proves effective. Therefore, from here on, it is clear that cauterization is not the last resort in medicine, contrary to the belief held by the common people and many foolish doctors.
The ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this because of the equality between gold and its nobility.
The ancients said that the place of cauterization does not hurt, but this is not absolutely true, as I have already proven and observed that it only causes harm in some bodies, and cauterization with gold is better than iron as they said, but if you perform cauterization with fire and gold, it is not declared to you, since it depends on the quantity of gold you want for its heat, and it is prepared to be cooled; and if you adjust it over the fire and some layers are created due to the occupation of that material.
Therefore, cauterization with iron should be performed lightly and carefully to ensure proper operation.
I have already organized this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and I have ordered those related to the feet within that section, so as to lighten the inquiry for those who are seeking it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization treats the excess coldness and moisture in the affected area, which are two causes of headache, so it is used to treat scrofula, runny nose, and fluid discharge from the ears and eyes, as well as insomnia, toothache, and gout, and generally any illness that arises due to coldness, such as paralysis, sclerosis, and similar conditions in those maladies.
The form of this cauterization is as follows: First, command the patient to be evacuated with a purgative medicine for three or four nights, according to the severity of the disease, the age of the person and their habit.
Then command him to shave his head with the razor, and have him sit on a bench with his legs apart and hold his hands.
Then place the back of your hand on the bridge of his nose between his eyebrows. However, when the indicated location is reached, mark it with a probe, and then ignite the olive oil cautery of the following shape:
Then hold that probe on the marked location as it descends and turn it gently, so that your hand remains constrained slightly.
Then lift your hand slightly and look at the location, and if you see any amount of bone being exposed, for example, the size of a grain of sand, then raise your hand, and if not, return your hand with that tool, or another cold one, until the bone that I told you about is visible.
Then take a pinch of salt and dissolve it on the location and leave it there for three days.
Then hold the probe on the edge of the burn and leave it until the scar from the fire is destroyed. Then treat the location with a strong tetrapotion until it heals.
It has been said that when the wound remains open, it gets better by itself, because it is better and more helpful.
It has been said that the coccyx should be cauterized to the bone, and the cautery should remain there until some part of the coccyx is destroyed.
Then scrape away what is attached to the bone, and let it heal.
It has been said that the cautery should reach the bone, until it strongly penetrates the bone until the bone breaks, and this is the form of a small splinter: It is estimated that the vapors from the head will escape from that location.
The wound should be kept open for a long time and treated until it is consolidated.
However, I do not see both types of cauterization in all cases, only in some men out of fear; and leave that one, because it is better for health when it is. The head is revealed by the solution of continuity of these things, as we have testified in other members, and especially if the patient's head is of fragile nature.
And the first type of cauterization is safer and better in my opinion, and therefore choose that one for safety.
Chapter second.
Of the head's cauterization.
When chronic and prolonged pain occurs throughout the head of the patient, and he uses swords, daggers, knives, plasters, ointments, cudgels, bandages, slings, and similar things, and if it has already been cauterized with one cautery which does not improve his condition, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution in nature; and if it is not frail and weak, then cauterize him again with another cautery. Then cauterize the patient's head at the crown with a new cautery where the skin is divided. Cut the skin and expose the quantity of bone that has been cauterized previously and cauterize it again in the area at the back of the head, called "vessels", - and this is the place where a blister was formed. And be careful not to expose the bone, for the patient experiences great pain different from the pain of all other head cauterizations.
Call this cautery by its name, because the cautery used for the corn of the head and the occiput is more subtle than the one used at other parts of the head; and this is its form.
Title: The Head
On the Cauterization of Modern Migraines.
When dull or spreading pain occurs in the back of the head, or sharp pain enters the skull, evacuate with medications that alleviate headaches, and administer other treatment as I have described in the section on diseases; if none of this works, then cauterize it in two ways: either with a burning medicine or with an iron.
Burning the cautery with a mustard plaster is when you take a mustard-filled bag and squeeze out its contents, making sure to remove both the ends of the bag from each side of the head. And then make an incision in the temple area where the pain is, with a sharp lance to create a small hole beneath the skin.
You should tighten it with a binding that restricts it slightly and leave it for three hours; then remove the bandage and massage the alum and leave the plaster for two or three days, and place a pad over the submerged area until the wound heals.
You should care for it with a mouthwash until it is healed.
If you wish, do it with some burning medications as I have written in the second treatise on burning medications.
The iron cauterization method is as follows: fire for cauterizing it with this shape:
And it is called "closed fracture of the clavicle," because its shape resembles a thorn with some curvature, and in a certain place it has a slight prominence.
Then press on the painful spot and hold your hand there - to prevent the bowstring from being injured that follows - and gently rotate the small blade slowly.
And if the amount of tissue injured by the operation is considerable and the vein is not affected, raise your hand to prevent the vein from being injured that follows, so that blood does not flow out.
Then immerse the wound in saltwater and place it on that spot, and leave it for three days; then immerse the wound in vinegar with bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize the end of the ulcer with a lancet according to the method of cauterization, and be careful not to cut the artery in this new type of surgery that is not ancient.
Chapter four.
On ancient cauterization of ulcers.
When you treat ulcers with what I have mentioned in the previous cure and in the divisions of diseases, and if it does not improve and sometimes because of the disease that does not respond to what was said about the first cautery with medicine or cauterization with fire, then it is necessary for you to ignite the lancet until it becomes white. This means placing a line on the painful spot with the length of which is the size of the finger, or whatever its size; and after waiting a while and strengthening it, you will cut the vein and reach the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to be careful of the continuation of the jawbone, which is harmful because of chewing, and that the nerve that controls it is not injured, and that the spasm does not occur.
And if it is about the care and caution of blood flow from the artery that has been cut, since in cutting it there is fear, especially for those who do not know what to do and are not trained and experienced; leave the operation at first.
And you will come with the reminder of the regulation of blood flow accidents of the vein according to its manner, in its place in this book.
And if you see that this disease does not respond to this cautery and you see the body of the patient to be tolerable, cauterize it in the right place on the head as I have described, and take care of the wound until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cautery that I mentioned in the chapter on the compression of the vein with cautery having two blades, and this cauterization is better and more beneficial.
Chapter five.
On cauterizing ear pain.
When in the ear there is pain caused by cold and it is cured with medicinal means and the other cure mentioned in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then ignite the cautery, which is called "point," and this is its form:
Then place the point near the fire and show it around the whole ear as if a wheel is rolled, or in the area of each example if the pain is in one of them. Hold the cautery of the ear's incision little by little with your hand, so that you know the spot where to try.
And if you use many points on the whole ear, and which one it is, then care for the spots until they are healed.
Chapter six.
On cauterizing tumor.
Tumor that is cured and with cauterization is only from the species that come from worms, as I mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cauterizing the species that enter through dryness or through spasm of the nerve.
When you treat this type of tumor with herbs and capillaries and guarguarmes and it does not improve your cure, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first one is an incision of the ear, and the second a small one near its temple, and the third is the conjunction of two lips.
Place your caution opposite to the side of the disease, because softening does not appear except on the side that appears healthy.
The form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cautery at the right end of the ear above a small amount on the tip of the head, and on the temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the finger, and after waiting a while with the cautery until the quantity of tissue cut by the operation is burned.
And this is the shape of the cautery, and it belongs to the blacksmith, its shape resembling a table. However, it is more subtle that what you see; and it is necessary to cut off any unnecessary roughness.
Then care for the area with whatever process is needed before it heals.
Chapter VII.
On ancient cauterization for apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and the care for it has been discussed and no fever is present in the patient, then cauterize it with four cauteries: especially on all the corners of his head; and over the middle of the head, as mentioned before; and on the back of the neck. And the method for using the cautery is done as described before.
It has already been cauterized at the mouth of the stomach; it is more posterior; let it be healed with whatever process you use.
Chapter VIII.
On cauterization for memory loss caused by plague.
It is necessary to give the patient, at the beginning, large and round pills for purification.
Then shave the entire head of the patient and place a plaster of the described composition, as detailed in the treatise on plasters, over it.
Leave that area unattended for some time, as this is the method of cauterizing. And do what has been ordered by the physician who provided the treatment.
If the patient recovers well by this method, then it is good; otherwise, apply three cauterizations to the lower part of his head, which should descend from the most supreme part of the head down to the neck. Leave some time between each cauterization, and take care of the cauterized area with the appropriate treatment.
But if you wish to increase the treatment and the patient is tolerant of it, then cauterize in the middle area; if you want more treatment, then cauterize at both corners.
Care for the cauterized area until it heals; and ensure that the cautery is olive-shaped as described earlier.
Chapter IX.
On cauterization for protection and softening of the entire body.
It is necessary to process the head with purgatives and as previously described; then shave the patient's head, and cauterize it in the middle of the head, on all corners of the head, on the lower part of his neck, and three cauterizations on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the case of softening the body due to excessive hardness and the patient can tolerate it, and the illness is strong, then cauterize it with four cauterizations on the vertebrae of the back, and afterwards cauterize inwardly until the marrow is reached, and raise your hand higher. Care for the cauterized area until it heals, and ensure that the cautery is olive-shaped.
Chapter X.
On cauterization for epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized, but that epilepsy is caused by plague.
Therefore, it is necessary to purify the brain of the patient at the beginning with purgatives and the other treatment previously described when the patient is large and tolerates the exclusion of medications.
If the patient is a child who cannot tolerate medications, then administer emetics and chewing agents for purification, using them for several days with proper dietary restrictions.
Approach the patient's head and shave it first, then cauterize that area with a cautery in its proper location on the head according to the method previously mentioned, and another cautery on the occiput of the patient, and cauterize each of the corners of the head as well. If the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize those areas with cauteries as previously mentioned, ensuring paralysis and softening of the body over the spondils of the neck and the spondils of the back.
Use an olive-oil cautery as previously described.
But if the patient is a child, pause with a subtle cautery according to this method.
Chapter XI.
On Cauterization for Melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and weak, thick fluids, cauterize that area with the cauteries as previously mentioned, ensuring paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is a decline of superfluity leading to melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, give him water that purifies his brain as previously described in the division.
Approach the patient's head and shave it evenly, then apply a properly made turpentine on the circle (or border), and pause that in its proper location on the head.
The patient should be seated, and should be held from all sides.
Pause a linen soaked in the ancient sheep-grease balm. Heat that area gently over the fire for a moderate time, so that it does not suffer when placed there. Approach that area in its proper location on the head in the circle, and let it enter until it is soaked.
Give that to the patient every week once, along with good treatment until he is well; or if you wish, cauterize that area making small points as much as possible, but always have a cautery prepared in this manner: this is the type of cautery that moistens the brain evenly.
Approach that area with a pad or bandage soaked in quince juice.
Chapter XII.
On Cauterization for water flowing down the vein.
When you have determined the beginning of water flowing down the vein by the signs I have mentioned in the division, start by giving the patient water that purifies his head, and protect him from all humidity.
Have him soak in a bath for three days.
Approach him and have him rinse his head, then cauterize that area with a cautery in its proper location on the head; and cauterize that area with two cauteries over two temples if it is the beginning of water flow in two veins, or one cautery if it is the beginning of water flow in one vein.
Cut all the veins and arteries that are affected by the disease; and make the cauteries in that area at the length of the temples.
Be careful to avoid bleeding when cauterizing; and if you see blood flow from there, stop it with some medicine that is within your ability.
I will come with the knowledge needed for extracting arteries, removing abscesses, and preventing blood flow.
Sometimes the skull is cauterized between two bones with two properly produced cauteries.
Chapter XIII.
On Cauterization for Ancient Tears.
When the tears in the veins and arteries of the head are ancient and it is determined that they are flowing due to excessive thickened fluids, cauterize that area with a cautery as previously mentioned in the beginning of water flow in the veins, and with another cautery in its proper location on the head and two cauteries between the temples and two cauteries between two bones of the skull. If it is necessary to add more cauterization, cauterize that area along the entire length of the vein on the side of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
On Cauterization for Foul Smell of the Nose.
When treating that patient with the method I have described and your treatment does not help, prepare yourself and give him chicory to drink for three nights; then shave his head and cauterize it with a middle-sized olive oil cautery. Cauterize that area with a carnation cautery and two cauteries on both eyebrows above the hairline.
Be careful not to cut any arteries during this procedure.
The carnation cautery is shaped as follows:
Chapter XV.
On Cauterization for Softening of Eyelids in the Veins.
When the eyelid of the vein is softened due to illness or humidity, cauterize that eyelid with this lunar-shaped cautery and here is its shape:
If you [the reader], cauterize that area between both eyebrows with a small cautery and two cauteries all around, extending towards the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the thickness of the skin.
Do not press too hard with your hand when using the cautery, but according to the thickness that one third of the eyelid is pressed down.
Chapter XVI.
On cauterizing the eyelid when the skin inside and around it becomes separated and swollen.
When the skin around the eyelid becomes separated and swollen, causing pain, there are two methods for treating it: cauterization with a hot iron or cauterization with medicine.
If cauterizing the area with fire is chosen, instruct the patient to wash their skin as they would when cleaning it, and keep it moist until it heals; and if a blister forms, press the eyelids together with a bandage until the skin grows over it.
When the skin is healed and covered, place a handkerchief on top of the patient's head, then gently press the eyelids together with your thumb or index finger in the shape of a holly leaf (as illustrated), starting at the edge of the skin.
And place a warm cloth or bird glue on the affected area around the eye.
And bring the heated iron, which is shaped as follows.
And apply the heated iron, following the pattern you have indicated, in small, measured strokes until the surface of the skin (which resembles a holly leaf) is completely burned.
The sign of the healing of this operation is that the eyelid will contract and the skin around it will rise due to the puncture of the eyelid.
Therefore, lift your hand and hold it there for three days, and place a warm cloth over the affected area to promote scarring. Treat that wound with mouthwash until it heals.
But if the skin around the wound returns due to some cause and the eyelid becomes swollen again, you should cauterize it once more in the same manner as before.
But if the skin remains in the eyelid, cauterize it until it returns to its natural position, heals, and does not press on the eyeball.
But if cauterizing with medicine is chosen, instruct the patient to clean their skin until it heals, and prepare a piece of cloth or paper in the shape of a holly leaf.
And take well-known remedies and living substances as needed. 1. 2. Mix those substances well, and apply it quickly to prevent it from becoming too thick; place the mixture on the cloth shaped like a holly leaf, and cover one or both eyes with it; then place a warm cloth soaked in oil over the affected area, and have the patient rest their head on your lap.
3. Wait for the remedy to take effect and gently press it until the patient feels the burning sensation of the remedy, as a burning sensation indicates that it is working.
4. Once you feel the remedy taking effect, remove it and wash the area with water; consider whether the eyelid has risen as it should (as when cleaned with heat or an incision), in which case you are done; if not, apply more of the remedy to the unaffected area and repeat the process until your operation is successful and the eyelid heals.
5. Place a warm cloth over the affected area to promote scarring and heal the wound, using mouthwash or other remedies as necessary until it heals.
And it is necessary for you to guard your operation with diligent vigilance that no error falls from the medicine, and if the eyelid becomes swollen within a few days due to some cause of the skin in the eye, then you should repeat the medicine on that location which has become swollen, and specifically do so as at the beginning, and apply it again until it is healed.
And this is the way to prepare the balm of myrrh.
And you should know that men's hernias are various in size and magnitude, so according to that, make your contraction.
And do not conceal the path of straightening for the one who is trained in this art.
Chapter XVII.
On cauterization of fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula as I have said in the division of diseases and do not confer with anyone, then it is necessary that you cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to lower their head onto your lap, and have someone else hold their head so that neither they nor the holder are injured or agitated.
Then apply cotton soaked in oil of hog or mullein root onto the eye of the patient.
And prepare the cautery which has this form:
It should have a concave shape, similar to the form of a reed or pen handle, from one end with which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it should penetrate into the other end. And if you wish, it should emerge as it tries.
However, the concave one is better for this work.
Then press the fistula if it is open, and drain and dry it from there. If it is not open, then you should open it and extract the pus from there.
Then place the cautery on it, which should be well ignited, and you with your hand hold the cautery at the corner of the eye near the nose, so that neither you nor the patient are disturbed, and then press the cautery against the edge of the eyelid and burn it.
And if at the beginning your cautery enters the bone, it is good; but if not, you should repeat the cauterization once or twice, as necessary; and leave it in this state for three days, and place a dressing over that spot with an absorbent dressing until it is healed.
If the condition persists for ten days and is not healed, then pause over the sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and scraped according to what is appropriate in its section.
Another method for cauterizing a fistula, which some have previously described, is as follows: place your hand on the location of the fistula and burn it, then pause in that incision with a fine needle-shaped substance, which is its form: And it was the amount of one lead pellet melted; hold your hand with good retention, and let it not harm the patient because the melted lead does not reach the wound; and it is necessary to place the fistula on the wound of the patient dipped in oil or water, since lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it miraculously.
If the fistula is healed by the method described for cauterizing and healing, that is good; if not, it becomes necessary to administer a probe through the nose and reduce the fistula into the nasal cavity according to its proper location.
Chapter XVIII.
On the Cauterization of the Fissure of the Anus.
Many times, fissures occur in the lips, and more frequently in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you treat those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and your treatment does not improve, then burn it with a small cautery knife in this manner as follows:
And let the cavity be according to the fineness of the knife.
Place that incision carefully in those fissures until the cautery reaches the edge of the fissures.
And heal it with care until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
On the Cauterization of Mouth Fistulas.
When an abscess appears in the uvula or palate or in the abscesses of the teeth and it becomes broken, decayed, and is made into a fistula, and if you treat it and your treatment does not heal it, then it is necessary that you burn the cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, and place that burning cautery in the probe of the fistula, and hold your hand until the heated iron reaches the edge of it, and at the end do this once or twice; and heal it with what we have said about healing until it is healed.
And if the abscess is separated and healed, that is good; if not, it becomes necessary to expose the location and remove the corrupted bone according to its proper location.
Chapter XX.
On the Cauterization and Softening of the Teeth and Gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are diseased, and you treat them with medicines but they do not improve, then lay the head of the patient on your lap, and hold the cautery in the shape that is appropriate for this purpose, so that you press the handle on the tooth and enter it with the cautery ignited quickly, and hold your hand a little further until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth to be reached.
And lift your hand, and repeat the cautery several times as desired.
And have the patient rinse his mouth with salt water and keep it for an hour, then stop it, since a diseased tooth is closed and a softened gum is strengthened, and corrupt moisture is dried out.
Chapter XXI.
On the Cauterization of Tooth Pain.
When tooth pain is due to inflammation or worms, or does not improve with medication, then cauterize it in one of two ways: cauterize with a cow's bone, or cauterize with fire.
Cautery with a pointed tip should be taken from the cow's or pig's horn, and it should be sharpened at the end and wrapped around the end of the tendon. Then immerse that pointed tool in hot oil and place it on the painful tooth quickly until it cools down.
Then repeat this process several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, immerse wool or a cloth in the previously mentioned tool, place it on the painful tooth, and hold that hot iron on it until the iron reaches the bottom of the tooth's cavity.
However, cauterization with fire should be avoided if the patient has an ulcer or a wound, and if the heat of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
Then apply the heated cautery to the tooth in the appropriate form and hold it there until the cautery cools down; repeat this process several times as long as the pain persists, either that day or the next.
And it is necessary to apply pressure on the mouth of the patient with a good cushion for an hour, and then remove it. This is the form of the cautery.
Cauterize the affected area as much as you are able.
And this is the form of the cannula:
Chapter XXII.
On Extrusion Cauterization.
When an extrusion is due to inflammation and cold humors that are not obedient to digestive medicines, and you wish to facilitate digestion of this condition somewhat, then use cauterization as follows: heat the form of the cautery as described below (having two pointed ends so that the smoke escapes through the other end), and apply the heated cautery to the apostema once, and if necessary, repeat until it reaches the base of the apostema.
And if the apostema is small, cauterize it according to its size, and then leave it for three days before applying fresh hot oil or fat over the burned area until the fire has consumed what it had burned.
And treat the wound with bandages and dressings until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On Cauterization of Roughness of the Larynx and Constriction of Veins.
When moisture comes over the trachea of the lung and especially when this is accompanied by cold congestion, it is necessary that the patient be evacuated with laxative medicines at first, and then cauterize the root of the glottis in the affected area.
But be careful not to burn the root of the glottis with the cautery or burn the cartilage of the larynx too much.
Cauterize that area with another cautery on the joint of the neck at the lower end of the spine. The form of the cautery should be as follows (rounded and resembling a nail).
And treat that area with what has been described before until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
On Cauterization of Lung Disease and Coughing.
When cough and lung disease are due to cold humors, the patient does not have fever or phlegm, and it is an old illness, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the collarbone at the points where lions' paws and bulls' hooves are depressed; and with another cautery in the middle of the shin between the nipples; and let the cauterizers be rounded, as described before.
And if you wish, perform your cauterization with the pointed cautery known as puntica, whose form is described in the section on earache pain.
And make points at those places; and treat that area with what has been described before until it is healed.
Now, let the cauteries have three legs for caution's sake, because cauterization is done as follows: in one application, you can perform three cauterizations according to this form:
Chapter XV.
On Cauterization of Twitching, which is the head of the helper. (This term may refer to a condition where the patient experiences involuntary muscle spasms or convulsions.)
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricous humors and does not return to its original position during its time of return, it should be reduced as soon as possible until it returns to its usual state. Then, by a small movement, you should dislocate it in such a way that it slips out, as we have observed, and it is necessary to first reduce the dislocation. The patient should then be turned over onto their back or side, and the cartilage, which is inside the affected area near the juncture, should be raised using your left hand to the areas above, if the juncture is dislocated inward.
Approach the cautery with two heads; and this is its shape:
Approach the cautery with two prongs, each prong to penetrate into the other; and you will find the shape of the cauterization afterwards with three prongs of the cautery.
And some observations are adjusted according to this count and for that reason the cauteries are eight.
Then stop the cautery by pressing on it with salt, and then have the patient rest in peace, and let not the member be harmed for any time before being comforted.
And if the dislocation is at the groin area and beyond, then do this: cauterize over the muscle with a cautery nail or a pointed cauterizing needle, because the joint will be confirmed, moisture will be removed, and the patient will be healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On Cauterization of the Stomach.
When cold and moisture enter the stomach and rot its composition, causing it to multiply rooms within it, and if you continue with the methods of treatment without conferring, then it is necessary that the patient lies on their back, extends their hands and legs, and approaches the area with three cauterizations: one cautery beneath the feet at the length of a finger, another cautery beneath the ribs of the caution, until a triangular shape appears; and extend between those not aligned to make blisters.
And if the depth of the cautery is the third part of the thickness of the tendon.
Let the shape of the cautery be as described, And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the appropriate location of the stomach according to this shape; and let this be a cautery shaped like a circle according to this form:
Let the stomach be cauterized at the point where that part of the cautery is frightened: and know that you should puncture the stomach with as many points as you want with tendon, and then cauterize those points with the cautery; and then care for it with the treatment preceding until it is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
On Cauterization of the Hernia Suture.
When the hernia causes pain due to heat or moisture or large windiness until it is expelled from its normal composition through excessive outflow, and if the patient is cured with what we have said and not conferred, then it is necessary that the patient lies on their back, and make three cauterizations according to this form and this quantity at the hernia beneath the hipbones, in the male's position.
Let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cauterization be according to the length of the straight body.
Do not press too much with your hand on the cautery.
And if the amount of what is adhered is equal to the thickness of the tendon's knot, and it is not properly adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them be seated, which has already extended its legs, and lift its arms.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauterizations with a surgical cautery, when you have subtlety and caution in the art.
Be careful not to overdo the cauterization, and make sure that the entire coating is cauterized so that the entire body and the intestines are reached, because the coating here is delicate; know this.
The eighteenth chapter:
On the incision of the abscess of the liver with cautery.
If you want to determine whether an abscess is in the liver or its capsule and wish to know if it is located in the liver tissue or the capsule of the liver, then, if it is in the liver tissue, the patient will feel a heavy and painful sensation.
If it is in the capsule of the liver, then the pain is severe and often exhausts the physicians who attempt to treat it.
Therefore the patient must be placed on his back and the location of the abscess must be determined. Next, the surgeon should apply a hot iron, similar in shape to that shown on the previous page, to the abscess cavity. The iron should be heated until it is hot and cauterizes the entire abscess cavity, reaching the cystic duct and causing pus to flow out.
After this treatment, the patient should be given care for other abscesses until they are healed.
It is not advisable to use this method of cauterization without further study in the art of medicine and knowledge of various maladies; however, some cases may require this operation, but you should consult a more experienced physician for advice on whether or not to perform it.
The twenty-ninth chapter:
On the cauterization of piles (hemorrhoids)
The ancient cauteries used for arthritis are now applied to the treatment of piles, and this is the method you should follow: Take a piece of dry cloth or thin metal rod that is about the thickness of your finger and heat it over a fire until it is hot. Then use this heated instrument to press firmly on each pile for a few seconds. This will help to alleviate the pain and swelling caused by hemorrhoids.
After the cauterization of each pile, submerge it in oil and then apply heat to it again using a heated iron or other instrument. This should be done at the point where the backbone meets the neck and two small cauterizations should be made on either side of the Adam's apple, one slightly lower and one declining between the fifth rib and navel, declining a little towards the rear; another cauterization should be made in the middle of the thigh; and another on the stomach, and three cauterizations on the back; and one cauterization at the point where the two shoulders meet and two cauterizations on either side of the thigh, after the first cauterization between the shoulders.
And it is not necessary that you press your hand on the cautery, but rather leave it in open air during its operation.
And it was said by some ancients that there are certain men who use a cautery of iron resembling a ray and ignite that same one, and place it in the location between the ribs, until we reach that spot with the abscess and open the pus, as we have said about the abscess of the liver.
However, in this perforation with the cautery, there is no fear, because if someone dies immediately, it occurs at the location of the fistula, where there is no healing.
Chapter XXX.
Of the Cauterization of the Spleen.
When you treat the disease of the spleen, as we have said in its treatment by division and do not confer your treatment, then cauterize it according to three methods, all of which are correct, of which one is that you make three or four cauteries according to the length of the spleen, following the figure of the cauteries of the liver, whose figure has preceded.
And between each cautery the thickness should be that of a finger or slightly more, and the method of cauterization should be the same as we have said in the cauterization of the liver.
And do not press your hand on the cautery; and let the patient lie face down.
Another method of cauterization is that you ignite the cautery having two ends, which we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift the intestine which is at the end of the spleen, allowing the patient to lie on their left side.
Your lifting should be such that you lift the intestine according to the length of the body, so that cauteries may be made according to the width of the body.
And bring the two ends together, and ignite soon, in that place where they penetrate the intestine of the other side.
Then withdraw the cautery; and thus, four cauteries are made.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three ends.
And apply the cautery which has been left for several days to boil, because more is conferred by this than other causes in the treatment.
Chapter XXXI.
Of the Cauterization of Edema.
Cauterization should be done in alginate, not in an edema.
When treating edema with the methods you have mentioned in the division and not conferring your treatment, then it is necessary that you perform cauterization around the navel with four cauteries on the circumference of the umbilicus and one cautery on the stomach, one cautery on the spleen, one cautery on the liver, two cauterizations between the vertebrae of the back, one cautery on the right side of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach. And the depth of the cauterization should be proportionate to the degree of the wound.
Then leave the cautery open to allow it to burn for a long time.
And do not remove the patient from treatment near the cauterization with what is necessary for them to remain in that place for two intentions, and it will be hastened to them with assistance of healing.
The shape of the cautery with which the stomach is cauterized should be round, as the shape of it was described before, and it is that one with which the back is cauterized in an olive shape, according to its previously described form.
Chapter .xxxii.
On the cauterization of feet and of the thighs.
When the feet are swollen with edema and filled with stagnant water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot between the auricular and anular veins, and raise your hand with the cautery without twisting it; then lift your hand, but do not remove it completely because the stagnant water remains.
The cautery is made in this way: And place two cauterizations on both thighs, and in each thigh make a cauterization with the tip of the cautery knife. And the cautery should be the length of the thigh: and make one at a distance from the groin, and the other slightly lower on the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauterizations.
Leave the wound open without treatment for a long time to allow some water to drain from it.
And heal those causes which were mentioned before.
Chapter .xxxiii.
On the cauterization of abdominal organs.
When an abdominal organ is weakened and humidity enters that causes the vertues to decay, it is the digestive and retentive vertue, which are in the stomach and the intestines, and is treated with the methods of treatment mentioned before. Sometimes the patient suffers from cauterization that exhibits its virtues, then cauterize it with a large cautery on the patient's stomach as described previously in the cauterization of the stomach, with the circular cautery and four subtle cauteries around the umbilicus, with a fine-pointed cautery; and with a cauterizer over the kidney on large stones or with two cauterizers.
And if the humidity is excessive and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize it on the pentenilh (a part of the abdomen) and on the intestines, and apply a strong adjustment with two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal area. This is a perfect cure without error.
Chapter .xxxiv.
On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
When nature produces ancient hemorrhoids or one that is caused by gross humors or corrupted humidity, and they are treated with what was mentioned before and their treatment is not effective, then cauterize it with three cauterizations on the pus under the lower spine (sacrum) in a small triangular shape, and with a cautery above the navel at two points.
If you suspect that the stomach of the patient is congested and their food is not spoiled, and sometimes the face of the patient is swollen, then cauterize it on the stomach with a large cautery as described before; and make one cauterization on the spleen, and another on the liver with a pointed cautery, leave the cauterization open for some time, and heal it until it is healed.
Title .35.
On the cauterization of an athlete near an abscess.
When you cut out an abscess, then heat the cautery that resembles a ray. Place a fire in the abscessed abscess and let the tip of the cautery enter the incision until it reaches the vein from which blood flows.
And do it once or twice, because if they are many abscesses, then cauterize each of them according to what has been determined, and take care of those that show signs of purulent discharge until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on someone, it is more beneficial in this case.
Title .36.
On the cauterization of fistulas that are made by nature in the groin.
When nature does not obey the work that has been recommended in its place and the patient is frightened by it, heal it with a cautery.
Therefore, when you see a fistula in nature and it is old, corroded skin and humid matter, then what is most appropriate is to try to cure it with a subtle probe, and bring the quantity of the depth of it along with the previously mentioned probe.
Heat the cautery that resembles a ray. And place that heated cautery in this fistula, and according to the quantity with which it penetrates the probe.
And repeat the cauterization in that area until the rotten flesh is burned off quickly one or two or three times, according to your need.
And beware of burning nerves and veins; or if the fistula is on the body of the bladder or the body of the hernia, then avoid all those areas; do not do this unless the fistula is in a meaty area and you think that it does not penetrate.
And take care of the area until it heals.
If the location is sealed and the materials are removed from it, and remains like that for a long time, then you should know that it has been healed completely.
If the materials are not removed from it, then you should know that it is penetrating or in the vicinity of a bone that is rotting, or that it will come back to memory of those causes in its location.
Title .37.
On the cauterization of snorrs.
When there is pain in the snoring due to cold or excessive congestion, and the patient's throat is irritated, it is necessary to cauterize that area on the snoring with a cautery on each snore with a pointed cautery that precedes the memory of it.
And be careful with the cauterization because it will be seconded by a small cushion, so there will be three cauterizations in a row, and therefore they will be more beneficial in this case.
Title .38.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When there is debility and softening of the bladder due to cold and humidity such that the patient cannot retain urine, you should cauterize that area below the bladder, on the side closest to the penis, and cauterize with a cautery on the right side, and with another on the left side.
The length of each cautery should be according to the depth of the pit; and cauterize that area with a cautery in the lower part or with two cauteries if necessary.
Let the cautery be pointed as it is prescribed.
Title .39.
On the cauterization of the liver.
When the abdomen swells and becomes moist, it is forbidden to engage in any activity, menstruation of the woman is corrupted, their provocation is delayed, pain occurs due to this, so the location must be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as has been said in the bladder cautery; and a cautery on the location below the navel or two cauteries, and let it be a hot cautery.
De la castracion de los hombres.
Of the cauterization of dislocation of the ankle.
When swelling and moistness are infiltrated at the ankle joint, and this causes dislocation of the joint, the sign of this is that the joint extends beyond the other when compared to each other. And the location of the dislocation is brought out in a place where it can be seen.
Therefore it is necessary to cauterize the patient over the ankle joint with a circular cautery, because you will have a sign in the circumference of the joint as described, and in this way the joint falls into the center of the circle.
And let the shape of the cautery used be similar to that used in cauterizing the stomach.
And if this cautery is not at hand, then you shall cauterize it with three cauteries and a large olive-shaped cautery.
Make the cautery according to the size of the dislocation in all the ankle; and care for that which is healed.
De la fracturacio de lanqua.
Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs in the ankle area, caused by inflammation and moisture, the patient is treated with what has been said before and nothing more, which is an old remedy. Therefore, you should lance the patient with thick humors using fumigated pills or artificial pills that resemble them; then cauterize it.
The method of cauterizing in this case is according to two methods: either cauterizing with burning medications or cauterizing with fire.
According to two known methods, one of which is to cauterize the ankle area with three triangular cauteries in this manner; do so with good depth. And make sure that the spaces between each cautery are proportionate to the thickness of the finger and whether the cauteries are large or small.
However, sometimes the cauterizations should be made on the middle part of the ankle for there to be four cauterizations.
And if you wish, cauterize with the circle whose shape is preceded in the ankle dislocation cauterization, and which encompasses and burns the entire cord.
This is the method of cauterization for sciatica when pain is attached to the ankle and not extended into the thigh.
However, if it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize there with two cauterizations on the thigh at the site where the pain arises; and one cauterization on the hip four fingers below the part of the crease.
And if it is a knife cautery, let the depth of the cauterization be according to the thickness of the cord.
And if the pain is extended to the location near the feet, then cauterize there where it arises with a cautery using three or four points, or more if necessary.
And if the pain is behind the thigh, then cauterize there with a knife cautery.
Always be careful in all cauterizations that you do not burn nerves or large vessels with the cautery, and so as to avoid harming the patient or causing contractions.
And I have seen and heard of others who have cauterized on the hip and burned in the cauterization, causing the leg to swell up to the foot, burn through, rot, and corrupt the entire foot. And applying this method strongly is a great solution for the stomach, and also leads to death.
If the pain is in two parts, then cauterize each one according to this method.
The wise say in the ankle cauterization using this method: make a circle of iron, and let its circumference be as big as a palm; and place the holes according to the thickness of an almond or walnut.
Inside that circle is another third; let the space between them be equal to the knuckle of the thumb; and let those circles be open in two parts; and let the length of the keys be one or two knuckles, and make the edges of iron appropriately fitted in the circles; and this is the shape:
Light it in the fire until it becomes red-hot and gives off sparks; and then place it on the ankle area, with the patient's hand on the side. And therefore cauterize it with three circles in one visit.
And leave it alone for three days; apply it with a dressing and let the wound remain open for several days; and treat it with mouthwashes until it is healed.
According to Al-Zahrawi: my son, we have rarely used this type of cauterization because of the fear of its consequences, and because few have paid attention to it.
Nevertheless, from among the many cauterizations that he suffered, he learned where to apply them.
Cauterizations with burning medications are those that you make two circles, having an armed hole in which the handle of the iron is inserted; the length of the wall should be two knuckles or more.
And let the space between each one be equal to the thickness of the finger; and let them open below and above, and let them contain something in the middle like this:
Place your hand on the ankle area with the patient lying on their side, and compress your hand over the ankle area; and take hot water and pour it between two circles, and let the quality of that be small but gradually increasing, and hold it for the duration of one hour, and have the patient bear the burning and the pain until the burning stops. This is how he learned to bear the pain as if from fire.
And raise your hand with the tool and wash the entire ankle with warm water.
Leave it alone for three days and cover it with a dressing until the blackness of the burn subsides, and leave it uncovered for several days, and apply red paint to it; this is the final step in healing.
Treat it with mouthwashes until it is healed.
If the pain extends into the thigh or leg, put it in a position where it contains water as was done for the ankle.
This is the method of hot water, and I have already written it in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Recipe of alkali and of lime burnt without being mixed together on one side, then crush and strain it in a new wave, where the hole left should be pierced with a small hole, according to the amount required.
Wait for the other wave to fill the bottom of the wave, and pour over it warm water with live alkali that rises through your finger, then compress it well with a tight grip, and let the sharp end of the needle pierce the acute water in the other wave-filled hollow.
Adjust all that water and pour over it new warm water and more alkali, because at this point it will have great strength, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in the cauterization of other members, because such an operation produces fire.
Some of the medications are cauterized wide, such as pitch and honey mixed with sulfur.
Gaul recounts an ancient man's operation and cure for pain in the back and sciatica, and it is remarkable that this was done, and he says that no other treatment is necessary, because it is cured in one go as recommended, because this remedy works very well in bathing and purging, as he recommends.
And it should be prescribed a green verdigris, and if green verdigris is not found, figs should be taken; it should be crushed with a little gray and placed on the back where the pain is, or on the chest, or on the legs, and left to act.
It should be left for a period of three hours, or as long as the patient can bear the heat.
Then immerse it in hot water and when the body of the patient is warm, place it on a hot surface, because the pain ceases and heals.
And know that it is not necessary to use cautery with these medications, but rather promote the elimination of the body.
However, Hippocrates says that when a goat's vein is stretched and cauterized, it will do better; the cautery should be done as follows: wool should be taken and soaked in ancient oil, and placed between the toes and between the grooves.
And take a dried goat's vein and inflate it with fire until it is made carbon, and place it on the wool and let it expand. And continue to apply this, and do not stop until the sensation of biting reaches the back and relieves the pain.
This method of cautery is called the cattle cauterization.
Chapter 42.
On the cauterization of toothache.
Sometimes toothache is due to various causes, such as chipping or hitting, or excessive elimination, and similar causes, by the infusion of cold and moist matter.
Cauterization should not be used except in this special case caused by an effusion of cold matter.
Therefore, promote the elimination of the patient with pills filled with similar materials that are placed on the toothache area three fingers deep according to the latitude of it, then use cautery or not depending on the tolerance of the patient and the potency of it.
The cauterization should be done with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three or four cauterizations using the central nail in this manner:
Chapter 43.
Treatment by cauterization at the start of a jaundice.
Signs of this disease in infants; and the beginning of it is indicated in infants by their structure becoming rigid, with a swelling and increase in size.
And thickening is observed in the lower part of the back and neck bones that begin to protrude above the others.
Therefore, when you see this and wish to stop it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery as follows: Have the cautery cover all parts of the affected vertebrae.
If you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery for two or three lines. Make sure the points are evenly spaced between them.
Take care to treat the area where this is healing as directed.
Be careful not to administer cauterization in jaundice caused by nerve spasms.
Chapter XLIV.
Treatment by cauterization for gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore, when gout due to cold is cured using the treatment method and the pain does not persist, you should perform additional cauterizations.
It is that you cauterize around the joint of the foot with multiple cauteries.
And the olive-oil cautery should have this shape:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. If the pain spreads into the nails or other joints, and it often indicates this, then cauterize that one with three or four cauterizations all around using this olive oil cautery.
If more cauterizations are necessary for this procedure, then cauterize it, but do not press too hard with your hand beforehand, just place the coagulum on the wound.
If the pain spreads to both hands and feet, then administer the cautery as described in the previous section.
If the pain is only in the limbs, and it's called sciatica, then puncture around the nerves as described earlier, puncture on those two lines.
If the pain persists in the aforementioned limbs, then puncture around the nerves on each toe and at the wrist of the affected hand.
If pain approaches the joints or muscles after several days, then cauterize all parts of the affected joints.
Do not evacuate the patient with good management and administration of medicine, for if good management and appropriate treatment is given, this cautery will heal them (God help).
Chapter 45.
On Cauterization of Wounds
When there is an injury in the inguinal region and the intestine protrudes toward the genitalia, it is necessary to begin by having the patient abstain from food on that day and use remedies to relax the swelling of the hernia caused by the stomach.
Then place the patient on your lap and command them to keep their legs together until the hernia or intestine is pushed back in or reappears through the opening.
Return it to the aforementioned place and press on it with your thumbs at the end of the penis, where the shape resembles the head of a circle at the sides of the body divided by ribs.
Then heat the cautery to be used.
until it is well-cooked and bubbles appear. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place the cautery on that spot with your hand steady, and push it in until you reach the penis bone inside the anus; repeat this process again if you did not succeed in reaching the bone during the first examination.
Observe wisely the position of the hernia during your cauterization, to ensure that you do not burn the hernia so as not to cause death or other serious problems for the patient.
Know that when using the cautery, if you do not touch the bone, your operation will be in vain.
It is necessary for the cautery of children to be subtle according to their age and size.
Cure the wound caused by the cautery for three days, using bandages until the scar of the burn heals over.
Take care of that one with other soothing ointments until it is healed.
The patient should remain lying on their back for forty days, until the wound and sore are sealed.
It is necessary to restrict the food intake of the patient according to the duration of their treatment and to prevent the hernia from protruding during the healing process.
When it is time to remove the bandages after forty days, administer appropriate treatment, and continue for another forty days.
The patient should rest and abstain from work, food, drink, and excessive speech, as using this regime for healing will lead to recovery.
I will describe the treatment of other hernias in the abdomen, and at the beginning, when you don't know what to do, cauterize the hernia with a circular cautery according to its size, as the third part of it is exposed from the wound; take care of that one using what was described earlier, but do not adjust.
I will now tell you about the first method for treating hernias by cauterizing them with a triangular cautery according to this pattern, which is known as:
and the line that extends from the left side to the right above the hernia, and another line across it; place your hand on a pointed cautery, but the first cauterization should be lighter and more effective.
Chapter 46.
Treatise on Cauterization of Twisting (or Torsion)
When pain arises in a limb due to sudden injury or blows and the pain persists for a long time without relief from medication, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
The cautery should be of the appropriate size for each member, taking into account its magnitude and smallness, its nature and characteristics, and the location of torsion and pain in it.
If the wound is healed by the first cauterization, that is good; if not, you should repeat the cauterization on it; for it is common for those pains to be recurrent in the neighboring member, so it is necessary to achieve this with cauterization before the patient is healed.
Chapter 47 (in English numbering)
Treatise on Cauterization of Leprosy
Some types of leprosy are seen to be beneficial when cauterized due to a large advantage, and in particular if the type of leprosy is caused by rotting of flesh and melancholy.
Therefore, if you wish to cauterize it, consider whether the leprosy is common and curable as mentioned in the division, or not present, and beware of the patient that the corruption has spread throughout his body and his entire complexion, then cauterize it on the head with two cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and the second below it, place the forehead at the end of the hair; and both on two corns; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
Finally, place your hand on the cautery a little before it touches the bone and causes a slight pressure, and thus the sores are moved, to ease the expiration of thick vapors from it; and cauterize on the glands as prescribed.
If the leprosy has already spread over the patient and is apparent, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with the cauteries mentioned on the head; and a cautery on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on both cheeks, and two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and six cauteries on the vertebrae of the spine, and one large one near the coccyx, and one on the coccyx, and two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and two on the elbows and one on each elbow, and two on the knees, and two on the thighs, and two on the shins; and cauterize it over all the joints of the fingers and toes, and over every toe on the feet, and over the wrists of the hands.
Watch out for the nerves that are on the heel, do not burn those.
Certainly, some are cauterized with a cautery on the pelvis bone and another on the stomach opening, and another on the liver.
And know that the more adjustments (applications of the cautery) you make, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as they have already been rendered unconscious by the anesthesia.
It is necessary that the cauteries be large or small according to the limbs and joints, following the recipes of the instruments (tools).
Then treat the cautery with a mixture of eggs beaten with honey and other medicine until it heals.
Chapter 48.
On the Cauterization for Stupor (anesthesia).
When a member is immobilized or anesthetized and treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but fails to heal, then you cauterize that immobilized member using cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
Your cautery should penetrate the skin a little bit. Treat it with honey until it heals.
Some stupor is cauterized, which extends to the back and feet, and the spine of the neck, and relieves the pain in the nerves that afflict that member, and the stupor subsides.
Do not presume this unless one is knowledgeable in the anatomy of members and the exit points of nerves throughout the entire body that cause movement.
Chapter 49.
On Cauterization for Gangrene (mortification of tissue).
When gangrene is old and does not respond to any of the medicines applied to it, then you cauterize over that area with a pointed cautery to the degree of the size of the wound until the whiteness and color disappear, and its color changes.
Then treat it with a mixture of eggs and lentils boiled in rose oil and arnica leaves, and goose or hare blood, each part separately and all mixed together, then lay a linen cloth over the area until it heals.
Chapter 1.
On Cauterization for Cancer (malignant growths).
When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery in the area around it as it is rotated.
The wise ones say it should be cauterized with the final cautery in the middle position; however, I have not seen this done, as I fear that it may be ulcerated, and I myself have seen some cases.
It is therefore more appropriate to cauterize it in the area around it with a circular or multiple cauteries.
Chapter 2.
On Cauterization for Hemorrhoids.
When an hemorrhoid is delayed in maturation, either due to superfluity or the patient's condition, who is elderly and weak with little blood, or due to time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of hemorrhoids; then cauterize it in the area around it with multiple small cauteries pointed. Place a linen cloth over that area which will promote maturation.
However, if you wish to perforate it with the cautery, then ignite the cautery whose shape is as follows: and immerse it in the middle of the hemorrhoid until it penetrates the skin.
And if the cautery is in that location which is lower down, to alleviate the arm; then treat it until it heals.
Chapter 3.
On Caterization for Corrosion (erosion).
Corrosion is a walking corruption in the member, which corrodes it like dry wood consumed by fire.
Therefore, if you see corrosion in a location that has been subjected to cautery with fire, then ignite multiple small and large cauteries as appropriate in the location where the corrosion is present.
Then treat it from all sides until you eradicate all the corrosion and there remains no cause of it.
Place a linen cloth over it for three days and cover the cauterized areas with oil mixed between applications until all scars are eradicated, and all corruption is gone.
Approach the swollen flesh causing growth.
If the flesh heals normally after three days without corruption, that is good; otherwise, you must use a cautery on what is rotten in the corrupted areas.
Corrosive medicine is sometimes used with acute medication, because it serves as an alternative to cauterization. However, fire cautery is often a quick aid in the pus.
And you have already said that acute medication is used for treatment in the division, so take it when needed.
Chapter XXXIII.
On cauterizing nails and similar items.
Motes observed near the joints of the feet, causing pain that is called a nail, and it is large, vented, which presses on the foot; cauterization in these areas can be performed in two ways: cauterization with fire or cauterization with water heated.
However, fire cauterization is performed by heating the convex cautery resembling a pen of a hawk's beak, made from iron in accordance with the size that covers the entire nail and has thin edges.
Approach the hammer and pause it on the nail, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail. Then let it rest for three days until pus begins to discharge. Then apply the plaster made with wild mallow leaves crushed and mixed with salt, let it rest on it for a night, as this will be expelled from its roots.
Then take care of the area with rotten flesh until it is healed.
And if it does not heal, and pus appears on the surface of the body, especially in the head and feet, then you must administer cautery with water, take a hot iron or copper or glass rod and place it on the nail; then put some warm water in the cannula, hold your hand, and rotate the cannula around the nail with compression from all sides, and press the edge of the cannula against the root of the nail, allowing the boiling water to enter the root of the wound; wait for an hour as the patient feels the pain of the boiling water, then remove it, as the nail along with its roots will be expelled.
So do the same to all of them until they are all removed from the body.
Then take care of the pus that arises when the roots of the nails are expelled with rotten flesh.
Capital III (chapter thirty-third)
On the Cauterization of Tremors (Treatment for Tremors)
When treating tremors caused by irritation of a nerve or fever due to irritation, or for other similar causes, then you must cauterize it with four cauterizations or five on the spine, between each spine with one cautery; and on the legs and above the stomach, use olive oil cauterization.
And the tremor of the affected area ceases and hastens the healing of the underlying illness.
Capital LV (chapter fifty-fifth)
On the Cauterization of Accidental Ulcers on the Body
When ulcers appear on the body that are pus-filled fissures caused by corrupt matter; therefore, at the beginning when they appear, it should be cauterized over the entire opening with a fine cautery made of myrtle wood, the tip of which is extended with fire; or with an esthesiology razor longue; or with a cautery lenticula.
And in some cases, cauterization should be performed before the opening of the ulcer using this method; and it is not credible, and the excess is removed, healing from the ulcers.
However, in some cases, it should be done with appropriate evacuation using phlebotomy.
Capital LVI (chapter fifty-sixth)
On the Cauterization of Accidental Bleeding from Arteries by Incision with an Artery Knife
In some cases, bleeding from an artery that is incised must be stopped by closing the wound, or by making a small incision or cauterizing the member, and in such cases, it is difficult to stop the bleeding.
Then when it happens to someone, you must immediately apply pressure with your hand on the artery wound and hold it until the bleeding stops and does not return.
And pause the olive oil cauterizations for few and large amounts, in many cases, until they are ignited.
And take a small or large piece of it according to the location and wound where the artery is broken, above the vein as quickly as possible after stopping the bleeding, and cauterize it until the bleeding stops and the blood flow is restricted.
And if the blood is expelled from the artery wound when you stop the bleeding and remove the cautery, then take another cautery carefully prepared among those in the fire, and do not cease to perform this action until the blood flow is restricted.
And beware not to burn the nerve that is here, and let nothing else harm the patient.
Know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the blood in such cases, and especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods is used: or cauterization as described earlier; or extraction when it cannot be extracted, for when the extremities are burned and blood flow is restricted; or binding with a ligature or strong suture; or applying medications that have the property of restricting blood; and they should be strengthened with a pulvinar or compress.
However, those who administer a proper ligature and a strong suture with cloth or by causing burning and similar causes should not trust it too much.
If no doctor or medicine is present and the wound is on a vein as mentioned, then make a pause in that place over the opening of the vein, and understand the great constraint until the blood stops flowing from the main part of the injury, and do not let it be renewed; and above the artery, spray cold water with great coolness until the blood is coagulated and thickened; and furthermore, be cautious in what is required for cautery or medicine.
Of incision and perforation and abscesses and of phlebotomy and of wounds and their similarities.
We have already said in the first chapter about all diseases where cautery with fire is appropriate and medication burning, and the occasions and causes for this, and the necessary instruments along with the forms of the cauterizations; and we have organized the chapters from head to feet.
In this chapter, we will proceed with this method so that the desired result is achieved, and then on what has been asked for.
Before I begin this, let me remind you that in this chapter we are dealing with things that were discussed in the first chapter of cauterization.
And because it is necessary to be in great caution, since in the operation that will be discussed in this chapter, many things are observed that involve evacuation, which involves blood and which gives life, and the spraying of the vein or incision over an abscess or opening of an ulcer or purgation of a wound or extraction of a thorn or incision of a stone and their similarities. And of all these, there should be fear and trembling, and above all, caution to avoid death.
I also advise you to be careful in what you do, because some things you will handle as if they were healthy people, but others as if they were sick with many diseases. And some of them will go away with their disease, and you must be careful because it is easy for them to die due to the severity of their illness, or due to the duration of their illness, and the disease itself signifies death.
And some are those that give you their property and goods, you hope for their recovery, but their disease is harmful.
And therefore you must not agree with those who come to you with this method; and your caution should be greater than greed and rapacity; and do not presume any cause without certain knowledge which verifies what has been asked of you, and for which a good result can be expected.
Use in the care of all your patients predictive and diagnostic methods for those whose health has been restored, because in this there is help for you in acquiring fame, memory, praise, and glory.
Oh, sons, may God inspire you with His understanding and not deceive or misguide you, for that is in His power.
I have organized this chapter according to the previous chapter on cautery, from head to feet, so that what you ask for and what you need will be made easier for you.
Chapter One.
On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of infants.
You should know that this illness often develops in infants and when the newborn does not drain the head properly.
And sometimes it occurs due to hidden causes which are unknown.
I do not see this illness except in infants; and all those whom I have seen suffer from it die of it, so it seems to me that this operation is useless in them.
I have seen an infant whose head was full of water and the size of his head prevented him from vomiting it out, and moreover, the moisture caused more congestion until death occurred by fire.
And this moisture can accumulate between the skull and the bones or be accumulated below the sutures of the skull.
Because the operation in this case if the moisture is between the skull and the bones and the abscess is small, then you must make an incision at the midline of the head with a crack in its length, which should be no more than two inches long, so that the moisture runs out. This is the shape of the spatula:
And if the moisture is more severe and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions according to this method:
If the humidity is in the bone, a sign of it is that you see the joints widened everywhere and the water is squeezed out when you press it with your thumb, but not hidden from you. You must make incisions in the correct location on the head in three places according to this method:
Then remove all the humidity through the incision; strengthen the incisions with cloths and feathers; broach it with oil and wine for five days, remove the linen and cure the wound with poultices and bandages, strengthen the head with a brace; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is comfortable and healed.
And another method of incision is to consider the size of the abscess and the collection of water, as sometimes it is larger in the occiput or in front, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore pay attention to the incision where the abscess and the filling of water appear, and do what is most easily possible for you.
And be careful not to cut the artery and let blood flow out, causing death of the patient due to bleeding and the evacuation of humidity.
Capital second.
When cataracts or abscesses appear in the ears or feet, and it is old and does not respond to medication, then the last cure is by incising those two arteries.
And therefore when you want to incise the place where the patient's head is swollen, and carefully press the area with a rough cloth to reveal the arteries, and tightly bind the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the vein pulses; and the places on each side of the places that are closest to the auricles should be pressed until they disappear, and this is only possible in some men.
And touch the artery with your finger, and incise each one with a sharp scalpel blade that enters the bone through the incision, and do this for the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the scalpel blade under the artery and break it at the incisions above.
And let the length of the incision be two fingers' widths apart, because when a vein is incised blood gushes out with pulsatile flow, which jumps far due to its frequency.
But if the artery does not appear at the incision, then it is necessary that you measure the distance from the auricle to the quantity of three fingers, and touch it with your finger, and proceed to the bone.
And the amount of blood to be removed is a quarter of a pint. And do not remove too much or too little blood, and all this is according to the quantity that appears of the virulence of the disease and the filling of the artery by it.
And carefully consider the wound, and therefore if there is any cause of pain over the bone, then incise it so as not to create an abscess.
And strengthen the wound with feathers and linen of linen cloth, and cure it with poultices until it is healed.
Capital III.
On the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
When an old or chronic abscess occurs in the temples or shoulders, due to humoral imbalances and qualities in the muscles of the temples, or old and violent swellings that resemble these, and is treated with the methods of medication without success, we have resorted to this disease extraction of arteries in the temples or cauterization of them as shown.
The method of the operation and extraction of these is that the patient raises the hairs on his temples; and understand the artery that appears in the temple because it is revealed to you by its pulse, but it is hidden from most men due to its forcefulness.
And if it is hidden, then tightly bind the neck of the patient with some cloth; and carefully press the area with a rough cloth or apply hot water to it until the artery appears clearly. Then you take the scalpel, which has this shape: And approach the scalpel blade with that ease until you reach the artery; and then make an incision in the upper part and extract it at the superficial level until you extract it from the sheath and expose it from all sides.
But if the artery is thin, you wrap it with a piece of cloth at its tip, and then make an incision in one part according to the size by which the tips are lengthened and contracted, but do not let blood flow out, because if they are not incised, no blood will come out.
And apply a wine leech to it. (The word "sanc" is likely a misspelling or error for "sangue", which means blood in Italian, Spanish, French, etc., but here refers to blood drawn by the leech.) Here comes the next sentence:
And if the archery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two places with strong cedar or cord, and not cut it until it has been allowed to fester for a while, during which time the wound will heal and blood will flow.
Then cut off the excess tissue between two ligaments, and do this at that time or another time.
If you wish, cauterize it with a hot iron (cautery) down to the bone and then make an incision in the extra tissues, and remain at that place during this work.
It is better for the patient to have a fever or be in a state of complete heat; because cauterization is of those causes that help to stop bleeding, and therefore it is better in this case.
And it is necessary to make an incision in the hernia that a person skilled in this procedure should do, and they must place powder on it properly, and heal it with dry medicines so that the flesh may heal and warm water be applied until it is healed.
If during another examination, blood flows from the hernia, then you should stop this bleeding by using a ligature, or a cautery, or by applying a pad to the area and press firmly until the bleeding stops. If one of those causes is not present, you should place a warm cloth over the area until the bleeding stops, and bind it with hot water until the inflammation subsides, and tighten as necessary.
The easiest method for extracting hernia is to cauterize the vein with two cauteries (tongs), after which you mark both places with ink, and wait a little while, knowing that it will reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities can be stretched out, because they are not consolidated by this cauterization.
Here is the shape of the cautery:
And let the heat of both cauteries be similar. However, if one cautery is hotter than the other, it is better because if they are as sharp as each other and close to the skin, it may cut the flesh too quickly.
Therefore, since in those cases there is some thickness (to the skin), it is necessary to keep the heat of the fire at a moderate level and cut the flesh gently.
And this work is easier and less painful.
Let the space between the two cauteries be the thickness of a finger (or a little more or less).
Chapter Four.
On the treatment of acute and chronic coughs in women.
When coughs are acidic and the affected veins are located on the chest above the head, and there is no cause for their cure in medication, and sometimes the face of the patient becomes swollen and he feels as if ants were crawling over his head, and the lips become extended, moistened so much that the skin on them peels off, and the corners of the mouth are scabbed due to the acidity of the tears. In ancient times, they used mastic (spruce resin) for treating this condition, but I name it "spit".
And you tell the patient to pull off the skin that is on his forehead and then make three incisions in the forehead at equal distances according to its length. And if the length of the incision is two fingers: one incision should be at an equal distance from the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second at an equal distance along the length of the eyelid, and the third on the other side.
And be careful not to make an incision in the hernias on both sides and stretch your hand from one jaw to the other. And let the space between each incision be three fingers apart.
And if you have a sponge soaked in vinegar or dry cloths, use them to draw the blood.
And insert the spatula between the two sharp edges, and this is the shape of the incision: which is from the base of the temples to the second incision. Extract the hernia completely by loosening the cord that is between two incisions, and do this from the intermediate incision to the second incision. And press this spatula and insert it into the first incision another time with a sharp knife on one side and blunt on the other.
And wait for the sharp edge to reach the adjacent flesh, the cord, and the bone, and push it inward until it reaches the intermediate incision, and cut off all the vessels that descend from the head to the lips.
The continuous incision should be continued to the point where it appears at the coccyx, and then continue it into the middle fissure towards the other fissure.
When the quantity of blood clots in the foot swells, squeeze the places of the blood clot with the fingers.
Then place a cushion on each old wound that has become purulent, and place poultices soaked in wine and oil and vinegar on the pus-filled blisters, and make sure they do not develop an infected abscess.
On the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large fumigation of boiled or distilled water, and take care to treat it with balsam of Basilico oil and others until the sores are healed.
Chapter V.
On treating ulcers through catharsis and on the boils descending from inside the head.
When a patient experiences constant and sharp pain accompanied by catharsis, and the boils of the patient are weakened and small, and their weakness is noticeable, and their ulcerated eyes and eyelashes fall out, and there is an intense headache with accompanying extension, then one should know from these symptoms that the matter and catharsis do not come from any other source but from the veins descending from inside the head.
The best treatment for such cases is as follows: tell the patient to shave his forehead, and then make a small incision in that place on the middle of the forehead (and start from the left temple to the right temple; and make the incision through the bone; and withdraw your hand from the temples, which are painful to touch), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and fill the space between the two lips of the incision with old cotton or dry cloth. Then bind it with poultices soaked in wine and oil to prevent an infected abscess from forming.
And when you remove the abscess and see that it has diminished, then it is necessary to clean the bone from where the flesh begins until the surface of the bone is exposed, and treat it with a drying regimen that promotes healing of the flesh, such as if you take flour made from two parts wheat and four parts colophony, mix them together, and make a plaster to be applied on these sores near the natural flesh.
Chapter VI.
On treating ulcers in the ear.
The cause of ulcers in the ear can be one of four types: mineral poison or something similar to poison such as iron and glass, plants like mustard seed or bean, fluid such as water and vinegar and similar substances, or some animal.
And if poison or something similar to poison enters the ear that does not belong in the ear and is causing trouble there, plug the ear with a wad of cotton, and if possible, remove the poison using an oil such as viola oil or sesame oil. Then, shake the head gently and apply drops of this extract to the nostrils to induce sneezing. Then plug the ear with some wool or cotton and gently spread the ear open at the sides, as these causes are often forgotten.
If this is not the case, then administer the extract using the tool called "gesti epicicarios subtil" which has the following shape:
And if the "gesti epicicarios subtil" is forgotten, that's fine; otherwise, administer the extract with a thin spoon with as little duplication as possible.
And if this is not forgotten, then make a tube of reed and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal and close its opening with wax and soft oil to prevent it from being too open but only the tube. Then draw air out using strong suction, as this is often forgotten.
If this is not forgotten, take alum or vinegar prepared with the tool that holds birds' feet and place a small amount on the end of the tube, and then cover it with a suitable stopper. And insert this into the ear canal gently, and extract moisture from the ear.
And if all these causes are not forgotten, then you should take care to avoid causing an infected abscess or spasm.
The method of cutting this is to first let the patient bleed from the saphenous vein and extract the blood as you would with its virtue, and then place your thumb on one side of the ear and make a small incision in the raised area of the ear where it is most prominent. Make the incision in the shape of the moon to reach the poison, and once the poison is extracted, close the incision with appropriate tools as soon as possible, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the cause arises in the ear is one of the swellings that grows and inflates, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if you do not attend to it immediately, then you take thin spout as follows: Here is the translation: And administer the abscission of that swelling which has arisen in the ear. (The first sentence continues with "but if you do not attend to it immediately, then...")
And do not perform it when you think that the swelling has already been moistened by the steam from the ear, and place it in damp cloths, and extract it with scissors or a thin instrument, or make an incision as described above, because it alleviates the extraction of it. (The sentence refers to continuing the process of removing the swelling if it has not yet been moistened by the steam from the ear.)
But in the water that has entered the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use sneezing at the beginning, and fill their ear with an old cloth, and rub on the ear in which the water is, and if this is done, it is good; but if not, then take thin tweezers or leeches according to the length of the finger, heat them slightly in the fire, and let the patient insert one of those into the opening of their ear and cough over that part, and strike another stone on the first stone within the ear. (The text describes a process for draining water out of the ear.) Therefore do not stop with the stone insertion until all the water has been removed. (The sentence suggests that the process should continue until all of the water in the ear has been removed.)
Therefore do not stop with the stone insertion until all the water has been removed. (The sentence suggests that the process should continue until all of the water in the ear has been removed.) And when the water is removed, take paper or cotton (to absorb it). (The sentence suggests that once all of the water in the ear has been removed, some form of absorbent material should be used to soak up any remaining fluid.) and put one end of it in the ear and extend the other end into the fire until its tip is burned off. (The sentence suggests that the absorbent material should be used to soak up any remaining fluid, and then burned off to sterilize the area.)
Then put another piece of cotton and do this several times until all the water has been removed, and strain it through a tube as described above with the stone extractor. (The sentence suggests that the process should be repeated multiple times if necessary to ensure that all of the water in the ear has been removed.)
But in the case of an animal entering the ear, if it is small, perform the same remedy as described above; but if it is large and causes swelling at the base of the neck, administer its extraction with a thin instrument or scissors, and this is easier than all the other causes that may occur in the ear. (The sentence suggests that the process for removing an animal from the ear might be slightly different depending on the size of the animal and the location of the swelling.)
But in the case of worms generated in the ear, when you treat it with what has been described above and in the treatment of distillations and it does not improve, then you must expose the ear to sunlight. (The sentence suggests that if the previous remedies do not work for treating a worm in the ear, exposing the ear to sunlight may be helpful.)
Therefore, if any cause of worms appears, extract it with a thin instrument or scissors; but if no cause is apparent, take a tube (that is) slightly narrow and wide at the top. (The sentence suggests that if worms are present in the ear, they can be removed with an instrument, but if not, a tube may be used for some other purpose.) Insert the narrow end of the tube into the ear to the extent that the patient can tolerate; and apply suction forcefully, and do this several times, until all the worms have been removed. (The sentence suggests that the tube should be inserted into the ear as deeply as is comfortable for the patient, and then used to suck out any worms that may be present.)
But if you do not attend to it immediately, then plug the opening of the tube with beeswax as described above; administer distillations that have been proven effective in the treatment of worms, and follow the instructions for the treatment of distillations. (The sentence suggests that if a worm is not removed promptly, the tube can be plugged to prevent the escape of fluid or air, and then distillations can be used as a treatment.)
Let your effusion (of oil or medicine) be with the instrument of this form: And make it of silver or copper, narrow in the middle with a small opening at the top. (The sentence describes the specific materials and shape for the instrument used to administer medication or oil to the ear.)
And therefore let it be as they push in such a way that it is in the concavity of the tube, where it will be necessary. (The sentence suggests that the instrument should be used carefully to avoid causing discomfort or injury.) And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it appropriately around its end, then place oil or juice from a herb, or any of these medicines in the tube (which is inside the ear), and then insert the ray with appropriate pressure, and apply gentle compression to it until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the ear canal and the patient feels the oil inside.
And whatever is inserted in the ear should be heated slightly in the fire first. (The sentence suggests that heating the medication or oil before it is administered may help improve its effectiveness.) And be careful that the cause which you will distill in the ear is not too hot, because ear medicines do not tolerate heat well. (The sentence suggests that the temperature of any liquid used to treat the ear should be carefully controlled to avoid causing discomfort or injury.)
Chapter VII. (The text has moved on to a new section or topic, although it is not immediately clear what it pertains to based on this line alone.)
On the treatment of obstruction in the ears. (The title suggests that the following text will discuss treatments for conditions affecting the ears, such as blockages or hearing loss.)
Some infants born from their mothers' wombs are not perforated, and this happens in some men, ulceration or lack of flesh at the ear area; and sometimes this ulceration is made in the front part of the earlobe that cannot heal, and sometimes it occurs outside these parts.
That which happens in the front part of the earlobe, which cannot heal, is in the major disposition for difficult healing.
And in that which heals, you must have the patient lower their ear and observe it. And if there appears to be ulceration, open it with a thin spatula, which is the form for this.
If the affected area is narrow at its end, with one side being sharp and the other not; and the spatula is two lion's paws wide so as not to damage the earlobe.
And if the ulceration is due to flesh born in the earlobe or meat of it, then cut it with sharp and thin scissors, making a deep incision until all the flesh is removed.
If ulceration is in the front part of the earlobe, then take a thin blade (ray) about a lion's paw long and heat it slightly with fire, and place it in the flesh of the earlobe.
And if the patient experiences discomfort and difficulty due to ulceration, relieve the pressure with ease; but be careful not to injure the nerves of the earlobe.
Then place a linen cloth on the earlobe according to the size of the wound that you have covered with Egyptian balm; do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the ulcer; or take any herb and soak it in water, pulverize it, and use it as indicated after being strained; and if the earlobe is already dressed, you must extract the dressing and replace it with another that you will cover with beeswax made with rose oil until the abscess dries up; and care for it until it is healed.
But if there is bleeding, immerse sponge or cloth in hot water and place it on the earlobe, and use other healing methods to stop the bleeding, which are called in the treatise of distillation.
Chapter VIII.
On the treatment of itchy eyes.
Itchy eyes that affect humans sometimes are moist, other times they are dry.
Therefore, you must have these with tweezers or scissors, and cut them with scissors according to their roots, and then apply the treatment after straining it.
But if there is pain and bleeding, cauterize them with a small, thin cautery.
And the best cauterization is when incisions and wounds return several times because there remains some cause of its roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, these roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment of swelling that occurs in the eyelids of humans.
Sometimes swelling occurs in the eyelids of humans due to a cause similar to swelling in its strength and durability, and for this reason it is called swelling.
And it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the upper and lower eyelids.
Therefore, you must examine whether the swelling comes from something that appears on the eyelid and affects all parts, and the cause is light.
Therefore, make an incision along its width, and remove it with ease from all sides until it drains; and hang it up with tweezers and extract it.
If the swelling is large, adjust it with stitches, and care for it until it heals.
And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from it because the blood of it restores and fills it.
If the swelling is receding inside the eyelid, you should apply pressure to the inner surface of the eyelid, remove the swelling with tweezers, and do not proceed to make an incision if the eyelid is elongated by it, as this may cause damage.
And before making an incision, wash the eyes with saltwater, and care for the area with something that fills until it heals.
Chapter X.
Treatment of conjunctivitis (inflammation of the conjunctiva) in the upper eyelid.
Conjunctivitis is a disease that is generated in the upper eyelid, and it mainly affects children, worsening their eyesight and causing catarrh in them; and they cannot look at the sunlight because tears flow towards them.
And so you often find them lying on their faces all the time, and sleeping on their faces as well; and to the eyelids of their eyes, you place moist compressions that have already been infused with inflammation, and imminence of infection is evident in the eye; and when you press the area with your thumbs, you feel the infection going inside.
A certain surgical method is applied to the patient when he or she tilts their head towards you and covers it with a cloth, and you place cold water on it and make a circle according to the size that contains arsenic from all parts, then you place this over that and press with your thumbs all around so that the infection is concentrated in the middle of the circle, and you make an incision in the middle of the moistness with a lancet penetrating through the fracture, and the fracture should not be larger than the one made during lancing.
But it is advisable that you cut the skin completely down to the infection, because in more serious cases, the infection spreads by fracture according to the shape of white chalk.
Therefore, remove it with cloths that you have wrapped around the affected areas and roll it between your right and left hands until it is separated.
And be careful not to close the fracture so that you don't push the pus out and make it worse.
But if you don't find pus at the beginning of the fracture, then close it with a small and easily removable stitch until the pus comes out; then remove it as I have said before; immerse cloths in warm water and place them on the area and press firmly with powders.
And also, apply salt and let it stand in the concavity of the fracture to draw out any remaining moisture.
And take care that it is healed.
But if there is an abscess in the location of a cauterized wound, then take care of it with caustic plasters until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
On methods of examining the eye.
When the eyelids of the eyes are naturally closed and become old, this should be examined by the eye, and various methods of treating diseases such as constant tearing, softening of the eyelids, and inflammation that may cause destruction of the eye, known as tactinir of the eye, should be treated in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with sharp medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization; or by tactinizing through incision and suturing; or by using canes as I will explain.
And so it is necessary that you tilt the patient's head towards you; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it turns, it is good; otherwise, insert a needle into the one in which there is no flesh behind the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through it, and this should be  near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs are absent  close to the skin, and pull the needle above the eyelid with the palm of your hand, and turn it outwards.
And make an incision in the inner corner of the eyelid where the hairs are absent, and make an incision from the larger lacrimal duct to the smaller lacrimal duct; then remove the needle and place small, powdered cotton or cloth under the eyelid, and apply pressure with a feather or something similar to the shape of a myrtle leaf.
But it should be shaped according to the swelling of the eyelid, because this is different in men, for some require that a large incision is made in the eyelid according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
And make an incision with the pus along the two lines that you have marked, starting from the larger lacrimal duct to the smaller lacrimal duct. And if your fracture is near the natural hairs, such as the thickness of a king's finger.
And place the onion in one of the corners of the skin, and excise it entirely; then suture the two lips with a stitch or thin thread, remove the blood, and attach whatever superfluous flesh remains over both eyebrows to some sticky substances, if you want to do this, otherwise, don't bother.
And remove the stitches of the flesh within three or four days and take care of it.
And if you want to leave the wound unsutured, take care of it with what dries and constricts, as the eyelid is alleviated by the sealing of the wound and its aggregation; but suturing is better, and therefore the ancients preferred it in this matter.
But it should be done with caution on the patient, and it is good practice, and there is no reason for fear.
And another method in tactinizing is to apply something like myrtle leaves on the eyelid and raise the eyelid with three separate and united stitches according to this shape:
If it is not possible to hold the fingers together, and they cannot be tied, then take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the figure (as shown in the diagram), and bring the other thread near the larger lacrimal, and the second one near the smaller lacrimal, adjusting them evenly with each other. Then lift your hand with an equal elevation, lift the whole bandage on which this is indicated, just as we have recommended.
Then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitching, and take care to heal that which is injured.
But if an abscess occurs, make your incision or cut, drain the abscess with a lance and apply heat.
Sometimes, the eyelid skin turns into the palpebra (eyelid), so you should use what I said about incision; but stitching is more artificial in some cases.
To loosen the jaw is done in this way: And it is that you convert the eyelid and cut the figure inside as I have described; and carefully create two thin rods or two thin wires whose length should be equal to the length of the eyelid, and their width should be narrower than the width of the spatula. You have already made incisions at each end of every partition, where you have the threads.
Then gather each partition with fine thread underneath the eyelid edge, and tie the rods of each partition tightly, and leave them like that for a few days, because the bandage due to the tightening will die, disintegrate, and eventually fall off on its own.
But if it takes too long, break the thread and take care of the wound until it is healed.
Therefore, when it is healed (solidada), the eyelid is raised, and the hairs do not touch it.
Here is the form of two rods you will make in this way: and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter XII.
For the removal of hairs growing in the eyelid with a needle when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are unnatural, hard, bristly, and irritate the eyelids, you should perform the operation by taking a fine needle, pausing on that soft and flexible thread, and ensuring that you adjust the ends precisely and gently in every movement. And the length of the threads should be equal to one palm.
Then create another fine thread alongside it quickly, and bind the ends of that one if you wish.
Place your hand on the patient's head in front of you, and make sure it is close to the sun so that your work can be clearly seen, as it is a subtle and minor operation.
Insert the needle into the appropriate point of the hair (requiring skill), and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid until you extract it from the skin naturally.
Pull out a few hairs and insert them in the paste (the paste being prepared for a plaster or salve).
Pull your hand back when the hair is removed from the eyelid with the paste.
If the paste is drawn out and not all the hair is removed from the eyelid, draw more paste from the mixture you have prepared until the paste from above is drawn out.
Watch it carefully, as when you remove the paste and the hair, you must crush the boil and let it drain, leaving the clot for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows fresh flesh over it.
If the hair is shorter, you should select a longer natural hair and raise it up, or let it grow until it reaches an appropriate space, and then lift it up.
Chapter XIII.
On the cure of this ecthyrosis that appears above the eyelid.
When ecthyrosis appears in the boil, and is a contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted above, on either the right or left side, due to poor consolidation of a plague or injury or burn, and it is called leporina, this ecthyrosis can be natural or accidental, caused by poor consolidation of a plague or injury or burn, or similar to their ill effects.
The method of the operation is to make an incision in the consolidation and separate the lips of it, place a piece of cloth in it, and tie them together until they heal.
And it is necessary that you use a cure for the causes which dry out, constrict; for if you do this, ecthyrosis will return even worse than before and there will be no time to heal.
Use a cure for the causes that soften, such as fenugreek, and wrap it in water in which it has been steeped along with its seeds, or gum tragacanth, which should be liquefied with one of the oils, and immerse the cloth in it, and heal with it.
The secret of your cure is to perform everything with all skill, not allowing any consolidation according to the initial form.
This operation that we have mentioned is not merely a correction of ecthyrosis but rather a restoration of the form of the place according to its original state.
Chapter XIV.
When ecthyrosis (a boil or cyst in the eyelid) occurs below the eyelid, it should be treated as follows: First, take a warm poultice and apply it to the affected area, leaving it on for three days. Afterward, make an incision over the inflamed part and remove all pus that is collected in the wound.
This ecthyrosis that occurs below the eyelid, which is called accurately ecthyrosis; and it can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental ecthyrosis is caused by a plague, injury, burn, or other similar factors.
The method of the operation is to take a double-threaded needle and insert it into the skin, making it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct until the thread reaches both ends of the skin.
Pull the skin up to the edges with the needle and sew it with the needle, and incise it deeply with a large scalpel. Therefore, if the shape of the eyelid returns as it should be, that is good; otherwise, take the edge and place it in the incised form, and turn the eyelid so that it covers the wound, and make two cuts along the lower eyelid.
The ends of the two cuts should be at two angles of the incision that you have made, and their meeting point should form an angle, such that when they come together, they should form the figure of their intersection.
This figure is the Greek letter Lambda ().
Pull out the skin to the amount that is the width of the sharp edge below it, so that the eyelid is open.
Then adjust the separated parts and sew them together with linen thread; and then care for those (wounds) with water that has been mentioned in the medications softening and hot compresses until they are healed.
If a cut, stitch, or cauterization is needed for a wound or incision, then you must make a clean incision along the skin of the eyelid as previously indicated. Then separate with hot compresses between two lips as was previously mentioned.
In conclusion, the sermon on the treatment of alxacrati, whether above or below, should follow in operation, as prepared according to the form of alxacrati, and that is in the shape of diverse dots.
The skillful craftsman always prepares an instrument in every possible way that is within his reach until he restores the figure to its natural form or as close to it as possible, and the patient according to the operation and tools in the best conditions.
Chapter XV.
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in men, especially when the eyelid is firmly adhered to the conjunctiva or cornea, and prohibited from easy movement and natural functions, then you must enter the outer margin of the eye below the eyelid, raise it up, or stretch it with oil.
Then you should cut through the adhesion with a fine instrument, which should not be sharp enough to cause pain during the operation, and leave a small opening so that the patient is not disturbed by it, and remove the instrument without damaging the eye or its sharpness.
And your incision should be as shallow as possible so that the eyelid is returned to its natural form and all adhesion is healed.
Then you should put salt water in the eye, which you rinse with, or distill it in a small earthen vessel dissolved in water.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with warm compresses, and place wool soaked in oil of hue on the eye, and apply the third day with consolidating substances until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the incision of a nail and excrescence of flesh around the tear duct.
Know that the nail can be of two types: one is nerve-like and similar to a hard, thin cipher; or it is not nerve-like, resembling congealed white moisture. When you touch it, it becomes swollen, and when it is pierced, it takes on oil, is removed, and the oil is not inserted into it.
And in both cases, they do not begin until the larger tear duct moves towards the smaller one, gradually covering vision and blocking light and movement of the eye.
However, the method of working in the incision of the eye is that the patient rests their head on your chest, and opens their eyes wide, raises the eyelid with your hand, collects the nail with oil-soaked cotton and stretches it towards the upper part. Then take a needle and insert it into the skin of a horse or cow or ox or similar, or strong iron, and double the tip of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the nail, and pierce it with the needle and remove the nail; stretch it towards the upper part and scrape the skin around the nail that surrounds the pupil. And thus you follow it with the skin towards the back of it.
Then you should incise the remaining part of the tear duct with a fine instrument or small scissors and remove the natural flesh of the tear duct so that there is no continuous flow of tears during the incision.
And at times the nail with only oil or iron, as previously mentioned, is stretched out or removed with a lion's wool, which has this shape:
And be careful not to touch the corneal tissue with the wool and ensure that there is a break in it, and that the pupil is pierced.
Make the incision in the eye a little bit of salt or crushed cedarwood and leave it for another day, then care for it with water that is necessary until it heals.
If the nail is not nerve-like and cannot be pierced with a needle or has become ingrown, it should be treated with this type of nail medicine and cured as such, as recommended in the division.
To cut it (the nail), you should open the palm of the patient and take a thin, sharp instrument with fine point according to this form: with finesse. And if it often becomes hardened and congealed and is used in that way, then distill from your own during the night in the head of a sinus or a skull or with salt crystals, and open the head the next day.
Then perform the operation on it until all that is from it has gone, unless the opposite abscess cautery is in the head, for then you should lance it, and treat the abscess at its beginning until it is healed.
Then perform the operation on it with reason until it is healed.
The emission of the lacrimal flesh, if it is found in the head by great injury, should be suspended with a string; and cut that one part through, and do not finish the incision to prevent tears from flowing out.
Then distill in the lacrimal skull of rosin and sinus until it is healed.
Capital 17.
On the incision of abscesses and what is born of flesh attached to the head.
In some heads, flesh grows red and is swollen over the eye, covering or approaching the pupil, or pressing strongly on the eyelids at the edges and forming a rosebud like a balustrade.
But the operation on it is that the patient lowers their head into your lap; and open the heads of that area and collect all that flesh with convenient strings or scissors, and hold it with a forceps or a cage; and incise the flesh at the beginning to the end with the scalpel, keeping away from the head so as not to injure yourself in your operation.
And the incision should be either with the scalpel that we have recommended for nail incision, or with small scissors with which you collect the ash according to the form of this chapter.
Therefore, when your incision is complete and all the flesh has gone, fill the head with salt crystals, or distill in it red powder similar to that of corrosive medicines, and wait over the head at a safe distance with albumen of egg until the abscess cavity is secured.
And if there remains some cause of abscesses and the abscess cavity is full of pus, and you fear an abscess cavity, you should lance the head and treat that abscess with something that drains the abscess, then perform the operation on it until it is healed, and similarly in the flesh attached to the head of this type.
But you must ensure that all healing of the skull is by natural or accidental means, work with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member has suffered from this operation.
Capital 18.
On the collection of sand in the head.
Sand is red and hard on the head and prohibits clothing from operating there, and you should dissect the head for several days.
Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the head in which there is sand is strong and there is not another illness than sand, and collect that sand.
And command the patient to lower their head into your lap, and suspend those veins with a string or two according to your discretion; and that string should be of double finesse as follows:
or two strings gradually in one body like this:
And those veins should be collected with fine forceps, with finesse, and the blood should be drawn from time to time, until you see that the veins have gone out of the head and are relaxed.
And keep away from the head with the tip of the instrument; and if your operation is before midday, and you are firm in your operation, do not incise except those veins.
And when you have completed it, then distill in the head green or red powder to dissolve what remains of the sand.
But if that is not possible for you to collect everything at that time, you should fill it all with something that relieves the pain of it, and lance it for several days until the pain is alleviated and the abscess cavity is secured.
Approach it repeatedly until the matter heals.
Here is the shape of the forceps:
Here is the title for this section:
On reducing arteritis at the nose.
When you treat arteritis with cautery or acute medicine as previously mentioned and it does not heal, then do not be deceived by it but instead make an incision over the boil to mature it, and extract all the humidity that is inside it and reveal the bone.
And when the bone has been revealed and it appears corrupt or blackened, you remove it with a tool of this shape:
It is called a sharp head, made of hard iron and the head should be round like an asher, which is pierced with small holes by grinding or fine sharpening (such as shown in the following image).
Press that tool onto the corrupt part of the bone and hold it between your thumb and index finger, pressing gently until you know that the corruption has been removed.
Make several observations, and then restore the area with drying and stiffening agents.
If the area is consolidated and good tissue grows back, separates the corpse from the wound and leave it for forty days without renewing or forming a boil or infection, then you know that it has healed.
If not, then do not be deceived but reduce the incision to the shape of the nose and follow this procedure: when you discover bone or use acute medicine, once the bone is revealed, you take a piece of bone as follows:
The edge of the bone should be trimmed triangularly, and the shaft should be first extended to the tip as often as necessary.
Press that tool onto the bone, specifically on the lacrimal bone; extend your hand a little farther up the nose, and press with your thumb against the bone until it penetrates completely through the bone, and the patient will feel relief when you release your thumb.
Then restore the area with drying and stiffening agents as previously instructed.
Once the tissue and area are hardened, the fluid that escaped from the sides returns to the nose, which is more difficult for the patient.
Title of the next section: Capitol .xx.
On reducing the swelling of the nose.
When the nose swells completely and no damage or shrinkage occurs, it is necessary to loosen the patient, apply gentle pressure on the nose with warm compresses and good sucking; and apply liniment to the nose made of opium, aloe, honey and castor oil, and strengthen the emollient on the nose with powder.
The method of powders is to take lion's wool and fold each piece into four layers, then grind it into powder.
Then place them one over the other according to the quantity that each one has need of. Then apply a strong and firm dressing; and pump the plasters with juice without cutting; and remove the plasters and allow the wound to heal by itself during the day and night.
But if in the meantime the ligament becomes softened, then it must be tightened.
Then remove the dressing during the day and night as previously stated.
If the wound has already healed, well done; otherwise, apply the dressing with powders and tightening and poultices until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the incision of the elevation of the tunica uvea.
When there is a disruption in the tunica uvea and it becomes prominent, proceed outside the eyelids as with a grain of sand, and shape it like a man's form using that, and if you want to incise it, the operation is as follows: enter the needle into the razor-cut part of the uvea from the lower side to the upper, and place another needle at the lacrimal duct's channel, and make it penetrate, and let the first needle go according to its position; then incise the location of the double needlehole and lift up the uvea's part around the needle's circumference, and tighten that area.
Then remove the needle and place it on the wool infused in the egg white and let the thread come out with the yolk.
Then treat the wound with something that comforts it until the plague is healed.
Sometimes apply a piece of cloth around the entire wound with a circle, and then perforate it with a subtle spatula that penetrates the wound to the skin, and let the white fluid run out, and lower the wound and bring it inside immediately.
Then tighten until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the cure of eyelids.
This illness called alconati is not simply water accumulating in the eye, but something else.
But the method of treating it is to place the patient on the couch with his head in your hands and lift up one eyelid to see if the water comes out at the lower part, and let it dry, not descend, and keep the light, and allow the patient to see the cause as he used to.
If it does not descend, know that it is water.
But if the descent of water is not prepared with what has been said, then place the patient between your hands and take a subtle spatula and fan it over the conjunctiva and cornea's junction at the corona (in the area to be seen), until the water is removed.
Therefore, when the water is removed, you should distill in the eye the water left over, into which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fennel and honey.
Treat it with other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
When the water descends from the eye.
We have already said what types of water there are in the division and which one should be pierced with a needle, do it accordingly.
It is necessary that you place the patient between your hands on a couch and gently lift his eyelid, tightening it.
Then place your hand near the eyelid of the eye from which the water is coming, on the left side if the eye with the water is the left eye; or on the right side if the eye with the water is the right one.
Then take your right hand if it is on the left side of the patient, or your left hand if it is on the right side.
Then bring the thumb near to the crown of the head, close to the corner of the eye on the side of the smaller tear duct, and then rub it with medicine and roll your hand around it.
Then penetrate the tear duct and feel if the thumb has reached its target due to your pressure.
The measurement of the distance from the thumb to the tip should be the same as the width of the tear duct, which is from the pupil to the end of the black part, and that's the crown of the eye; for you will see the pupil with the sight of the eye through the clarity of the cornea.
Then insert the thumb into the tear duct and push it down gently once or twice until the water comes out. If the water comes out quickly, the patient will have watery eyes immediately and the thumb will be in their eye.
Then wait for a moment; if the water has come out, you should pause and wait further until the thumb is not inserted.
If the eye is still dry and no water comes out, you should gently remove the thumb, rotate your hand slightly around the eye, and apply a small amount of clear salt crystals dissolved in water to wash the inside of the eye; and then cover the eye with cotton or stopper or infused linen soaked in rose oil, honey, and milk.
However, we of our time apply a poultice made with honey to the affected area.
If you find it difficult to insert the thumb into the eye due to its toughness (for some men have a hard eye), then it is necessary for you to take the spatula, which is called alberid, and this is its shape:
Therefore, pierce that juncture with the spatula and do not injure your hand in doing so, and make sure to avoid damaging the eye with your thumb.
Insert the thumb as previously described.
You must complete the procedure by preparing a comfortable sleeping place for the patient in a dark room where they sleep on their back. It is also necessary to prohibit any movement.
Pause in nature to ensure that it is smooth for the patient and do not move their head to the right or left.
Keep the bandage as previously arranged for at least three days.
Then remove the bandage in that dark room and expose the wound to fresh air, let them see certain causes, and return the bandage on the seventh day.
It is not necessary to perform this procedure during the hours of treatment or immediately after infusion. Since it is necessary for you to avoid this because water can easily leak out due to excessive and vigorous blinking.
If the abscess is cauterized, you should remove the bandage on the seventh day and apply a remedy that dissolves the abscess.
Remove the bandage from the patient's face and leave their eyes uncovered, and keep them lying down in a dark room for several days.
Have it gradually moved gently and speak to him about his condition.
Know that a disciple is not excused from seeing certain sights, and if you are brave, then perform the operation.
It has been reported to us that one of those who were in the Artaxata region said he made a fire with his thumb, piercing it through the eye and causing water to come out.
However, we have not seen it done in our land nor have we read of anyone who has performed this procedure in the ancient books; and it is possible that it is new.
And these are the forms of thumbing procedures for those who do not know them:
They can be made of earth or iron specifically, and their extensions are triangular in shape with sharp points similar to this one.
Chapter XXIV.
From the treatment of flesh, nothing in the nose.
When various fleshy growths are born in the nose, one of which is related to scorpion-like motility of heavy legs or polyps resembling that foot representation; and this disease is called polypus. And if there is cancerous flesh, callused, of dark color; and it is called lion's flesh when it is not dark colored.
Therefore, in that which is not fraudulent or cancerous lion's flesh, you must make the patient lie down with his chest facing up, open his mouth wide, and pick it with your thumb where those fleshes are. And then remove that to the incision of the skin on one side, and then make a narrow incision with a sharp thin scalpel from the incision where you know all the flesh has been removed; if it remains due to some reason, then cut it with one of the fine instruments until there is no more reason for it. But if it is a wound or an abscessed boil, you should stop there; or if it is malignant boils, you should cut and cauterize it until it is completely removed.
And apply heat to the nose near the incision with vinegar or water. But if the nose is open and moisture is introduced into the back of the throat, you should know that it is healed.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that there is no flesh inside the nose in the sinuses or bones of the nostrils that have not undergone abscessing.
Therefore, you must insert a fine probe into the nostril where there is any swelling, and apply pressure with your fingers, counting the number of nutmegs or grains of rice, and then anesthetize the patient and introduce one end of the probe into the nostril with the ray or another method that is available.
And after that, draw the odorant towards the channels of the nostrils, and let it be excreted on the forehead, for many watched children in schools resemble this action, and it is an easy cause for those who want to do it.
And then stop the two ends of the probe, one end that protrudes from the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and administer a stitch for the meat with the nuts that are on the probe, and do it until you know that the flesh is attached to the nut on the probe.
And then remove the probe, and stop in the nose near the drainage of pus a small cloth, and do it for three days or more until the ulcerated matter is removed from the fleshes.
And at the end of the cause, place a lead cannula in the nose for several days until it is healed.
If it's a matter of healing, use it.
And this is the shape of the suction device used for purging, with which oils and medications are distilled into the nose:
Use either silver or ivory, something similar to a small lamp with an open top, like a small cup, and the inside hollow as well.
And if you wish to use a closed cannula similar to a syringe, make sure the cannula of the suction device is flat and open; it should have a handle at its end, with which you can hold it when you are suctioning oils or juices from the affected area.
Chapter 25.
About the teeth in the external parts of the nose.
Moths often have teeth in the external parts of the nose, and it is emphasized and explained in some days before the law regarding their treatment takes effect.
And for this reason, you must inspect it at the beginning of its appearance and treat the entire thing. Place your hand over the area or use caution or medicine that burns, which is located there.
If its inspection is delayed until it becomes noticeable, then consider whether it has been calcified, hard, of dark color and with little sensation, in which case do not touch it with iron, for moths often lay eggs at this calcified abscess and cause great harm to the person who touches them.
And if the abscess is touchable and not dark-colored, and its inspection is possible in all cases, then evacuate the sick person, inspect it without fear, and treat the area with whatever is available and confine it until it is healed.
Chapter 26.
About the suture of the nose, lips, and ear when continuity is dissolved by a wound or something similar.
Know that when the continuity is dissolved in one of these cartilages, it is not advisable to perform this operation except in certain men.
Therefore, when you treat any cause of these, consider whether the wound is fresh with its own blood, and if so, adjust the two lips of the wound with stitching, and cover it until it is healed.
And if the lips of continuity dissolution are already separated and each one is healthy, then it is necessary that you cut each part of its cord as far as bleeding occurs. Then adjust the two lips with stitching and tighten them, sprinkle powdered dragon's blood on top of it, spread a dressing of emplastic diaphinicon or another consolidating plaster over the powder, leave it for two or three days, then remove it and replace it with a new one and continue to treat it until the wounds are healed by themselves, and apply an oral remedy until it is healed.
The method of suture is to add the dissolution of continuity or with needles as in abdominal suturing, or to add the dissolution of continuity with thread as you have learned.
Chapter 27.
About the extraction of those causes that appear in the two lips on the inside cuts.
Moths often lay eggs in the inside cuts of men's lips where hard abscesses similar to tumors occur, and some are mild and others are severe.
Therefore it is necessary that you cut and open all those hard calluses on every part, and fill the abscess with soft sterilized linen until the bleeding stops, and wash it with warm water and heal the wound with a remedy that promotes healing, until it is healed.
The number xxviii refers to chapter 28 in a book or treatise. In Roman numerals, it would be written as XXVIII.
On the incision of the attached flesh in the gums. This sentence is in Spanish and translates to "On the Incision of Attached Flesh in the Gums" in English. The original text was discussing surgical procedures, as indicated by the use of medical terms such as "incision" and "gums".
Daily observation should be made of the attached flesh in the gums, which were formerly called albulus. Therefore it is necessary that you suspend it with a probe or hold it with forceps and incise it properly, and let the blood flow or the saliva drain. This sentence continues the discussion about surgical procedures on the gums, specifically discussing the need for daily observation and the proper methods for making an incision.
Then apply a dressing to the sutured wound or other styptic powder or cauterizing agent. This sentence suggests that after making an incision in the gum, it is necessary to apply a dressing or some type of styptic (blood-stopping) powder or cauterizing agent to the wound to stop any bleeding and promote healing. The word "stipticas" refers to blood-stopping agents, while "excicativas" may refer to surgical cauteries used to burn or cauterize tissue. This continues the discussion about the proper methods for performing a surgical procedure on the gums.
If that flesh returns, then incise it again and cauterize it, because the cautery will not return. This sentence suggests that if the attached tissue in the gums does not respond to the initial treatment (such as incision and application of a styptic agent), it may be necessary to repeat the procedure or apply additional treatments such as cauterization. The caution about the cautery not returning indicates that the process of cauterizing the tissue is intended to be permanent, preventing the gum from growing back in the same area. This continues the discussion about surgical procedures on the gums and possible complications that may arise.
Capitol .xxix refers to chapter 29 in a book or treatise. In Roman numerals, it would be written as XXIX.
On the reason for tooth extraction. This sentence suggests that the text is discussing the reasons why a tooth may need to be extracted, such as severe decay, infection, or crowding. The word "dentz" is an archaic form of the Spanish word for teeth, "dientes". This continues the discussion about dental surgery, which was one of the main topics in the original medieval medical text.
When the surfaces of the teeth on both sides of the root and those in the foramen (a cavity in the jawbone) are rough, hard, sharp, and sometimes darken and decay, they may become inflamed or infected and form cavities that rot the gum, eventually causing the tooth to decay. This sentence continues the discussion about dental surgery by describing the potential problems that can arise when teeth have rough or damaged surfaces, including decay and infection. The use of medical terminology such as "foro" (cavity in the jawbone) and "gingiva" (gum) indicates that this is a treatise on medieval medicine.
And therefore it is necessary that you hold the patient firmly between your hands and support their head on your lap, extract the teeth in which the roughness and causes similar to sand appear, leaving no cause remaining, and remove the decay and discoloration and other impurities until they are cleaned. This sentence provides instructions for performing a tooth extraction, advising the practitioner to hold the patient firmly to prevent them from moving during the procedure and to carefully extract any affected teeth while avoiding damage to healthy tissue. The use of medical terminology such as "negror" (decay) and "citrinitat" (discoloration) indicates that this is a treatise on medieval medicine.
If the reason for the extraction remains at its beginning, it is good; if not, you should continue the extraction on another day and the second and third days until it reaches the desired result on the fourth day. This sentence suggests that a tooth extraction may need to be repeated over multiple days in order to completely remove the affected tissue and prevent any remaining infection or decay. The use of medical terminology such as "razio" (reason) indicates that this is a treatise on medieval medicine.
You should know that teeth have various types of movable forceps with different shapes depending on the nature of your operation. This sentence suggests that there are different types and shapes of forceps used for tooth extractions, depending on the specific situation and type of tooth being extracted. The use of medical terminology such as "rezoris" (forceps) indicates that this is a treatise on medieval medicine. Because the forceps used to extract teeth from the root are different from those used for removal between the teeth in other ways and have various shapes depending on the nature of the operation, you should prepare the types of forceps that you will see soon:
Capitol .xxx refers to chapter 30 in a book or treatise. In Roman numerals, it would be written as XXX. This suggests that this is the beginning of a new section or topic in the treatise. The previous sections have focused on dental surgery, but it is not clear what the next section will cover based solely on the chapter number.
On the extraction of teeth. This suggests that the next section of the treatise will focus on tooth extractions and possibly provide more detailed instructions or information about this procedure. The use of medical terminology such as "d'eradicacio" (extraction) indicates that this is a treatise on medieval medicine.
It is necessary to care for the tooth of its pain with every caution and to delay in all extraction of it, because there is no reason to replace the observation of it when it is extracted, because it is a substance that rises during the extraction of it. This sentence suggests that tooth extractions should be performed carefully and cautiously, as there may be complications or risks involved in the procedure. The use of medical terminology such as "eradicacio" (extraction) indicates that this is a treatise on medieval medicine. It also indicates that the author believes that it is important to observe the tooth during extraction in order to identify any potential problems or complications.
However, when the patient is certain that the painful tooth must be extracted, you must definitely be sure which tooth is causing the pain, because many times the pain deceives the patient and they believe it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth has been extracted, as we have seen through barber surgery. This sentence suggests that it is important to accurately identify the source of tooth pain before performing an extraction, as there may be instances where the patient incorrectly identifies the affected tooth. The use of medical terminology such as "barbies" (barbers) indicates that this is a treatise on medieval medicine, as barbers often performed basic surgical procedures in addition to their traditional duties of shaving and haircutting.
Therefore, since you must be certain which tooth is causing the pain and know this with certainty, it is necessary that you scratch around the tooth with spittle in which there may be some virtue, until it dissolves the tooth from the gum on all sides, and then take hold of it with your fingers or with delicate forceps, gradually pulling it out as it becomes looser. This sentence provides further instructions for performing a tooth extraction, advising the practitioner to use spittle (saliva) to help loosen the tooth before attempting to extract it. The use of medical terminology such as "gingiva" (gum) and "forfexs" (forceps) indicates that this is a treatise on medieval medicine.
Approach the mouth of the patient carefully, holding large tongs for good communication or structure, and place the patient's head between your thumb and index finger gently so as not to injure it, and approach the tooth correctly in a manner that neither breaks it nor causes more pain to the patient.
Therefore, if not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place it all around the area with ease and effort to remove it as was done at the beginning.
However, if the tooth is fractured or corroded, you must bind a cloth around the fracture and tighten it at the end of the root to prevent it from being crushed during your compression on it with tongs.
You must work carefully with incision around the entire area of the gum and be careful not to break it and leave it split, but rather return over the patient to alleviate the pain that is greater than the initial pain.
Be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers often do in their surgery and recklessness during tooth removal, since they do not administer what has been recommended; for many times they bring upon men painful diseases which are difficult to treat, and the roots of those teeth remain rotten, or all of the roots rot away, or that tooth is extracted with some bone from the jaw as many times has been testified.
Then wash the mouth with warm water or salt water before the tooth removal.
If bleeding occurs during this process, as has been observed many times, take some vinegar and sprinkle it on the wound, and if the vinegar does not stop the bleeding, cauterize it.
The shape of the forceps and tongs with which the tooth is initially held should be long in the handle, short in the jaws, and thick, to prevent them from bending when working.
They should be so that the thick handle does not bend when they are tightened at their ends, and the jaws should be short.
They should be made of good quality Indian iron, and the jaws of those tongs should fit tightly together with a firm grip, and in some cases the shape of their ends is that of a stork's beak (called ciconia), which has a strong grip.
Chapter XXXI.
On tooth extraction and bone fracture removal from the jaw.
When you need to extract a tooth that is fractured, it is necessary to wait for the area to become soft for one or two days; then approach gently with tweezers whose ends are shaped like a stork's beak (called ciconia or guanta) and hold the forceps.
The ends of those tweezers are made concave, like a file or an alfajal (a type of dental instrument).
If you do not obey these instructions regarding the use of forceps or tweezers, it is necessary that you be careful with the root and remove all the tissue around it and insert a small instrument called an atali (small lever) whose shape is as follows:
It should have a short thick handle and not be bent to prevent it from breaking.
Therefore, if the root is lost, it is good; but if not, help yourself with these other instruments whose shapes are as follows: The shape of the first instrument is a triangle with some thickness in the handle.
The second instrument's shape is also a triangle but with a very thin handle.
Now you are helped by this instrument, which has two arms and the shape as follows: and other instruments that I will mention for dental care; because this instrument is also useful, which resembles an elephant's tusk, and its shape is as follows:
It has a twisted or short triangular handle with some thickness and should not be bent to prevent it from breaking.
And you must know that the tools for teeth are made of bone and similar to other tools.
Wise and skillful artificers, by themselves understand the operation and various diseases; for they are diseases about which the ancients did not know or use specific instruments, due to the forms of diverse species.
If the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth is fractured, or powdered, then place a weight on it in its place with whatever is appropriate for the instrument and forceps mentioned during tooth extraction, and follow the steps of the person skilled in this procedure. Here follows the method:
Let the meat be gradually reduced in size, and keep it closed with the mouth so that it does not dry out or escape before the bone is completely healed; and then restore the area with appropriate medications.
If there is a small hole in the bone, then remove that piece of bone and its blackness, and heal it until it is healed.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of prominent teeth compared to others.
When teeth are prominent due to their natural shape and especially when they grow in women and the pious, it is necessary to consider: if one tooth is not close enough to another tooth and cannot be sutured or treated with liniment, then extract that tooth; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, which has a shape similar to a pig's tooth, made of sharp Indian iron.
Make the incision with which you will cut the tooth in small daily portions due to its hardness and avoid cutting other teeth.
And if the prominent tooth is worn down by grinding, then grind it with an Indian iron file of this shape:
The entire file should be made of Indian iron and the edge should be sharp; it should have small pointed teeth like a drill bit with which the tooth can be ground down gently in small daily portions to avoid damaging other teeth. Then straighten that end and remove it with another razor.
If the tooth has been broken off and the tongue is injured, it is necessary to smooth out that part until the sharp edge is removed and sealed, so that the tongue does not become inflamed or the speech is affected.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the repair of damaged teeth with gold or silver wire.
When a tooth is knocked out by striking or hunting and the patient cannot bear to eat, and you have treated it with medicinal poultices but your treatment has not been effective, then fill in those that are strengthened with gold wire and not silver, because silver becomes soft and can be dissolved again within a few days, while gold does not change over time.
The wire should be as thin and thick as the space between the teeth can allow; the shape of the repair is to take the wire and place double the length between two healthy teeth, then let the wire grow twisted between two damaged teeth, or one or several, until it reaches the healthy tooth on the opposite side. Apply the tissue repair to the damaged area and strengthen your hand with ease and skill until it is healed.
Your stitching should be tight enough to keep the gold or silver wire in place between the teeth without coming loose.
Cut the excess wire with forceps or scissors and insert it in each place as necessary, then bend and hide those areas between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth to avoid injuring the tongue. Approach that narrow vessel as if it were a rope (or string).
If it is unraveled or broken, tie it or them together in such a way that it remains (or they remain) joined at all times.
This is the shape of teeth and the positioning of the alignment of two healthy teeth and two unhealthy teeth, like this:
When returning one tooth or two to their respective cavities, they should be repositioned in such a way that they grow back and heal properly.
Only skilled and wise individuals should do this.
In some cases, cow bone can be used as a replacement for teeth and shaped like a tooth, placed in the place where the tooth is missing, tied together as mentioned before, and remains useful for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the incision of the ligament that is found in the tongue and the prohibition of speaking.
This ligament that is found behind the tongue sometimes or naturally belongs to one person, or it may be accidental and occur due to an injury that has already healed.
The procedure involves opening the mouth of the patient, exposing their head within your hands; elevate their tongue and make an incision in the ligament nerve according to the length that is needed for the tongue to be completely free from its root.
But if there is any hardness or stiffness and it is due to consolidated injury, then you throw vinegar on it and cut through the ligament to the length that you have incised it, removing the stiffness.
Be careful not to make a cut or fissure in the flesh of the incision and that you do not cut through the arch, causing bleeding.
Then wash the remnants of the incision with water, vinegar or cold water, and let the tongue rest for a short time; this is a mucus that the patient should not keep their tongue in every night to prevent further injury.
But if bleeding occurs, press a piece of wool soaked in vinegar over the area; but if the bleeding continues, then cauterize the area with a light cautery that is suitable for this purpose. Then treat the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
Extraction of a ranula from under the tongue.
Some swellings occur under the tongue, resembling a pimple that hinders its normal operation; and it is better to treat it while it is still small.
And the procedure for this involves opening the patient's mouth wide in front of the sun and considering the swelling.
If you see one that is dark or black, hard, and which the patient does not feel any sensation from, then do not touch it because it is cancerous.
If it is white and contains moisture, then you put vinegar on it, and cut into it with a subtle spatula, and cut it off from all sides; and if blood comes out during the operation, pause over it with a cloth soaked in vinegar until the bleeding stops.
Then return to your work until you have dealt with it completely, until it is washed with vinegar and salt; and take care of it with other treatments until it is healed.
Chapter 36.
On the extraction of a pimple on both ears and that which is not in the ear canal, and other pimples.
When a pimple forms in the ear canal, they are glands that resemble boils; these occur outside and are commonly called "two ears," which if you treat with what has been said in the division and it is not healed, then consider if the pimple is hard, dark colored, with little sensation, then do not touch it with an iron.
And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with an iron because of the flow of blood; leave it alone until it ripens, and then either remove it or let it break by itself.
And if it is white, round, and the root of it is subtle, then that one should be cut out.
And the procedure for this involves considering whether the pimple has already rested after being cauterized or if it has diminished in some way; then make the patient lie down facing the sun, and hold their head with your hand, open their mouth, and the servant should grasp their tongue from below with a noble instrument of this form:
It should be made of silver or iron and be as thin as a knife.
Then as you press the tongue and show the pimple to you, cut it with your instrument over that, then take vinegar and apply it to the opening, and pull it out from all sides as much as possible. Another thing that you pull out is caused by the membranes, and then cut it with an instrument of this form:
Another thing that you pull out is caused by the membranes, and then cut it with an instrument of this form: and is similar to forceps, but the ends of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one is opposite the other, very sharp, which should be made of iron and then polished.
However, if this instrument is not available to you, then cut it with a spatula of this shape: It should be sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
And after you have cut one, cut the other according to this method of cutting, and then have the patient rinse their mouth with warm water.
However, if bleeding occurs, rinse with a decoction of common sorrel or myrtle leaves similar to that for stopping bleeding until the bleeding stops, and then take care of it until it is healed.
Sometimes other pimples appear in the ear besides those two ears, and cut them as I have said in the cutting of two boils.
I have treated a woman with a pimple that was born in the ear of hers, which pimple was dark in color, with little sensation, which had closed the ear of hers, and the woman breathed with difficulty, and she had been prohibited from eating or drinking water, and was near death if it lasted for one or two days more.
The pimple had grown so much that it burst through two tracts within three months.
Therefore, I will treat it surgically and place the vinegar in one of them, and remove that one, and take out a large piece from there, and then I will cut the other tract from where I can see it, and hold open the mouth of hers, and compress her tongue, and I will place the vinegar in that pimple.
And I took out a large piece from it, but there was only a little blood flowing from it. Therefore, the woman's ear was completely healed, and she began to drink water immediately, and I prescribed food, so I did not continue to cut that pimple for a long time, and another pimple appeared in its place, which I treated until it had subsided.
Therefore, I put oil and cauterize the woman's ear, so it was completely healed; and I continued to walk around and did not know what God had done for me.
Chapter 37.
On the cutting of a bladder when it becomes pimply.
When catarr appears in the nasal cavity and is thick and long, it is named perpendicular; and if it is in the posterior region, large and round, it is called a boil.
When the wound that we have spoken of in the division heals, and it does not conform to your treatment, and sometimes even cautery has already been applied and is still present and thin, you must incise what has grown round; if it is along that length, and is bleeding, of dark or black color, and it is not draining properly, you must be careful with the incision, as there is fear for the patient.
And when you see it as I have said of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient lie down and press his tongue with an instrument for shaping it and place the spoon on the new one, and pull it out and incise it with one of two instruments that are called scissors in incising the two sides.
It is necessary not to incise it unless it is adjusted according to the natural term, for if you incise more of it, you harm his speech.
And during the incision, use what we have recommended for the incision of two sides, and care for it until it is healed.
But if the patient is afraid of the incision, it is necessary to use an instrument in the cauterization without fear, and the method of the cautery in him is not with anything other than sharp water, and you should hold his head in your lap, press his tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned, and take a small amount of the water that was said in the chapter on cauterization, and heat it to a live state, and stop it from thickening or thinning, and fill the concavity of the instrument with this shape:
Let the outside of the concavity in which the medicine is placed be like the concavity of a spoon and let the instrument with the medicine rest on the tongue, and let the patient yawn over his throat so that saliva or mucus from his mouth may pass through the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not cause any harm to the wound of him and burn it.
And place your hand with the medicine and press it on the tongue for a long time until you see it become darkened and numb from the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take a piece of cotton and wrap it around the end of the ray, submerge the cotton in the medicine, insert the ray into the cotton in a canula so that the cotton adheres to the canula, and do this as many times as necessary until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and leave it for about three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and cauterize the area around the uvula with a cotton swab dipped in antiseptic solution, clean with that what is in the area of the medicine, wash with warm water, and cure outside with ointment, and internally with lozenges until it is healed.
And this type of treatment is safer than incision and longer lasting.
Sometimes the uvula is healed with what is more subtle than cauterization and incision, as it is cured by subfumigation in this way: take calmly, hyssop, origan, rue, scilla, camomile, crushed plants similar to those of the herbs, and arrange all these causes or some of them in a bowl, submerge them with vinegar, boil; let the water be well strained, and place a stopper at the bottom of the bowl over which an instrument is placed, concave in shape, made of silver or iron.
Place the end in the mouth of the patient until the steam reaches the uvula through the instrument, until the uvula is well obscured.
And repeat this treatment as many times as necessary until it is dry, and be careful not to apply this treatment at the onset of an abscess, for it would overheat the abscess, and you should not do this, but rather make a surgical incision of the abscess.
But if you do not have this instrument, take a cane and make a hole in the end of it to enclose oil, so that the patient's mouth is narrowed, as the closure of oil prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the extraction of spines and what adheres to the wound, and other causes.
Sometimes things adhere to the wound or a thorn from the foot or another cause.
Therefore, you must extract what is obvious from those things, looking carefully at it, as you press the tongue with an instrument to reveal what is in the mouth.
And what is not obvious and is concealed in the mouth, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, as powerful acids from the stomach will release the cause that adheres to the wound; or you may give him a piece of soap or salted fish or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, and push it forcefully against the teeth, and make the patient swallow it, as when it reaches the location where the thorns are, they will be expelled. Take a live eel and tie it securely, put it inside a dish, then extract it slowly; or take a pig's bladder and place it in the mouth, then draw it out slowly.
If those causes mentioned above are not forgotten, then use an instrument made of lead in the following manner:
Let it be either large or small, but at its end there should be a cavity which you insert into its mouth with ease.
Lift its head upward, and be careful that the tip of its bone touches the cavity, to ensure it fits well with the bone or the spine, or that the doctor holds it with his hand.
Nevertheless, it is better that the patient inserts it himself, because of his knowledge of the location of the adjacent cause and peels it off from below, and pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all according to the quantity prepared before forgetting.
Chapter thirty-nine.
On the extraction of pus attached to the throat.
When the pus in the throat is treated with the medicines mentioned in the division of cure and does not improve, consider placing it on the tongue of the patient alone, since you have recommended an instrument for this purpose.
Therefore, if you see pus, extract it with a small tool or gentle instruments as appropriate.
And if it is not possible for you to extract it, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the patient, and place a hot iron in the concavity of the cannula. Repeat this process as many times (until the pus has died off and come out from the throat) and keep the patient away from water for the entire day.
Place a syringe filled with water near the patient's mouth, open its mouth with it, wash the mouth with it; do not allow any cause to interfere and discard the water after an hour with your hand, because the pus immediately feels the water.
However, if the remedy mentioned above is not forgotten, then fumigate the patient with cumin or asafoetida using the instrument recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Do it, and be careful that it falls. (This is a general command, not related to any specific treatment.)
Another method of operation in fumigation is to take a bowl containing ignited charcoal and cover it with a lid with a hole in the middle, and place the tip of the instrument through the hole. Then hold the patient's mouth near the bowl, and have the patient open their mouth over the end of the cannula, and close the patient's mouth so that the fumigation is not forgotten until you know that the fumigation has reached the pus, because the pus will immediately fall.
And if it doesn't fall, repeat the fumigation multiple times, and keep the patient from drinking, eat salty foods and garlic, and do not drink water, and thus this regimen should be forgotten.
This is the shape of the instrument used to treat throat pus when it is visible; and it resembles forceps in some ways, but there is a certain curve. The instrument should be flat against the throat, and its end resembles the beak of a stork, which is concave, so that when any cause is compressed, it does not slip away.
Chapter forty.
In which is the conclusion of the sermon on the opening and treatment of abscesses.
Abscesses are various species, with various methods, as remembered from their description in this book.
And they are divided into two categories based on the perforation and treatment of them through two methods: one is for the species of abscesses in themselves, and this method addresses the moisture that accumulates in them.
And the second method is for the locations in which accidents of the body occur, because an abscess that occurs in the head is different from an abscess that occurs in the anus; and an abscess in a meaty location is different from an abscess in a joint. Each of them has its own treatment method through surgery.
However, some abscesses should not be perforated unless the healing of the wound has occurred in them or they have been completed.
Some abscesses should be drained when they become hard, and not allowed to heal according to their completion, such as abscesses near joints, because an abscess that is located near a joint will last until the surrounding tissue is purified, and the ligaments or nerves of that joint are damaged, causing contraction of the affected limb; or it is an abscess associated with a major member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it matures, it may affect the main member; or it is located in the anus, so do not drain it unless it has not matured. Do not cut into a hard abscess before completing the digestion, but only drain that associated with the anus, because you can avoid opening it and prolonging it to the fissures inside the anus, creating a fistula or making it incomplete in its term, and it will not heal. It should read: "However, you must know the time of the abscess's rupture, and that is when it has matured."
"And you should know that it is matured when the pain subsides and fever ceases, and there is a decrease in redness and pulse, an increase in the abscess head's sharpness, and other signs."
"And you must know that the rupture should be made in a place lower than the abscess, and allow the pus to drain from the healing of the prominence."
"The rupture should be performed along the length of the flesh or body if the abscesses are in the buttocks or feet, and in places like tendons, ligaments, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all other areas where there is no reflection; because in reflected areas, use the rupture according to that member."
"However, if the abscess is in fleshy areas, it is better to delay the rupture until digestion of the pus has been confirmed as complete, as mentioned; because if you perform the rupture before that, it prolongs the course of the purulent discharge and makes the edges of the abscess hardened and deep."
"However, some abscesses should be ruptured according to the depth of the flesh or body depending on necessity, or according to which member requires it."
"And you must administer small ruptures, and large and wide or many small incisions according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses."
"And others are abscesses in which the cavity should be hollowed out and incised when it is done so that bread and food can pass through, such as those that occur in piles and buboes."
"And those are the incised abscesses with three angles, and those are the ones that are incised as if in the form of a myrtle leaf, such as the abscesses of gout."
"And those are the ones to which round and crescent-shaped incisions are administered, resembling these."
"However, those that are not like superficial lion abscesses, must be ruptured with a superficial or flat incision."
"And when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, it should be ruptured but do not rush to extract all of the purulent matter at that time; having extracted a part, leave the abscess for another day, and extract a larger part later, and make small observations until it is healed."
"Moreover, if the patient is weak, a pregnant woman, a young child, or an elderly person in decline, because animal spirit dissolves with the exit of pus, and it makes the patient die, so be careful."
"Take great care with this chapter, and when you perform the incision for these abscesses, avoid any contagion and consider if the abscess pus is little, or it is a flat section; in that case, administer some of the lime or ancient remedy; but if the abscess is large, and the ruptures of the incision are many, then you must pause every now and then until they all heal together."
"And if a part of the abscess cavity is cut out or hollowed out in the perimeter, you must plug it with old lime or thread made from fabric, like when you stitch bread or razors, without moisture; and strengthen it for three days; and process it and care for it with the remedy for mouth sores until it heals."
"However, if bleeding occurs during your operation, you should administer warm water and wine in which a piece of fabric is steeped, and place it on the location of the bleeding, watching carefully."
"However, if the bleeding persists, you should administer treatment and care and apply the powders that I have recommended in various places of this book and section."
"However, if it is winter and the location of the abscess is near many nerves, you should apply powders in wine and warm oil, and leave them on those locations."
"And if it is summer and the locations are fleshy, you should leave powders soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, and all of that should be warm until the third day, as mentioned, and then you must lance the abscess and clean it and administer to its healing the appropriate remedy until it heals."
"And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of abscess treatment universally, but according to the distinction I have mentioned, I have discussed the treatment of each type of abscess separately in individual chapters."
"Chapter 40."
"On the incision of abscesses that appear in the skull."
"Small abscesses in the skull are of various types that contain tunic-like structures; and their types are many."
"And some are blisters, and from those that contain moisture similar to lime." And of those which contain moisture similar to powder and resemble them; and of those are the hard, stony ones.
And in the section and in the extraction of those, there should not be fear, as removing the outer casing of those does not oppose the archer's bow.
The procedure in the section of those is that you probe them with an instrument of a shape that resembles this one, which is called an intromesse, before you know what it contains.
If it contains moisture, then you shall cut it with section according to its length in the following surface manner:
And begin the section from the line of B to the line of G. Therefore, when the moisture is evacuated, you shall remove that part which contains it, and do not leave any cause at all, because many times it returns if there remains any cause.
And immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment if it is present, or else in water and salt; fill the wound with that and leave it for another day, because with that it will dissolve everything that has been destroyed from that skin layer.
And apply the Egyptian ointment over the wound secondly and thirdly if necessary, until you are confident that there is no more cause for that skin layer to be destroyed; then treat the wound with the ointment until it is healed.
And if an abscess contains fatty nodes, then you shall cut it in the following manner: With the section having the shape of a cross, make an incision between the two lips of the section and cut it through all parts, and exert your strength in the extraction of the tunica that contains it.
But if it opposes your bowstring, then do what I previously told you.
And do the same with the stony abscess in section and care as I previously told you; sectioning an abscess is easier, because it has little blood and little moisture.
Sometimes these abscesses are in the head of some men who do not have any moisture; this occurs because I made an incision on an abscess in the head of an old woman and the abscess was hard, rough, white, which could not be pressed, and if someone had touched it, they would be injured.
But in other abscesses that occur in the head, this is not the topic; for example, abscesses that come to the heads of children and you must lance the ears, but the section of all of these should be a surface section.
And halt the perforation of those from the lower parts of them, in order to alleviate the pain at the lower parts.
Then treat them with what is appropriate for their care.
Chapter 42.
On section of scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Many times these abscesses recur in the neck and the ears and the angles; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck are those that are generated between them, and every scrofula of these is filled with its own pouch, just as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we previously recommended.
And the types of these scrofulas are boils, because some are stony, and of those that contain moisture, and of those are the malignant ones that do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, in the one which you see with good disposition in the palpation, of which the color of that which is manifest is similar to the color of the skin, and it is harmful all over, and not attached to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the archer's bowstring, and not protruding, you should make an incision on the surface of the part above the body from the line of G to the line of B, and cut it through all parts, and separate the two lips of the skin with a knife or a boil knife if necessary, as we said in abscesses of the head, and remove it little by little.
And it is more caution that you do not make an incision into the vein or nerve.
And let the spatula not be sharp, that does not fit your hand in incision or disturb the patient, and do not make an incision where it is not necessary to incise; because if you make an incision into a vein or archer's bowstring and forbid yourself from your operation, you should stop the wound with vitriol ointment or other powders that cause blood flow, and tighten the wound, and leave it until the acuity of the abscess subsides and the abscess becomes softened and begins to break open. When the blood is separated.
Therefore, return to your operation when you have completed it.
And ask the patient if there is any cause of other small scrofulas, so that you can incise those and clean them.
And if the scrofula is being lanced due to a large vein, then you should be careful not to incise that scrofula from its lancing. Advance carefully, ensure the patient is lying flat and let that area fall naturally on its own without harm.
Then fill the ulcerated wound with old lard, and take care of it.
If you incise the entire scrofula (tuberculous nodule), then it is necessary that you adjust the two lips of the wound and sew it as soon as possible, without leaving any surplus.
But if you see that there is surplus due to the size of the scrofula, it is necessary that you understand to incise its root, extract it and provide suture and whatever is said in this matter.
And for those scrofulas that contain humidity, perform a superficial perforation at the place of maturation of it, and stop the perforation with the basal pus of the body in this way as we have said.
Then administer the perforation, use lard and similar substances for this purpose, so that it rots what has rotted from the corruption. When you see the wound already cleaned, then treat it with generative meat until it is healed.
Chapter XLIII.
On the incision of the abscess in the ulceration of a scrotum (swelling or tumor in the scrotum).
They used to incise this in the scrotum, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it.
And this is the inscription of their saying.
But in men with hernia (scrotal protrusion), it is necessary to avoid the incision of the scrotum, since this would not be beneficial because all the veins and the largest ones of the patient are here.
But in those who have abscesses or hernia or two ears (possibly a misinterpretation), when the disease is not in the neck, it is necessary to incise the scrotum to avoid the danger of death caused by strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to do this, incise the scrotum just outside three circles of the scrotum or four with a small incision in the middle between two circles depending on the size, that the incision be at the top, not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for incision because it lacks flesh and the blood vessels are accessible.
And if the doctor is poor (inexperienced), then extend the scrotal skin with one finger and cut the skin to reach the channel, but avoid the blood vessels if you notice any cause of them.
And make the incision as we have recommended; and it refers to the incision of the channel above the scrotum, which is of that place from which there is a discharge and due to the abscess of the penis (misinterpretation).
And leave the wound open for some time.
Since the time is long when perforation is feared, take two lips of the scrotal skin and sew it alone without the cartilage.
And administer medications that cause the flesh to heal.
And Al-Zahrawi says that the summary of our saying (the recommended procedure), is not to expose veins, but some of these abscesses have already caused the scrotum of the patient to die and the patient has died, and the ailment is cut off, and some people will incise the epiglossis (a part of the tongue) so that the patient can breathe through the wound, and be saved from death.
And for this reason we command to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease is consumed; and the evil of it is for three days; and therefore we command to sew up the wound, and treat it until it is healed.
And what I have seen through my practice, is that a maidservant took a knife and cut her scrotum with it and made an incision in one part of the lung canal (possibly a misinterpretation), and I was called to treat it, and she moaned like the dying, and I uncovered the wound and found a small amount of blood.
Therefore, you were confessed that she had not cut a vein or a guideline (artery), and the wound bled, and I treated it until it was healed.
And the maidservant did not die if it was not in the penis (misinterpretation), and then return to recovery of her condition after some days.
And now I say that there is no fear in incising the scrotum.
Chapter XLIV.
On the incision over abscess that occurs in the scrotum outside, and is called a hernia of the scrotum.
This abscess, which is called hernia of the scrotum, is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it is a danger for women.
And it can be two ways, either natural or accidental.
And in the natural one there is no cure.
And the accidental is of two types, one of which is similar to fatty nodes, and the other type is similar to an abscess that is made by nodules of an artery, and in this case there is fear. And it is not necessary to make a presumption about him unless he is small. You should examine him and probe him with the indicated tool, and if you find it resembling a fat nodule, and not suspended from any of the veins, then you shall cut it in the same way as you would with nodes, and remove it along with the fluid under the skin and bursa; otherwise, you should search his entire being, and cover the location with something that requires healing before it gets better.
Chapter 45
Title: On the section of types of nodes.
Of the nodes, there are many species and I have already told all their species in the classification.
It is necessary that I distinguish between the difference between a node and an abscess as if there is doubt.
Therefore, I say that an abscess is characterized by heat, fever, and intense pain before the boiling of the superfluity is stopped; it is a putrid mass that eventually stops the fever, the pain, and the heat.
But a node does not have heat, fever, or pain, and it contains a cold substance that is in the sac itself.
And depending on the color of the body, it starts like a pimple and is treated similarly to a boil, whether large or small, and they are of two types: either fatty with moisture inside, and the colors of the moisture are many, as I mentioned in the classification.
Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a node, extract it and examine it at its beginning with a probe, which is called an incision, according to the form that will appear in the chapter that is appropriate for this.
The method of examination of abscesses and all nodes is to take this probe and make an incision in the location where you find it moist, which is inside the abscess; then, you rotate your fingers little by little until you know that the probe has penetrated the capsule.
And then you place your hand as per the measurement of the size of the abscess, and extract the contents and consider what comes out as evidence of it.
If the running moisture is missing, no matter what its color may be, then you shall cut it with a superficial section, as I mentioned for other abscesses.
And if there is no moisture in the contents of the incision, then you will know it is fatty.
You should dry it on top with a section having the shape of a cross as follows: in the same way as you were taught, and hang it up with a thread, and cut off the capsule from all parts easily, and keep the skin or sac if possible on top of it and extract the pus along with the node.
But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract the pus; however, you should remove the affected area until there remains no cause for it.
For if there remains any cause, either a little or too much, the node will return; therefore, you should cut off more of the affected area to prevent its recurrence.
And if you see that a small part remains, then fill the wound with some corrosive sharp powders and strengthen the wound; then cover it with an ointment to cure it from gout, until it gets better.
If the node is large, you shall cut both lips of it and treat it with whatever ointment suits.
But if the vein is pulsating on the opposite side or not pulsating, you shall cut and fill the area with zinc ointment that is vitriol and let it rest for two or three days until the wound heals and stops the bleeding; then return to incise what was broken from the node.
Chapter 46
On the forms of tools necessary for section and perforation.
Of these there are three types of incisions, namely large, medium-sized, and small.
The shape of the large incision is as follows:
The form of a small incision is as follows:
Make the incisions with a pair of scissors, from the base to the tips, well-aligned, so that the incision is made in the abscesses finely.
And these are the shapes of the experts, and they are called lances, and one of them is called lancet.
It has three parts, where the largest is the middle one, medium-sized, and small.
The form of the large expert is:
The form of a medium-sized expert is as follows:
The form of a small expert is as follows:
It is necessary to use these tools for abscesses, discharges, fistulas, and buboes because some of them are due to bones and other causes.
Redondas, grosses, leones and assi como grandes agujas con las cuales son cosidas las hojas, son hechas de ciruelas, o de madera, o de hierro, o de plata, Y las mejores son cuando son hechas de ciruelas.
And these are the instruments made of black feathers, which are used to close the cavities of the fistulas by directing their reflection onto them.
And of the three species, for some of them are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the size of the fistula and the narrowness of it.
Mold a large quantity of lead:
Mold a medium-sized quantity of lead:
Mold a small quantity of lead:
The shapes of onions are of many species, for some of them are simple and have only one curve, while there are three species: large, few, and medium-sized.
For some of them are hollow, and there are three species.
For some of them have two curves, and there are three types.
For some of them have three curves, and there are three types.
All of these are necessary in their place.
Mold of a small simple onion:
The formation of an uncus (or beak) has two curves: The formation of a large uncus (or beak) has two curves. The formation of a small uncus (or beak) has two curves.
The formation of a large uncus (or beak) has three curves:
The formation of a small uncus (or beak) has three curves.
These are the forms of scalpels with which one cuts and scrapes nodes and abscesses, and there are three types: large, small, and medium.
The form of a large scalpel:
The form of a medium-sized scalpel is as follows: it has one straight line, followed by two curves that meet at the tip.
The form of a small scalpel is as follows: it has one straight line, and then a single curve that ends in a point.
The incisions made on those areas where a section is to be performed are sharp, while the other areas are not punctured in such a way; rather, it should be done carefully during the incision of nodes, taking care to avoid cutting a vein or nerve, and for this purpose it will heal the patient and bring about some tranquility through the cauterization which is necessary due to the cauterization of the abscess.
These are the shapes of lancets (or almagidas), and they come in three types: large, small, and medium, as you can see.
These are made of ivory and resemble the handle of a razor with which alcohol is applied.
In the area with a punctured edge and hidden spatula, and in the other area go to the sides inside and outside, as you see fit.
The forms of spatulas, which are concealed beneath the pointed edges during the incision of abscesses and do not harm the patients, come in three types: large, small, and medium. These are the shapes of those (instruments):
The shapes of ventoses used for draining blood are as follows:
These are made of citrus ivory, round with some length, and they are delicate.
It is necessary to use these types of ventoses: large, medium, and small, so that blood can be drained quickly in case of necessity, and at the beginning it is not medication.
However, do not use them for draining blood in any part of the body, and only use them on fleshy areas such as the armpits, thighs, chest, breasts, abdomen, and groin, and similar to these on fleshy areas that are moist.
Some of these tools are small and resemble fish scalers, as follows: they drain blood when used for phlebotomy or incision of a vein or artery.
And some of these tools are round, as follows:
Chapter XLVII.
On the treatment of male breasts resembling female ones.
Some of these tools are used to inflate the breasts of certain men for the purpose of sleep, and they should be inflated like female breasts, and they produce abscesses, which are hard.
And for those who want to use this method, it is necessary to incise them with a lunar section as follows: from the line B to the line G, and then excoriate the entire groin area, apply the plaster of carmine-colored medicine, and adjust the two lips of the plaster with stitching, and treat the area until it is healed.
If the nipple sinks towards the breasts and becomes soft like it does in women, then it should be cut into two halves horizontally, with two incisions resembling a crescent moon shape, each of which should contain the other in its end until the larger line contains the smaller one according to this B line and G line shape. Then remove the skin that is between the wound edges, remove the pus, administer what has been said about suturing and powders necessary for healing until it is healed.
If you do not complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the discomfort of the patient and blood flow, then it is necessary to cauterize the wound with hot iron and let it heal until the corrosive burns away the remaining fat tissue, and take care of it until it heals.
Chapter 48.
On the perforation of abscesses that are caused by the itch.
These are boils that arise from the species of scrofula, hard ones, which contain a hair that must be drained.
Some of them contain moisture; those that contain moisture should be incised with a lunar section as shown in this figure: from the line G to the line B. And when everything within the boil is evacuated and drained, cover it with thin cotton cloth and allow it to heal on its own the next day.
Then keep the wound covered and let it heal properly with suitable care until it is healed.
If the boil of the lymph node or scrofula species occurs, then you should cut it open in the same way as was described in the section on scrofulas.
If the ulcer is extended to become pustular, then administer cauterization as was previously mentioned.
Chapter 49.
Section on boils that occur due to an arrow wound or vein.
When an arrow is broken and the string that covers it is consolidated, a boil can occur at the site, and there are signs to determine whether inflammation and boils are due to an artery or vein: for when the boil is caused by an arrow, it tends to be long along the length of the body; and if you squeeze the boil with your fingers, you can feel a grinding sensation.
And one that is due to a vein is round in shape like the body.
The section on this boil is an error, especially in the armpits, groin, neck, and various parts of the body; it can be large, so its treatment with iron should be avoided, and those that are in the external parts, such as the head, should be avoided.
Concerning that which is caused by an inflammation of the opening of the arrow wound, cut open the string section lengthwise; then, carefully incise the incision with scissors and remove the arrow, as well as its sheaths until it is exposed.
And place the needle on top of the arrow and make it pass through the other side, then firmly twist the arrow in two places - which will cause the wound to open slightly during the extraction of two arrows that are within the temples.
Place your finger on the site between two ligaments and use a sponge to draw out all the blood that is present in the area until the boil is resolved.
Apply treatment that promotes pus formation until the ligaments fall apart, and then care for it with suitable care until it heals.
If the boil is due to a vein section, you should have your hand on the boil and the string, and then carefully insert the needle next to the location that you have your hand on, making it pass through; and use double thread until you withdraw it from the other side, and then tie the boil with a strong ligament as described in the uva4 ligament of two parts with two extremities of the thread.
However, if you fear pulling out the thread, insert the needle into the boil after making an incision with the first needle, and firmly twist the threads four times.
Carefully cut the boil in the middle until everything within it is evacuated, then incise the excess string and leave what remains attached.
Place a poultice of pulverized material that has been soaked in wine and oil over the wound, and apply the appropriate treatment with heat and suitable care until it heals.
Chapter 1 on boils that occur due to nerve twisting.
Boils can occur in the same way as those that occur due to an arrow wound or a vein, and also in nerves when they are struck or subjected to excessive labor, and similarly.
The main cause is found in the locations of joints or the ankle, or any place where the joints are painful.
The boil is severe and resembles the color of the rest of the body; it is in the larger parts of the body and becomes constricted with great pain, causing the patient to feel faint or dazed.
And it is not an abscess added in the neck of the body, and therefore the bandage is removed, and it is bad all over and does not go to either the front or back parts.
And what concerns the joints should not be wrapped tightly, for this will lead to contraction.
But that which is in the head or forehead should have the bandage with sponge. However, if it is a small abscess, then cut it and open it to lancing.
And if it is large, you should suspend it with oil, and excise it, and place a dressing on it; and adjust the wound with stitching, and heal it until it is healed.
Chapter 11.
On the incision of an abscess that occurs in the abdomen.
In some men, many pimples appear in the abdomens of those and in other parts of their bodies that are called fungus because of its similarity to those with fungus; the root of these is subtle, while the head of it is large; and the lips of these are already converted, and these are small ones, and these are greatly enlarged.
I have also seen one (patient), and in his abdomen there were two small pimples that resembled fungus, and they were not distinguishable from the white roots.
And the lips of these were turned inward and split open, and moisture flowed out of it all the time.
Therefore, you should incise them (the pimples) and stitch one in the foot with eighteen oil. And the other (pimple) with five oil.
And the operation in their incision is that you consider whether the patient is wet, and the color of it (the abscess) is white, moist, with subtle roots; then you should lance it with a lancet, and be cautious to have a fire nearby, for many pimples are expelled without bleeding; if blood comes out, cauterize it.
If the patient is weak and fearful, do not lance it with a knife; instead, take a fresh leaden pill, and press it against the abscess, as I have said before; leave it for two days.
Then tighten the string of lead; therefore, you must not press too hard on the large piece of lead until it is excised and falls off by itself without labor.
But if it is a large abscess, the incision of it should be done with some cause of fear and dread, especially for one who is in the abdomen.
It is possible that you incise the depth of it (the abscess), and then cauterize it to prevent its return.
And heal it until the wound is healed.
And be careful not to presume to lance an abscess that is of dark color, with little sensation, and has a regular shape, for that one is cancerous.
I will come back to the subject of cancer soon.
Chapter 12.
On the treatment of swelling in the navel.
Swelling of the navel is caused by many causes; either by fissures in the ciphus (the pubis bone) that occurs on the abdomen, and it contains the intestine or hernia as with other ruptures; or by bleeding which flows from a vein or artery as mentioned earlier, or by compressed air (gas) in it.
If it's due to a wound in the scrotum and a simple tear of the fabric, then the color of the abscess is similar to the body color; it is lion-like in pain, and it appears in various locations. If it's due to the protrusion of the intestine, then you should locate the site where the intestine has protruded, with more severe intensity, and when you press that area it is hidden, and you should gently return it; and a strong cold is on that spot, and it needs to be introduced with great care and vigorous washing.
But if due to moisture, it is lion-like and not hidden when pressed with the hand, neither constricted nor contracted.
And if it's due to bleeding, the abscess shows black spots descending.
But if it's a piece of flesh, the abscess is severe, large and hard, and it is filled according to a quantity.
But if it's due to flatulence, the touch is painful.
And the operation in that area is to consider whether the protrusion of the navel is due to bleeding from an archer's wound, a vein, or flatulence; it is necessary that if you diagnose it as such, you should be prohibited from treating it, for there is fear and dread as explained in the chapter where apostemas due to an archer's wound and veins were discussed.
And if the protrusion of the navel is due to the intestine or fabric, you should command the patient to lie down with their back exposed; then hold the tent on all sides around the entire navel and order them to lie between your hands facing upwards, and encircle the space around the navel with a broad spatula; extend the maturity of the abscess towards the upper parts by one inch or more; and tie it in the circuit firmly but gently, using the proper tying method.
And you should cut the edge of the extended abscess over the wound and insert your finger in that opening to locate the intestine; if you have not found or preserved it with the dressing, then you extract the feces and push the intestine back inside the abdomen.
And if you have found the fabric, you take it with an inch; and cut off the excess from it.
But if it is contrary to your arrow wound or vein, you should encircle it and return to your operation; take two needles and put them through the fabric firmly and insert the needles in the circle that you made around the abscess in a cross pattern, which you will make penetrate; and tighten the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the area where the extended flesh may fall by itself; or cut the one that is thin and soft, and care for it with the medication until it is healed.
And if the protrusion of the navel is due to a piece of flesh or moisture, you should cover the abscess as previously stated and drain the blood or moisture, which you will preserve in it, and care for it with the medication and consolidate the area.
Chapter 33.
On the treatment of cancers.
We have already stated in the division, the species of cancer and in what way the treatment of it is to be done with medicines, and that it is unsuitable to cure it with iron because it should not be ulcerated; and we have also said that cancer arises from carelessness and caution in its treatment.
And the ancients said that sometimes cancer can be eradicated in places where this is possible, such as in the head, which is located near the breasts or its similar areas and it is advisable to remove the entire area, especially when it starts small.
But when it becomes old and large, it is not advisable to treat it, for I cannot heal it or have seen anyone else do so, nor has it been achieved in any way.
The operation in that area is as previously stated, that you proceed and prepare the patient and purge them of black bile for some days, and fumigate it, if a clear repletion is evidently found.
You should prepare the patient with a preparation suitable for surgery, and you should warn them of the possible side effects of the operation; and you should also make sure that the wound is closed well with good surgical sutures until there remains no cause for the recurrence of it. Let the blood flow freely and do not abscess it lightly, press the areas, and wipe away all thick blood from it with your hand or an instrument that is available to you among the instruments.
But if it is contrary to the thick blood flowing from an artery or vein, you should cauterize that area until the flow of blood stops, and care for it with other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 40.
On the treatment of edema (dropsy).
We have already recommended, in the division, the species of edema due to water and the signs of each species, as well as their treatment with medicines.
The one that is treated with iron is only the species of lithiasis alone, and it is not advisable to use iron for the species of tympans or the species of hypoarachnoid cysts, as this is deadly.
When you have already treated this type of tympanic edema with medicine and it does not improve, then consider, for if the patient has become weakened, or is suffering from another form of edema, such as in the lungs or abdomen and similar cases, then be careful not to treat with iron, for there is fear regarding that.
If the patient is healthy and not suffering from another disease but just edema, and they are neither old nor young, then the procedure for treating them is to lift the patient with your hands and place them on their back, then press the abdomen of the patient with your hand, directing the water out of the bladder through the penis, and take a sponge with thorns according to this method:
The instrument should be made of two sharp points, with a pointed end like a sponge; but it should be of some short length, so that during the operation it does not enter the intestine and damage it.
Then consider if the production of edema is from the intestines, for in that case you must be at a distance of three fingers below the navel on the right side above the penis.
But if the production of edema is due to a problem with the kidneys, then your incision should be on the left side below the navel by three fingers.
And if it is due to the spleen, then your incision should be on the right.
And ensure that your incision is over the side where the patient wants to lie, so that fluids do not accumulate in that area unnecessarily.
Then perforate the bladder entirely with the instrument and enter that incision, and lift the sponge between the bladder and the scrotum and remove it; and if there is a quantity of one nail or more.
Then perforate the scrotum until the sponge reaches the location of water. And remove that and insert an instrument with this shape: It is similar to a silver thin cannula; it is made of silver or iron or leather, at the lower end of which there is a small hole, and on the sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other. The tip of it is inscribed like a feather, as sometimes:
And on the upper end of it is an arm, for when the instrument reaches the water, then immediately close it over the instrument, thus evacuate as much water as possible, for if you evacuate any more than necessary, the patient may die from resolution of their animal spirit, or they may suffer convulsions which are a precursor to death.
But evacuate according to the strength of the water and according to what the condition of the patient indicates about the quality of their pulse and the goodness of their complexion.
Then remove the instrument and retain the water that caused it, which should be held by the bladder which retains the hole in the scrotum of which you are recommended to perforate in that manner.
And if the patient tolerates it, repeat the procedure with the instrument on another day, removing a small amount of water, and do so for several days out of fear, and be careful not to leave any water but only a little.
But if you are afraid of the patient and let out a large amount of water, then care for them with burial in hot sand, rub them with warm water, and wait in the sun for a long time; and treat them with drying medications until they are healed.
And cauterize the stomach, and the spleen and kidneys during the removal of water, as I have previously reported in that which was mentioned before.
Chapter 51.
On the treatment of children whose places for urination are not perforated.
Sometimes one of the children is born from the mother's abdomen and the head of the umbilical cord is not perforated (or it is narrow or not in its place).
Therefore, you should immediately cover the area with a thin sponge in this manner:
Then place a small leaden plug soaked in wine over the wound and leave it for three days or four.
And when the need to urinate returns, let him empty it again.
And if you do not hold the lead plug, it is possible that the urine overflowing in that area does not close this wound.
But the wound that has been made should be treated with a lead plug as we have said for many days until it is expanded.
But the wounds that are not in their proper place cause problems such as those who have had this surgery are unable to urinate at the parturition until they lift the penis with their hand towards the parturition; it is not due to generation since the sperm cannot reach the mother as it should, and it is a serious illness.
The method for the operation is that the patient should be turned onto their back, and you should stretch the penis with your left hand using strong extraction, and incise the head of the penis at the location of the foreskin with a sharp instrument such as a feather or whatever blade you have available so that the tip of the penis will look similar to its original shape, and then cut it off so that it falls into its proper place as required.
And be aware that in your operation for bleeding, this often happens; and stop the bleeding with the necessary means and take care of the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 64.
On the whitening of the foreskin that occurs in the head of the penis due to inflammation, blackness and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Often this whitening occurs in the penis and is an area of dead flesh.
And one of these types is malignant, while the other is not.
Non-malignant, it should be suspended with a thin thread and removed as soon as possible until the entire area is cleaned; then place a mild Egyptian ointment on the area submerged and use the specific Egyptian ointment to cure it for several days until it heals.
If the whitening is malignant and discolored, you must administer cautery to the incision and remove it.
But if the whitening is in the foreskin of the head of the penis that has not been circumcised, and one part of the whitening is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, you must remove the internal whitening first until it consolidates; then cure the external area because when you treat the foreskin at the same time, there is no guarantee that it will not become infected.
And you often encounter blackness and corruption in the genitals and foreskin, therefore it is necessary to remove all the already damaged areas that are about to rot or have already rotted; then apply liniment over that area with honey mixed with flour of oats, crushed walnuts and hulled barley.
And cure it with the other remedy until it is healed.
But if there is bleeding, administer lunar cautery in this manner:
because cauterization helps in two ways at the same time: for bleeding and when an ulcer is rotten.
And if the head of the penis is rotten and destroyed completely at that time, you must insert a lead pipe into the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in those whose foreskin is healthy and circumcision has not been required; and when adhesion occurs due to an ulcer or abscess), you must cut with a dull knife until the adhesion is dissolved and the head of the penis is released from all sides.
If it is difficult to detach them exactly, you must cut with a knife of some sort on the head of the penis and the foreskin; this is because when the foreskin is thin, it is easily perforated due to its thinness.
Approach separating between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a thin knife, which has been softened in warm water to prevent it from sticking again.
Then be cautious to cure it when it is stiff and consolidated.
Capital, Chapter VII.
On the purification of children and the cure for those who suffer from circumcision.
Circumcision is not a continuous plague like other diseases; however, since it comes from our action and our will, and that of children is inherently required, it is necessary to assign the best operation and way to perform it with least risk to health.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books, because they did not use it according to their laws, and only acquired it through experience, which is due to the fact that I have discovered most craftsmen and barbers using circumcision with a knife and torch; and they use lime and incision with the nail.
And I have already prohibited all these methods and do not find a better purification with forceps, lime, or incision with the nail, because more often the skin is torn above, because the skin of the foreskin has two layers, and the lower layer remains, which is easily exposed to further incision and certain pain. And the purification that is performed by an apothecary, and is called "digital," which is used by cobblers, is not assured of the incision at the end of the male organ, because deep cuts can enter it.
However, in the operation with the nail, deep wounds can easily spoil your operation. And the skin of a child is naturally short, and many times it does not require purification in this manner, and I have seen that.
However, the purification performed with forceps and lime and the nail has been found beneficial by experience, because the forceps are of proportional incision, so that the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below; therefore, when you press your hand proportionally in two areas, and make an incision accordingly according to a comparison in one time; and it causes compression of the lime on the penis with a shape containing the skin of the entire area, from which no error can occur.
The method of the first operation is to keep the child more if it is of those who can understand a little, that you do not let him put lime on his penis except for one day.
And approach him in every way possible that is within your power regarding the understanding of the child. And approach him and make him stand between your hands, but do not let him be agitated; and hide the forceps in your hand or under your foot, so that the child does not see it nor any other of the instruments.
And approach your hand to the penis of the child and blow on the skin, then pull it back until the head of the penis is exposed, and proceed with purification of that which is accumulated in the foreskin due to dirt.
The shape of the forceps for purification, this is its shape:
The outer parts should not be sharp and the inner parts should be, that there is no projection of the handle, and the length of the two points should be equal to the length of two handles joined together.
However, the error in purification is that deep wounds can tear the entire skin, or if you make an incision it must be partial.
Therefore, you should stretch the skin at your discretion with your nail before the incision and make the incision accordingly.
And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then pull it out with oil and make the incision.
However, if it has been three days and the inflammation remains at the base of the penis, you should remove it with care and cut the inflammation cautiously, then excise it easily and make an incision according to your discretion.
And be careful of the head of the penis, as that will not help you.
Therefore, cure it with what has been recommended for the inflammation in the treatise on powders.
If the skin is incised too much and opens up at the edges, that will not help you.
However, cure it with what has been said until it heals.
Capital, Chapter VIII.
Treatment for retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to stones or clotted blood, or poure or meat, similar to those mentioned in the methods of treatment division.
If the above remedy is not effective and the cause is severe for the patient, then it is necessary to administer extraction using an instrument called a syringe, which has the following form: It should be made of silver and have a conical shape, like a bird's feather cannula with the same fineness as a long ray in the shape of a palm and a half, and at its tip, it should have a fine tube.
The method of emptying the urine with the syringe is to fold the thread and place it in the wool or cotton, ensuring good lubrication; then insert the thread into the part behind the syringe, and cut off any excess wool if necessary, but introduce the thread into the cannula with vigor. Next, move the syringe towards the body and the albumen of egg white.
Have the patient lie down on a bed and compress the bladder and scrotum with wet oil cloths, olive oil, and egg whites.
Then insert the syringe gently into the scrotum until it reaches the bladder; then fold the scrotum above the anus; push the syringe through that area; push the syringe towards the bladder, ensuring that the patient is positioned correctly and not twisted.
Then stretch the thread little by little until the urine soaks the cotton.
Then remove it and treat the urine, using a syringe, and continue to press and use the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Chapter LIX.
On the quality of clysters for the bladder with a syringe and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
When an ulcer or boil occurs in the bladder, or blood clots within it, or there is a hardened pus, and you want to distill waters and medicines in that area, then use an instrument called a clamp, which has the following form:
If outside of it is silent, it is closed. And in that place there are three holes: two from one side as sometimes happens.
At the beginning there is a hollow place where something is hidden and in accordance with its quantity, it should be added to it until some cause is pulled from the humidities, and when it is expelled, it should also be pulled back, and when it is expelled long, as happens in clamp shells made of a substance called naphta used in naval battles.
When you want to stop the humidity in the bladder, insert the end of the clamp shell into the humidity and pull with it whatever is hidden inside the parts above, as the humidity is expelled into the hollow of the clamp shell.
Then insert the end of the clamp shell into the anus as we have recommended in the syringe; and pull with it the humidity as you pull it, since that humidity reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient suffers from it.
The shape of a subtle cyst with which the bladder is cysticized, and that is the shape:
And it should be made of silver or lead, with a head shaped like a small feather and the body canning inside it.
Then take the bladder by hand and stop the humidity that you want to crystallize in the bladder, then tie it between two strong ligatures with a double stitch, and heat up that humidity over the fire.
Then insert the end of the cyst into the anus.
And hold your hand on the bladder with the humidity and the structure until the patient feels that the humidity has already reached the bladder.
But if the bladder is not present, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; perforate it completely around its entire circumference; and insert a strong thread through these holes in such a way that they are turned around; and apply the circle also in this way so that it is attached as in an amulet, since you stop there whatever you want from the humidities, oils, and waters.
Then tie it with the instrument in the same way as you did with the bladder, and press with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Capital LX. (This is the number for the 60th chapter)
On the removal of stone.
We have already said in the division the types of stones and their cure with medicine, as well as the difference between stone produced in the lungs and stone produced in the bladder, and the signs of that.
And we have said which type of stone requires surgical operation and incision.
And the stone produced in the bladder itself is that which is embedded in the bladder.
And we will tell it with clear exposure and concise language.
Therefore, we say that stone produced in the bladder is most often seen in children; and among its signs is that the urine that comes out of the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in sand; the patient scratches his anus frequently, and moves up and down a lot, and his buttocks are swollen, and with that, the feces come out.
Child healing is easier before they turn 14 years old; it is difficult to cure the elderly. In young ones, healing is more easily achieved; it is difficult in the old.
The larger the stone and the easier the healing; if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when treating that condition, at the beginning we must clean the patient with a clyster which extracts all the crevice within their intestines; for that crevice sometimes prevents the stone from appearing, you should investigate for it.
Then place the patient with their feet and have them sit in a warm and comfortable position to encourage the stone to descend to the bladder's opening or to pass out of the body at some point.
Then prepare the patient's bladder using your hands, and remove their clothes from that area so that the entire bladder is exposed at the sides.
Then pierce it completely.
If you feel the stone in the space (i.e., if you can locate it), cut through it immediately.
If you do not feel it entirely with your touch, then you must anoint it with oil using the index finger of your left hand (or right if the patient is a child or young person), and insert it into their anus. Then pierce the stone that was inside. And gradually push it towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press on it with your finger and expel it outwards from the bladder at the location where you pierced it.
Command the assistant to press on the bladder with their hand; command another assistant to extend the legs apart using their right hand, and use their left hand to remove the covering that is below the legs, in the area where the piercing was made.
Then insert a spatula with a sharp edge into the area: Cut the area between the anus and the genitals, not too deep, but along the left side; make the incision on that stone and your finger should be in the anus, making a transverse incision so that the incision outside is wide and narrow inside, according to the amount of the stone that can be exposed there, and not too much, for strong pressure on your finger pressing the stone during the incision is necessary, but it should be done without difficulty.
Know that some stones have an angle and edges, which makes their removal difficult.
And of this type is one resembling a walnut, round, and easily removed.
If it has an angle or edges, fit it into the groove (i.e., place it in the channel formed by the pelvis and pubic bones).
If it is not easily removed or cannot be grasped, then press on it or squeeze it gently with appropriate pressure, the end of which should be like a file against the stone, and do not let go; or insert a sharp, curved instrument below it.
But if you cannot press on it, expand the opening a little and if you see blood flow, cauterize it with diluted vinegar.
But if there are more than one stones, first press your hand on the opening of the bladder and then pierce it; then press a little on them; proceed similarly with larger numbers of stones.
If the stone is very large, ignorance is that you pierce it with a large incision, because the patient may suffer from one of two causes: either death or continuous urine discharge, due to which the area is not completely consolidated.
Administer an emetic to expel it out of the body if possible, or use forceps to extract it through the fracture once the bladder is broken open.
When you have completed your task, fill the wound with aloes and dragon's blood (a type of resin), and cauterize it. Place a cloth soaked in oil and vinegar or rose oil and water on the wound, to allow it to heal without an abscess.
Then reposition the patient on their back and do not remove the bandages for three days.
When you have removed the bandages, apply warm water and oil to the area, and treat it with antibiotics and antiseptics until it is healed.
If an abscess forms in the wound, apply cautery and caustic substances to it, similar to if blood is present in the urine (and this is known as hematuria), then insert your finger into the wound and drain the blood, for if it remains, it causes the bladder to decay and putrefy.
Wash the wound with warm water, vinegar, and salt, and use appropriate antibiotics until it is healed.
It is essential during the entire healing process that you watch over them and adjust the medications applied to the area.
If the stone is small and lodged in the scrotum and urination is prohibited, treat it with what I have previously recommended before piercing, for this treatment is often accused of causing piercing; and I have already explained that you should use a sharp, pointed instrument like this:
Of a triangular shape, sharp, inserted into a wooden rod.
Then take the file, and bind it to that part behind the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the iron into the stone with ease, piercing through it until the piercer reaches that pebble. Rotate the piercer in that small stone little by little, and you perform the perforation on it until the other side is able to penetrate; for urine will be released soon.
Place your hand on the fractured part of the stone that is separated from the bladder, for it is closed and forgotten by the urine, and the patient will be healed.
But if this cure is not suitable for some reason that prevents it, then bind a file behind the stone, and another file on top of the stone. Then strike the stone in that bladder between two layers. Then extract it. Then loosen the ligaments and unclot the blood in that wound.
No, it is not necessary to bind a file behind the stone, but only for preventing its return to the bladder; and another ligament on top of it, for when the file is loosened near the exit of the stone, it returns to its place and heals the wound.
And for that reason, when you bind the file on top, you should raise the patient's thighs or else it will not work and the wound will heal in this manner as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
On the extraction of stones in women.
Stones in women are rarely formed.
If a stone (peyra) appears in any of those [parts], then the cure is difficult and forbidden due to excessive methods.
The one who has a female and is weakly built is a virgin.
And the second one is because you do not find a woman who knows how to keep herself chaste or is married.
The third one is because you do not have a woman skilled in this art, especially when it involves surgery.
The fourth is that the location of the incision on the stone in women is far from the location of the stone, requiring deep incisions and causing fear.
But if necessity forces you to do it, then you must take a woman skilled and obedient.
But if you are deprived of the former, then seek one skilled and discreet, or present a married woman knowledgeable in the affairs of women, or a woman who is proficient in this art to some extent.
Therefore present her and order her to do everything you command, from the investigation of the stone at the beginning; for this reason she is to examine whether the woman is a virgin, in which case she must place her hand on the woman's stomach and feel for the stone.
Then if she finds it, separate it from her, and then order her to incise it.
But if she is not a virgin, order the married woman to insert her hand into the patient's vagina and search for the stone; then place her left hand on the bladder, and press it firmly with good judgment.
Then if she finds it, you must carefully draw it out of the urinary bladder through the vagina, until its virtue reaches the place where the incision was made.
And you should insert the incision into the location of the woman's cervix; find the stone in that area and make a small incision there. The incision must not remain unattended without being removed from the stone extracted from the vagina.
The incision should be small at first; and then insert the scalpel into the incision. If you feel the stone, adjust the incision according to its size, for you know how large the stone is from that location.
And you should know that the types of stones are motes (pebbles); some are small and large, hard and sharp, and round and elongated, and some have grooves.
Therefore you know the number of types there are for this purpose, regarding what you wish to do.
If you see bleeding, adjust the location with a cauterized metal and hold it there for an hour until the blood is absorbed, then return to your operation as soon as the stone is expelled.
Make preparations with yourself of the instruments that are mentioned in the treatment of stones in men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
If you see bleeding, and you know that the evacuation of blood is from the archery that is incised, then you stop the powder on the location and tighten it with pulvis and stricture paste, but do not repeat this; leave the stone in place and do not extract it, for a weak person will die from it. Then heal the wound.
Once the acuity of the blood has subsided after several days and the location has healed, then return to your operation as soon as the stone is expelled.
Chapter LXII.
On incision for a hernia in the scrotum.
A hernia in the scrotum is not anything other than an accumulation of moisture in the white cyst that lies below the cord of the testicles containing the semen, and it is called a cyst.
Sometimes the accumulation is in the proper abdominal tissue that nature has prepared in the testicle area until it becomes another testicle; and it is the cord of the testicles between the white cyst, which we have said is not true but false.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that affects the testicles, so that this material accumulates there; and sometimes it happens from a blow made on the testicles.
And this moisture has stones of various colors; the color of it can be declining towards citrine or blood red, or brown, or black and slimy, or water white, and that is what is most common.
And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is located are as follows: if it is in the white cyst that we have said, then the abscess becomes red and slightly elongated like the shape of an egg, and the testicle appears, for the moisture contains it entirely.
And if the moisture is in the proper abdominal tissue, then the abscess becomes round with the testicle area and from this it is believed that it is another testicle.
And if the moisture is between the cord of the testicles and the white cyst, then you must cut under the center.
In order to know the color of the moisture, you should express the color of the moisture from within the abscess with its shape removed; and according to the evidence found in the interior, judge what is inside it.
Therefore, when we come to the treatment of him who is ill, it is necessary to command the patient to be bled if this is possible for you, and often empty his body.
Then raise him on his back due to some cause, and place warm cloths over him.
Then place yourself on the left side of him, and command the servant to follow the right side of him, who will extend his leg from one end of the bed to the lower edge of the genitals and the border of the abdomen.
Then take a thin stick and cut the groin from one end to near the penis.
Make the incision straight and at equal distance from the line that should be the pubic hair, up to the white area containing.
Excise it, observe, and be careful not to cut too deeply; and your excision with which you are excising should have an opening that is suspended by the mouth more gently and subtly examine the excision according to the amount possible for you.
Then perforate the bladder full of water with a large perforation, and drain all the water.
Then separate the labia majora of the incision with sutures, and stretch the bladder to the edges; do not touch the region of the genitals, and cut the bladder in that manner that is possible for you. Cut it all or in pieces, and especially its thin part, because if you do not examine the incision of him closely, it is not certain that the water will not return.
However, if the wound is processed from outside the genital area during your operation, when you have completed the incision of the bladder, return it inside and then adjust the two labia majora of the genital opening with sutures, and care for it like other wounds until it heals.
If the wound becomes corrupt due to another illness, it is necessary that you remove the instruments used as support and extract the bladder, and then care for it as we have said.
However, if the water is divided into two parts, you know that they are hernias; therefore, cut that part as you have done in the other case; and if it appears to be a rupture, you should perform the operation.
Then you should abstain from blood, and enter into the wounds with wool immersed in oil or red oil; and put another wool that has been soaked in wine and oil over the genitals and abdomen; and place damp cloths folded and powdered on top of it, and let them dry in this manner:
and apply two cloths soaked in carmine-colored wool as described; and the ends are pressed with cotton or moist wool, and they are tied together with twine in the undergarments, one end of which takes hold of the buttocks to the back, and the other to the anus, and two ends on one side and two ends on the other side on the thighs, and the entire construction is adjusted in the undergarments.
Sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of incision and bleeding; you should take a subtle cautery knife and cut the genital opening with it, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white area containing water is exposed, and then you should take caution as follows: It resembles the Greek letter.
Then perforate that bladder, and let it burn until all the moisture is expelled.
Then stretch the bladder with sutures, excise it with scissors, and excise it with a thin cautery knife ignited; cut it as possible for you until you have removed all of it; and be careful not to let the fire touch the skin.
You should know that this operation is less risky and longer lasting than an incision and bleeding operation.
However, if you encounter a contraindication such as an abscess during incision or cautery, or bleeding, it is necessary that you treat the contraindication as appropriate for him according to what has been said.
However, if the patient is weak and does not expect a second operation due to its severity, you should perform the perforation as we recommend; and it is when you are sure, according to what has been said about the signs, that this hernia is watery.
It is necessary that you elevate the patient on some high bed, and then pierce the abscess in the lowest part of him with a thin stick, and let the perforation be according to the length of his body.
The opening should be wide enough for all the water to flow out.
Place a cloth over the area and let it soak up the remaining water. Then care for the wound once the sore is healed.
If the swelling occurs against the expulsion of water in that time, you perforate it: and this is not done except if white pus appears in the wound's orifices, causing resistance and preventing the flow of water, then it is necessary that you put a pen or instrument with which to extract the water from abscesses, its shape being preceded; or adjust on the pressure of the wound a small.
And know that the water returns, and is accumulated for about two months or less; and when it is accumulated, then it should be perforated according to that method, because the patient will pass their days.
Chapter sixty-three.
On incision for fat hernia and its treatment.
Know that in the incision for this hernia there is great danger of harm in the largest preparations, because I have seen the dismissal of it and being saved by the better.
And you should remember the operation in that case, and the properties of abscesses.
Therefore, it is said that abscesses are born in those bodies whose genitals are composed, and this occurs for various causes: or due to acute sharp anger, which is poured into the genitals, or due to a blow.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not found in pain, and it is a severe abscess.
A large abscess is a lapified abscess, whose color is dark, and it is not felt.
Sometimes it is made by the thickening of the arteries and swelling of those same, so that the memory of it is already perceived or by the swelling of veins.
But what is caused by swelling of the arteries is recognized by the dispersion of the abscess when it is compressed with the fingers, and it is not necessary to touch it.
But what is caused by swelling of a vein should not be dispersed in any way due to compression with the fingers.
And it is possible that a section may be made on this condition and on the other flesh; and you insert the cavity of the genitals, and place the oil on the upper parts, and remove that from the white cloth, and release the suspenders of the organs, and tie them, and insert the suspended organ in the cavity that you released from all parts of the upper part of the oil.
If the hernia is already consolidated in that area, then you must remove and insert it.
If there is an adhesion due to some cause between the organs, or that which lies between the bladder and intestines, then you must remove all of this adhesion and insert it with a circular incision.
But if the flesh is native to the location of the adhesion that is behind it, then you must insert all that is there, and remove the hernia as described earlier.
Once the operation is complete, fill the wound with wool soaked in oil and wine, and take care of it along with the other treatment until it heals.
Chapter 64.
On the cure of the hernia that is from wounds.
A wound is an abscess enclosed by some similar covering like a boil with softening of the testicles, making it difficult for exercise and walking on the part affected by the patient.
And in the treatment of this disease there is recalling of what was beforehand feared.
However, it is necessary to say that the operation should be performed as described earlier.
I say that you must put the patient on an elevated stretcher; and spread out the suspenders of the testicles to their sides; and place the genitals with the thighs apart, using proven instruments in the area of the backside; and have another servant to hold them with great tension.
And place a sharp long spoon across the transverse section of the organs, exposing them until they are uncovered.
And scrape all parts in the same way as you described earlier, when removing arteries from the temples.
And insert into that a double-pointed needle, and pierce the first of the places where you previously found the wound, and pierce the other place later on. And incise them in the same place by a straight section according to the length of the body, and remove that which has been accumulated from fetid and corrupted moisture.
And take care of the wound along with other wounds in which you want to promote healing for the purpose that the organs which are not nourished by one or both testicles may fall out, as it is not harmful for this reason.
But if the wound occurs in all the organs, it is necessary that the testicles are removed or that the testicles are deprived of nutriment through the incision of the organs, and become atrophied, or blinded to prevent them from being helpful for this reason.
Chapter 65.
On the cure of inguinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to an incision made in the expanded intestine that extends over the abdomen from the angles of the navel, causing one or more hernias to protrude through that rupture.
The rupture can be of the intestine or an extension of it, and this occurrence is due to multiple causes such as trauma, pressure, strain, heavy lifting, or similar factors.
The sign of this condition, when it is due to extension of the intestine, is that it occurs gradually over a long period and not suddenly, and it appears as an abscess near the inguinal area because the intestine compresses the hernia sac.
The first sentence is: "The sign of it (gout) is when there is a section of the ciphac, as at the beginning it causes sudden violent pain; and it appears as an abscess different from the ordinary one, but it is actually related to the intestine, and its body parts are outside the ciphac."
Here is the translation: "In some cases, the intestine herniates through the tissue and is called an entestinal hernia known as a zirbal."
Here is the translation: "In some cases it occurs with wind, in other cases the intestine tears and is retained, causing serious danger to the patient, and in some cases it causes bad and severe pain, especially when it is pressed."
Here is the translation: "And in the treatment of this disease with spices, there is fear that it may cause traps (or ambush), so it must be avoided."
Here is the translation: "The method of operation for this (hernia) is to make the patient return the intestine with their hands into its cavity, and then wrap it around its neck with a bandage, and raise the legs."
Here is the translation: "Then, stitch the skin that connects the scrotum at its edges, and cut open the scrotum completely; then insert the fingers into both sides of the incision as necessary to divide the incision with them."
Here is the translation: "And if the incision is made according to how much it is possible for it to be retained (or closed)."
Here is the translation: "Then remove that hernia which is below the scrotum, until the white hard cyst (or fibrous tissue) of each part is discovered."
Here is the translation: "Then you insert your finger into that which separates the testicle, where there is white fibrous tissue below the scrotum and between the cysts, and release any adhesion in the area behind the testicle."
Here is the translation: "Then grab the scrotum with one hand and with the other hand pull out the white fibrous tissue from between the cysts, raise the testicle along with the cyst to the incision site; and command the assistant to extend the testicle beyond it and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind it using a complete solution."
Here is the translation: "And look for any other causes of the hernia being trapped in the white hard cyst." Here is the translation: "If you find any cause (of the hernia), remove it from the abdomen."
Here is the translation: "Then cut into the area below the scrotum along the incision that runs with blood and pus as we have recommended in what has been said."
Here is the translation: "And apply wool soaked in oil to the wound; and let it rest for a while; then apply the thread that we have recommended (and in some cases the white fibrous tissue is cauterized, which has been said to prevent bleeding, as this often occurs), and leave the thread until it falls off by itself."
Here is the translation: "If the trap (or ambush) is delayed, let warm water be soaked and placed on it until it falls off as we have said."
Here is the translation: "And cure the wound with other wound treatments until it is healed."
This line seems to be a heading or title for the following text, so it can be translated as "Chapter LXVI."
Here is the translation: "Of the windy hernia."
Here is the translation: "In this hernia, there is no one who has been cured by fear (or frightening them)."
Here is the translation: "And at first they said that it should be treated as we have recommended in the hernia caused by wind; that is, place the instruments near the incision with ease and dry it there, around the abscess with what opens it, until the instruments fall off."
Here is the translation: "Cure the wound as we have said until it is healed."
This line seems to be a heading or title for the following text, so it can be translated as "Chapter LXVII."
Here is the translation: "Of the disruption that occurs in the anguons (or ankles)."
Here is the translation: "Sometimes a rupture occurs in the ankles as we have said, and it (the ruptured area) opens."
And they should not give any reason for hernias to the genitalia; and if they do, it is little; and return them to their place in all hours.
If it persists for a long time, a small incision is made in the scrotum before the hernia appears in the scrotum; and this occurs due to the extension of the scrotum as has been said earlier, which causes the scrotum to be stretched out, softened, and exposed, and protruding.
The cure for it is with cauterization as described earlier.
And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this method: the patient must hold his genitals between your hands, and dry the area of the rupture of the protruding parts with a piece of linen three fingers wide.
Then, pull the white scrotum (the testicles) out from under the abdomen until they are exposed.
Then, take the thread and place it on the protruding part of the scrotum, and press it against the abdomen.
Then, sew together the two protruding parts of the scrotum at its extremity with the thread.
Then extract the extremity of the thread, and do not open the scrotum completely, nor extend the hole, nor any other cause as you know in the treatment of inguinal hernia.
Then, treat it with the treatment of ulcers, and when you incise the scrotum, clean it and return the ulcer to its place until it is consolidated; because the scrotum is constricted and the protruding rupture is not adjusted.
Cauterization is better in this case, as it is closer to health.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the softening of the scrotum of the testicles.
Sometimes the scrotum of the testicles in some men is softened by this, as the flesh that is between it is softened and the diet is taken care of.
Therefore, it is necessary for him who is being treated to place the patient in bed according to his genitals, and to incise all the scrotum that is softened over the natural scrotum; and then sew together two labia with stitches.
If you wish, sew at the beginning the redundancy of the softened scrotum with three or four stitches and a firm stitch.
Then incise between the stitches; and treat for the treatment of other ulcers until they are healed and the wound heals.
Chapter LXIX.
On castration.
Know that castration in our law is condemned, but by reason of this I remind you of it in this book; and its remembrance is not necessary except for two reasons, one of which is so that it may be known by the physician when he is questioned about it, who knows the treatment of such a case; and the other reason is that we sometimes have to castrate other animals for our benefit through them, such as horses, cows, pigs, and similar animals.
And so I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by strangulation, or by incision.
In the one that is done by strangulation, the method of the operation is to seize the animal in the anus until its testicles are softened and lined up and hanging down. And place those with your hand inside until they are resolved and do not reappear again.
But in a castration performed by incision, you must hold the animal and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
Then tie the sutures, and make an incision on each hole with one cut as it processes through.
And then make an incision where each abscess has been scratched. And do not leave any cause for the bladder, but rather cauterize it on the vessels.
And this method of castration done by strangulation is better because strangulation leaves no cause for the testicles, so that the animal desires coit.
And heal the wound until it is healed.
Chapter .lxx.
On the treatment of hermaphrodites.
Hermaphrodites in men are of two types: the first is when it appears where there is a gap in the cord of the testicles, and in this one that is between two testicles there is a vagina-like structure which has female genitals.
And some cases of the cord of the testicles where urine flow occurs.
But in women, it is a special case: and it is that the vagina above the cervix is like two testicles of a man, with a little less below, similar to the foreskin of a man and two testicles.
And the treatment is of three types: two for men and one type for women. And it is that you must incise the flesh adjacent until the emission of that one ceases, and then cure those with other treatments for other wounds.
And in the second type of men where there is urine in the cord of the testicles, there is no cure or operation on it.
Chapter .xx1.
On the swelling and prominent flesh due to reasons from women.
Swelling is adjusted naturally to a certain extent and treated accordingly with regulations, but in some women it becomes magnified to such an extent that it spreads like in men and enters the vagina.
Therefore, you must remove the excess swelling with your hand or scissors.
And do not make incisions, especially near the vein of the artery, so that there is no bleeding.
And heal it with treatments for other wounds until it is healed.
Born flesh is flesh that is born within the mother's abdomen until it protrudes, and this is called hernia (and for this reason some people call it "abdominal disease"); therefore, we incise and treat it as we would incise swelling, and heal it until it is healed.
Chapter .lxx2.
On treating the prolapse of the uterus.
Prolapse of the uterus is when the cervix is not perforated or small. It can be natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to disease that has occurred previously, and this is done either when the flesh is not properly adjusted or by cauterization that is too hot or cold.
It is done either in the mother's abdomen, or on her hips, or above her pubic bone, or below her pubic bone, and it is forbidden to have coit, engage in sexual activity, and procreate; and severe prolapse prohibits menstruation.
The knowledge of this is obtained by the use of a metron, if the opening is visible, it is dilated with the fingers or the ray; but if it is not visible, you must search for it with your eyes or the ray.
If obstruction is subtle and close to the two lips (labiae), then you should cut and separate it.
It is necessary to place pressure on the two lips (labiae), and hold those indicated marks in place with both hands.
The woman should be on her back, her legs spread open, and stretch out the affected area with force until that subtle obstruction is broken and the obstacle is opened.
Take wool and dip it in oil, place it on the affected area, and press firmly for a day to prevent the wound from hardening.
If the obstruction is large and thick, then it is necessary to incise it with a spatula or a myrtle leaf.
If the obstruction is due to a cord, then suspend it with a hook and incise it.
And use the medicines that stop bleeding without cutting it, such as opium, dragon's blood, and styrax, mixed with alum of yew.
Place a wide leaden cannula to prevent the wound from healing lightly.
Hold it for several days and administer warm baths.
Let it be healed with the other treatment of consolidation until it is cured.
Sometimes during childbirth, other organs are affected, and then it is necessary to incise it according to this method. If it is due to cancerous abscess, do not apply iron in any way to the cancerous abscess during childbirth.
Chapter LXXIII.
On the treatment of diarrhea and red piles or boter rojo that occur in the female's womb.
Diarrhea is recognized when it flows continuously from the openings of large veins, and when chronic diarrhea occurs and it becomes purulent.
I have already mentioned the types of these (diarrhea) and their symptoms in the previous section, and here I will say which ones receive treatment and which do not.
So I say that diarrhea and purulent discharge when it occurs in the cervix and is not felt, then no treatment with iron should be applied.
But those that are in the cervix and can be felt, those are the ones that should be treated.
And it is necessary to make the woman lie down with more heat and extend the thighs with hot blankets or rough cloth, and incise it (the cervix) with sharp instruments.
And apply powdered dragon's blood or another non-cutting incisive powder to the flow of blood from those (cervix) without cutting it, such as opium and similar powders.
Wrap the feet in wool for an hour and place them in cold water.
If the bleeding continues, then seal it in a decoction of sumac, mustard seeds, and onions and similar substances.
Take barley flour, mix it with honey, wine vinegar, and fat and make a plaster on top of the back of the patient.
If the bleeding is separated (clotted), it is good; if not, cause it to adhere with two leeches and do not scarify the nipples.
Take wool and immerse it in the juice of colander, armaglosa, or garruvera with repentine (penicillin) vinegar and apply to the affected area to promote adhesion. Treat the wound with honey until it is healed.
Let it heal.
Chapter LXXIV.
On the perforation of a cervical accident in childbirth.
Various types of abscesses that occur in the womb, such as cancerous, lapidated abscesses, ulcers, adhesions, erysipelas, fistulas, diarrhea, rags, thyl and other abscesses. I have already mentioned these diseases, their types and symptoms, and their treatments in the previous section.
It is necessary for me to explain in this treatise the treatment of cautery for an abscess that occurs in the womb when it is associated with a discharging abscess, and if you wish to know how to perform the operation with iron.
Then you should consider if the pain of the abscess at its onset is sharp and throbbing with fever, and sometimes it swells and can be felt, in which case do not cut into it, and treat it with something that promotes maturation until the acute symptoms subside.
Then it is necessary for you to make the woman lie on a bed with two beds; recline her on her back and place her feet at the edge of the bed below her abdomen, and her legs should be spread open, and her arms should be placed on the sides of her head as appropriate.
Approach the midwife following the straight path and administer the instruments with which you will open the mother's orifices, the shape of which will be needed in those cases that require it.
When you wish to administer this instrument which penetrates the mother's cervix of the woman, ensure that nothing but the cervix itself enters the woman and the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the cervix, then you must place powders on the texture of the cervix to prevent any instrument from entering the cervix.
You must place the oil that runs in the instrument of the forceps above and let the one who ministers have the instrument, rolling the oil into it until it is inserted into the mother's orifices.
When the expulsion occurs and is touched with the hand and squeezed, then you must cut off that part with a spatula of linen.
When the pus is evacuated, then you must place a plug made of wax immersed in rose oil or olive oil with some antiseptic properties on the wound, and hold the plaster on the cut in the cervix of the mother.
Place a clean wool padding soaked in water where bad odors have arisen around the mother and on the loincloth.
Then let it be healed for about two days with an enema, which is appropriate until it is healed.
After some days, the mother and the wound are washed in this way so that it is cleansed with water and honey, and with water in which is boiled rosemary or long-term aster root, and then return to the enema.
If the wound is inside the mother and swollen, then you must refrain from treating it with iron, having care for it in the way that has been said in the division.
Chapter LXXV.
To teach midwives how to treat ectopic pregnancies according to the figure that is not natural.
It is necessary for the midwife to recognize in the beginning the figure of natural childbirth by signs of it, and when you see the woman pushing at the opening of the birth canal and wanting to smell the air, and above her is cleared by what is on top of her, and she rushes out the membranes of the ectopic pregnancy, then you know that this birth is according to a natural figure, and it comes out above its head, and the second one with it or suspended or hanging from the navel.
Therefore, when you see those signs, it is necessary that the woman's abdomen be compressed to make the ectopic pregnancy come out easily because when it comes out above its head, it releases the second one, and it is cleaned of superfluidities with good hygiene.
But that which is other than this birth is not natural and unlawful because when the ectopic pregnancy comes out on top of its feet and the body of it is expelled in front of its head and its feet are protruding from it, and the hand of it is one, or at the foot of it... or at the head of it and the hand of it, or at the abdomen of it, and if it is strongly turned on its neck, resembling the figures of those unlawful pregnancies.
It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and discerning in all these matters, and to avoid mistakes and disappointment.
And we are showing the entire figure of them, and the method is in them for it to be understood and to be done over them.
When the delivery is on top of its head due to a natural labor, and it is difficult for the woman and painful, with the vitality of it already debilitated, then do that incision or what women have, and evaporate the congealed blood from it with fenugreek oil and humid oils.
Then the midwife enters between her fingers with a small spatula and cuts the second one or severs it with her nail until the moisture that is in it comes out. Press the woman's abdomen until the fetus comes out.
But if it does not come out, then the woman should be cleansed with the mucus of a peacock and the mucus of fenugreek with scissors.
Then command it to expel itself, cleanse it, compress it and make it vomit with a mixture; open its mouth and nose for an hour because the fetus will soon be forgotten.
And if the two more of the fetus are forgotten at the beginning, then you must gradually reduce them with ease. But if the instrument does not enter, then have the woman lie on a couch and raise her feet up, and strike the couch with the heel; have the woman held so that she does not fall forward during the blow.
And if the more are not turned inside out and the fetus dies, then incise them and separate the membrane of the fetus or pull its body to the midwife's hand with a cloth and separate it because that will soon be forgotten.
When the child is on its feet, it is necessary to press and turn it gently, make it smaller, take hold of it and pull it out little by little.
If the child is still inside the vagina, you command it to come out, and make it turn around with caution, as forgetting this will result in complications if God wills so.
And if this recommendation is not forgotten, you return the child little by little into the position it was in naturally, as forgetting this will cause an easy delivery.
If all the previously mentioned recommendations are prohibited, you prepare alum and dissolved gum, grind everything thoroughly in a mortar, and apply it to the woman's cervix with cotton soaked in the mixture at the bottom of her stomach. And then make that cessation happen in hot water until the hips are reached.
And when labor pains have subsided, you make the woman inhale mirtle smoke and cause her to rest. And when the smoke has been inhaled for an hour, you make her vomit on a pan, and then cause her to cough forcefully and open her mouth wide, remove that, and press the afterbirth gently at the bottom of her stomach with compression, as the child will soon be delivered.
On the subject of the retained placenta hanging from one of its umbilical cords. Try to reduce the size of its head, but if that cannot be done, lift the woman and have her walk around.
If walking is not possible, lay the woman on her back and apply violent pressure to her hips while administering liniments as recommended by me and others for mucilage.
When the childbirth is completed, make her vomit on a pan and study how to reduce the size of its head, then gently pull it out following its natural position, have her cough forcefully and compress her until she recovers.
On the subject of the child expanded on its mother's back. The woman must hold the object (probably a small object or instrument) and gently turn it (the object or patient's body part), making it easier to move.
And when that (the affected area or instrument) has been held and turned, pause over the wound with the recommended oil and ointments.
Then gently tug on the affected area (a small object or body part) little by little, and when you have it pulled out, place a pair of forceps over it and command them to be inclined straight, and then command someone to compress it; and make that thing shake with a gentle movement. Prepare the infant (or fetus) on the side.
When the mother has given birth (or is experiencing labor) according to this method, consider, and then you shall incise the second (child or afterbirth) with your nail up to where it is emptied of moisture.
And if the infant (or child) is suspended by the face and neck, you shall incise the umbilical cord to ensure it does not become trapped and die.
Then gently push the infant (or child) into the birth canal until you feel resistance, and command the woman to compress her abdomen, and let it out easily if possible, if God wills it so.
Delivery of twins or multiple fetuses. Be aware that twins are often born with a difficulty in the abdomen, and sometimes there may be three or four, but this is unusual and rare; however, this happens due to nature, not living beings.
And when these (afterbirths or placentae) are multiple, separate one from each other, dissect the ligaments near the umbilicus of each one, and some may be expelled easily like a normal delivery, while others may not pass due to unnatural difficulties, as we have previously recommended.
And if some of them (the babies or placentae) are difficult to deliver, and you encounter abnormalities as previously mentioned, then care for those accordingly.
And if the woman is subtle and skilled at making things easier and less complicated, and experienced in dealing with both speed and slowness, she should be clever according to all figures as prepared by the ingenious method for healing.
Remember that it forms within the womb from embryos and is expelled (aborted).
Sometimes a woman gives birth to one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, and even more children at once, which must be verified that a woman aborts five or ten times in a row, the cause of this was determined by the measurement of the wise.
And it is necessary in the midwife's knowledge to discern whether that mass appears hard or soft, and then touch it accordingly. (This means that the midwife needs to examine the baby's position and feel its head to determine if it is ready for delivery.)
Chapter 66. (This indicates a continuation of the text or a new topic in the treatise.)
On the extraction of the dead fetus. (This suggests that the text is discussing what to do when a fetus dies during childbirth and needs to be removed from the womb.)
When you treat the dead fetus as I have said in the division of medicine and it has not yet been expelled, you should use forceps if necessary. However, you must first consider whether the woman is of good health and not suffering from any of the conditions for which delivery could be dangerous. (This means that the healthcare provider needs to carefully evaluate the mother's condition before attempting to extract a dead fetus.)
Then the woman should be placed on a bed or cushion with her back inclined downwards and her legs raised. (This is a common position used during childbirth to help facilitate delivery.)
The attendant should hold the woman's legs together or tie them down on the bed to prevent the body from stretching during the extraction of the fetus. (This helps control the mother's body during the delivery process.)
And then you moisten the mother's mouth with olive oil and honey, aloe vera, fennel seeds, and linseed. (These substances were believed to help lubricate the birth canal during childbirth.)
And you anoint the midwife's hand with those oils and ointments, and insert her hand into the mother with ease, and surround the area where the fingers will grasp the fetus. (This is done to prepare the midwife's hand for the delivery process.)
And when the time is right, you should determine if the fetus is positioned correctly for delivery by examining its head. Then you will grasp it with your fingers in one of the following areas: on top of its head, under its chin, inside its mouth or palate, near its jawline, at its shoulders, near the ribs, or just below the breasts (hypogastric region). (This means that the midwife needs to carefully examine the fetus' position before attempting to extract it.)
However, if the presentation is breech, you should try to turn the fetus by rotating its feet or hips. (This means that if the fetus' feet or buttocks are presenting during delivery, the midwife needs to attempt a maneuver to reposition it correctly for delivery.)
It is necessary to hold the fingers with the right hand and bend them in the area between the thumb and index finger of the left hand, and insert the hand into the mother with ease until you reach the cause of the problem. (This means that the midwife needs to carefully manipulate the fetus' body during delivery using both hands.)
And then place another finger or the third one if necessary on the opposite side to provide traction but not extend it beyond its normal position. (This means that the midwife needs to use gentle yet firm pressure during delivery to help guide the fetus out of the birth canal.)
This should be done carefully on all sides to ensure that the fetus' passage is eased as much as possible, just as it would be when pulling a tooth during extraction. (This means that the midwife needs to exercise caution and gentleness during delivery to avoid causing harm to the mother or fetus.)
It is necessary to soften the extension between them; if any part of the fetus remains stuck, you should anoint the mother's fingers with oil and insert them expertly into the area that is obstructed, gently rotating it to loosen the blockage. (This means that the midwife needs to use lubrication and gentle pressure to help extract a stubborn or obstructed fetus.)
If the fetal passage is blocked, you should grasp the fingers inside and gently pull them towards the perineum until everything has been expelled. (This means that the midwife needs to carefully extract the entire fetus from the birth canal.)
However, if the vagina is wider on one side and cannot be reduced due to constriction, you should wrap cloth around it. Then extract it gradually until everything has been expelled, and incise it either at the vaginal opening or in the perineum. (This means that the midwife needs to take extra precautions when delivering a fetus that is too wide for the vaginal canal.)
And so you should make an incision in the other vagina and both feet. (This means that if the first attempt to deliver the fetus is unsuccessful, the midwife needs to make a surgical cut in the other vaginal opening and carefully extract both feet.)
However, if the fetus' head is large or it becomes stuck in the birth canal, or water accumulates around its head, you should insert sponges between the fingers and split open the skull and drain the water, or use an instrument called "alundat," which will be described in the following chapter. (This means that the midwife needs to take special measures if the fetus' head is too large for the birth canal.)
Similarly, if the fetus has a large head by nature, you should incise it with scissors or grab it with forceps as described earlier, and remove the bones carefully with forceps. (This means that the midwife needs to take special measures when delivering a fetus with an unusually large head.)
If the head is swollen and stuck at the neck, you should make an incision until the fluid that is in the feet is drained. (This means that the midwife needs to release pressure on the fetus by making a surgical cut at the neck area.)
However, if there are no complications or obesity, you should make an incision in the head as soon as possible. (This means that in an uncomplicated delivery, the midwife needs to quickly extract the fetus' head.)
If the abdomen is protruding or watery, you should make an incision into it to release the fluid that is inside. (This means that if the mother's abdomen becomes distended due to amniotic fluid leaking out, the midwife needs to make a surgical cut to relieve pressure on the uterus.)
If the procedure is performed on the feet, then the pull and direction towards the mother's mouth is light.
However, if the procedure is to be performed on the abdomen and feet, then you must extract that cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and you should open the abdomen and feet as far as what is inside runs out.
However, if the other members are stopped and the head turns, then you must insert your left hand into the uterus; however, if the mouth of the womb is blocked, then you should enter your hand into her privates, seek out the head, pull it with your fingers towards the mouth of the womb, and insert a finger or two and pull them.
If the mouth of the womb is obstructed by an abscess that occurs on the vulva, then you must not be too rough on it; rather, you should administer a solution of moist fatty substances. Apply poultices and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
If the procedure is on the side of the patient, then if possible, it should be incised; and administer the solution mentioned in the living creature.
If that is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and extracted.
It must be ensured that no cause remains inside the second one (the fetus).
When you have completed your entire operation, then administer the solution mentioned for healing in abscesses caused by the womb.
If there is bleeding, then you send it to stagnant waters and administer the other treatment.
I have already seen a woman in the abdomen who was dead, and on top of that fire another watched over her, and her death was caused by that other fire. In the man there was an abscess in his navel for a long time; it inflated until it opened fire, and it began to emit pus.
I was called upon to treat him, and I treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Then I put strong adhesive plasters on him for some causes, and extracted a bone from him, and after some days another bone was extracted; I was greatly amazed because there is no bone in the abdomen.
And then I thought that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
Therefore, I cauterized the wound, extracted many bones from it, the woman who was in her milk, and lived in such a manner for a long time, recovered from it a small arm.
I did not think it was strange, but rather that there is knowledge and help in such things; for a doctor works with his hand to administer healing.
Of the shapes of instruments necessary for extracting the fetus.
Shape of a lever with which the uterus is opened:
This is the shape of a brace to which the free ends are attached, in which the braces are located at both ends of two rods. However, this brace must be subtle thread from a suture, made of yew or oak wood.
Each rod must have two grooves, and each groove one tooth, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle of two rods are two adjustments of that same rod, which are already fixed, the length of each is the width of a palm plus a little more, and the width of each is two teeth or slightly more.
These two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the uterus so that it can be opened with those two prescribed braces when you turn them.
Another shape resembling that thin and light thread:
Made of yew or oak wood in the shape of forceps. However, at the extremity of it (the affected area), there are usually two additional parts, and the length of these additional parts is about one palm, and the width of each one is two fingers.
When you want to open the larger area (the incision), you should place a woman lying on her back with her legs hanging down, opening that which is between her thighs. Then you should open your hand with the tool (scissors) similarly to how you use forceps, according to the amount that you wish, based on the perception of the mouth of the incision up to where the ligature will be made so that it fits.
The turning movement which the ancients called "vertegge":
The thrusting movement that is called impellent:
The method of amputating the large head, which is called amisidado:
It is similar to forceps at the end (handle), sometimes, and some cases are made long like forceps according to this form, sometimes, at the end of which it resembles forceps's teeth used for cutting and crushing bones. The method of partial amputation (amputatio parziale):
The method of extracting an ingrown nail with a splint (oncia con spina):
The method of extracting an ingrown nail with two splints (oncia con due spine):
The form of a spatula has two extremities, one of which is detached at its tip:
The form of two spatulas (or plasters) has two extremities:
All those instruments should be handled with care, and when there are many of them, and their types multiplied and prepared, the artificer should consider ease of operation and their quantity in people.
And you should not work on those instruments without preparation, for the need for them is not an excuse.
Extraction of the second part (or stage).
When the second part is retained, you must command the patient to hold their breath, then make them sneeze by stimulating their nose and nostrils. If this causes them to expel air, that's good.
If the above method does not work, then you should take a cloth, pierce it with a hole, and place herbs such as calamint, wild rue, anise, camomile, Arabian scidads, cassia wood, and sweetgrass in the cloth. All or some of these herbs should be soaked in water within the cloth, and place it over the fire.
Place a reed tube in the mother's mouth and hold it so that the vapors emerge into the mother's cavity.
Make the patient sneeze again in the same manner as described earlier, and the second part will be expelled quickly.
If this treatment persists without effect, then you should command the midwife to immerse her left hand in oil of olives or millet oil and insert it into the cervix and uterus while searching for the second part. Once found, take it out a little at a time, but if it is attached to the mouth of the womb, insert your hand as recommended earlier, and when you find the second part, extract it gently so that the mother does not suffer excessive bleeding. The ribs should be tightly bound on both sides (right and left) with ease.
If the mouth of the womb is narrowed, we have already recommended treatment through sneezing and herbal oil remedy.
If it is not expelled with all the causes that we have recommended, then be cautious not to cause further irritation during attempts at extraction. But if what has emerged from the womb reaches the female opening, you should clean it with warm water and tetrafarmacon; for this will make it soft within a few days and will dissolve and expel it.
When it is ripe, it raises bad humors to the head and stomach, causing harm to the patient; therefore, appropriate remedies should be administered to alleviate these effects.
Modern Sub-Fumigation of garlic and dried figs was already discussed by some Ancients.
The design of the instrument with which a woman is sub-fumigated should ensure the retention of menses and secondary flow.
It may be made of glass or of earth.
Let the thin end be placed in the cavity and the broad end above the fire, and the sub-fumigation should be applied over the arms of the fire.
It should contain what is to be consumed by that sub-fumigation and another should be added.
Treatment of the infant's unperforated anus.
Newborn infants and their unperforated anuses which are still narrow and closed. Therefore, it is the duty of the midwife to perforate that narrow opening with a sharp instrument; and if she does not have one, she should use a sharp stick, ensuring that she does not touch the rectum.
Place a woolen cloth soaked in vinegar and oil on it, and apply medicine internally when the anus is clean.
If there is concern that it may still be closed, place a cannula in it for several days and remove it when the infant desires to defecate.
And there may also be obstruction of the anus due to consolidation of a plague or abscess; therefore, that consolidation must be incised and treated as we have said for treatment and lead.
Treatment of fistulas that occur in the rectum.
Fistulas that occur near the anus, in the lower part or outside it, should be treated by applying warm poultices and using cautery near the fistula or in the space between the anus and one of the buttocks.
It is a fistula or boil.
And when that swelling is old and has become moist with foul, white or suppurating pus, some of these fistulas may burst.
And these bursting fistulas can be recognized by the discharge that exits through it and by its odor; and sometimes the patient uses evacuation as a remedy, but in most cases the worms are strong in those.
And some of these fistulas may also burst in the space between the bladder and the bowel, or into the joint of the hip and into the nut of the coccyx.
The distinction between a penetrating and non-penetrating fistula is that you insert your sharp instrument into the anus, and try to probe gently with earth or iron in the fistula, but do not cause injury.
If there is injury during the probing, insert a probe made of lead or horsehair into it until you feel resistance or hair in your anus.
If you do not feel any resistance or experience any evacuation, worms, or odor as mentioned before, then you should conclude that it is non-penetrating and proceed with treatment.
When the fistula bursts into the bladder or bowel, its significance is clearly of urine and it should be prohibited to drink anything except medicine until the location is consolidated.
If the fistula bursts into the hip joint or bone and causes pain in the surrounding area, the sign is that the probe penetrates into it if there is no injury to the bone, and pain in the surrounding area of the anus; and that it produces pus quickly; and that no medicine works, nor does it heal with internal application.
And in all such penetrating fistulas there is no cure and the cure of these is labor and futile efforts of foolish doctors.
However, in non-penetrating and non-old fistulas, healing with iron is expected as I will recommend to you and as I have proven.
The patient should lie on their back with legs raised and knees bent, so that the buttocks are inclined toward the stomach, and probe gently with lead or earth if the fistula is not injured, until you find its location.
If the patient feels pain around the lower back, then insert your finger in the anus.
If you feel resistance in your anus when inserting the probe and you also feel it touching something soft or flesh, then you can be sure that it is penetrating; and do not work on it, as there is no healing in it, as mentioned before.
However, some say that it heals in some men temporarily.
And of the medicine by which healing is hoped for in it, it is that you ignite a small cautery according to the size of the fistula as described before, and insert it into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and afterwards apply it two or three times until you know that all the surrounding flesh affected by the fistula has become seared like the feathers of a bird.
And treat it with calves wrapped in bandages until all the affected flesh has healed, and treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate new skin, and if it is healed, it is good; otherwise, it is not cured at another time by other treatment.
And if the anus tries to protrude and does not enter within it (the anus), as there is a swelling in the area of the anus that is either flesh or abscess, and sometimes there is a fistula on the surface of the anus, then dry the anus from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see drying with the swelling, and it should be cut into the fistula until the incision reaches the place where the end of the swelling is, and by the swelling it is released and captured.
Then clean and dress those fleshly fistulas that resemble the beak of a bird's egg, ensuring there is no remaining cause for them.
If bleeding often accompanies your action when you treat those fleshly areas, then apply milk or a mild cauterizing instrument such as fire or a sharp medicine, for cauterization with fire is a good habit: it ensures proper adjustment of the affected areas and the drying out of the blood from excess moisture.
And cover the affected area with warm cloth or compresses until the wound is healed, and treat the wound with tough, hard-working meat to heal and consolidate it.
And use medications that contain astringency and drying properties. Once the wound is restored, it will be healed and there will be no fear of recurrence.
But if the fistula has entered the rectum of the anus and is elongated on the surface of the body, then you should enter your finger into the anus and feel it with it.
And if you find the swelling and it is almost ready to penetrate, there should be no operation on it, but rather by trust and hope.
The cause of this is to administer it in one of three ways: or to cauterize it as we have said; or to cut it into the cavity so that you can gain access to it for proper healing; and do not proceed with cutting unless you are sure that you will not injure the muscles containing the colon, and this should not be done without the patient's consent. Rather, heal it with what we have said before, which is a strong remedy. Or elongate the swelling and clean the pus that seeps into the area near the anus, as we have said, or with the swelling or another sharp instrument with a pointed end, and then clean the fleshly fistulas in the incision using a plaster. And finally, work on restoring the entire wound by cutting, and if the orifice of the pus is not consolidated and the fistula remains open near the anus, it will be easier for the patient. And sometimes the fistula is closed in this manner: when you enter your finger into the fistula and find it at the side of the anus near the skin and at the edge of the anus, then take a perforated probe like a sharp needle prepared in the following manner:
And enter the swelling that is wrapped in five fields, or around those areas. Then insert your finger into the fistula until you gain access to it.
But if penetration occurs near the anus, you should extract the field from that hole by pulling it out along with your finger entering the anus. Pull out the end of the field and straighten both ends, and leave them for a day or two until the field is more deeply embedded in the flesh, and then tighten it as far as those fleshy areas allow, which are between the two ends of the field and that fit together.
And heal the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, make it penetrate using any method prepared by you, but do not force it into the rectum, as it is not your place to do so lest you injure the muscles; and heal it until it is healed.
The way to use a pointed sponge to split the fistula: the curved side is sharp and the other side is not, so that it does not penetrate unnecessarily, as sometimes happens.
Stitching for hemorrhoids where blood flows from their incisions.
Hemorrhoids have two types: either they resemble coal, like those which are hard, or they are as fat as butter. These are small and large hemorrhoids that bleed frequently and are always one, and these are the swellings or external ones, and in their extremities.
However, those that are external from the anus follow seasons of little moisture, where clear water or a small amount of blood with continuous flow occurs, and they are in accordance with the body's color.
The treatment for internal hemorrhoids is to instruct the patient to sit down and to express himself before the anus dries up, and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you cut them with scissors or what you have at hand with your nail, and you should carefully incise them.
However, if scissors are not available for the hemorrhoids due to their moisture and softness, then take them with rough cloth or cotton or flaxen thread, extract them with tweezers, carefully incise them, and apply some powders that resemble cautery over them, so that they remain in place; or cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterization. Apply other treatments for them until they are healed.
If the anus does not release them, then you should fistulate the patient with a small fistula and wash it with water that facilitates their release when the patient squeezes.
However, if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, their cause is light and you should gently take them with your nail or scissors, incise them, and apply other treatments for them until they are healed.
The one with incisions must receive stitching of them according to this method: take fine thread and pierce it through the hemorrhoids at their divisions, making it penetrate the other side with the needle, and envelop both ends of the thread in the division beyond the needle, transversely; tighten the hemorrhoid with strong stitching, knot the thread, and remove the needle.
Do this to all of them, leaving one open and do not sew it up, so that the excess blood can flow from it.
Place a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the anus, and place it over the anus and instruct the patient to rest. Leave it inside until it dries up; and when it is healed, treat them with poultice or another treatment until they are healed.
Since they are old and have no value in that medicine, it is necessary that you lance them with a lancet or your nail until they become moist and the discharge increases above, which prevents their consolidation; and treat them until they are consolidated.
Then you remove them with a sharp reason as soon as possible, and treat them until they are healed.
It is important to be aware that hemorrhoids can resemble a red dot on the body similar to a clavicle head, and it occurs throughout the body, especially in the lower parts of the abdomen and genitals, and because of these pains you should always treat them.
Then it is necessary to incise what is around the clavicle, and hold it with forceps or scissors, and remove it from its root; and treat it.
If you wish, cauterize the following as described in its own chapter.
However, a wart is a small rough fistula that protrudes roundly from the surface of the body, and they frequently appear in children.
The treatment for it is to stretch and incise it, or to tighten it with thread or cloth until it dries up. If you wish, cauterize it as described earlier with fire or with a strong medicine.
However, a tick is a small rough or thick fistula that appears on the surface of the body and when it bites it becomes red like the bite of a flea, and it is found around the body.
The treatment for it is to take a pointed needle or a hollow needle, and hold it firmly, place it on the tick until it is contained within its circle; then rotate your hand with the needle around the tick until you incise what is around the tick, and press it into the skin, and remove the tick from its root.
If you wish, do this with an iron needle or a lancet in the following way:
The first part of the sentence seems to be instructing the removal of something that is located above the cannula (possibly a stitch or suture), which appears undamaged and wrapped, so that the underlying area can be observed and the rotation of it can be perceived. Translation: "Let the area above the cannula be drawn out to subtlety, undamaged (meaning not perforated), wrapped, so that the underlying part may be uncovered and its rotation can be perceived."
And if you wish to cauterize a flea as previously mentioned in the section on cauterization of atheyl (a kind of skin growth) in the chapter on cauteries. Translation: "And if you want to cauterize a flea, just as was previously described in the section on cauterizing atheyl under the chapter of cauteries."
In the manner of the instruments that are administered for the purpose of making an incision. Translation: "In the manner of the instruments that are used to make an incision."
Sometimes an incision is made using a silver or lead instrument that has been melted or shaped; and sometimes it is made with smaller and larger instruments depending on the patient, because the one administered during the treatment of small children should be small; and for those whose buttocks are fleshy or painful, the incisions should be smaller. Translation: "Sometimes an incision is made using a silver or lead instrument that has been melted or shaped; and sometimes it is made with instruments of various sizes depending on the patient, because the one used during the treatment of small children should be small; and for those whose buttocks are fleshy or painful, smaller incisions should be made."
The form of a large and shallow incision: Translation: "The form of a large but shallow incision:"
The head of the cannula above where the bag is attached should be wide in this manner; and it should be clearly distinguished from where the bag is attached as was mentioned previously. Translation: "The head of the cannula above where the bag is attached should be wide, just like we described earlier; and it should be clearly distinguishable from where the bag is attached."
And the end of it that is inserted in the buttock should be undamaged (meaning not opened), as much as possible, narrowed to subtlety; and on one side there should be two cuts, and on the other side one cut, and the width of the cut should correspond to the size of the rays, and the larger ones should be smaller. Translation: "And the end of it that is inserted in the buttock should be undamaged (meaning not opened), as much as possible, narrowed to subtlety; and on one side there should be two cuts, and on the other side one cut, and the width of the cut should correspond to the size of the rays, and the larger ones should be smaller."
And let the bag in which the animal bladder or sheep's wool medications are placed be round in shape, and its diameter should be approximately the size of a palm. Translation: "And let the bag for holding the medications derived from animal bladders or sheep's wool be rounded in shape; and its diameter should be roughly the size of a palm."
It should be pierced with numerous cuts, just like it is rolled up; and the space between each cut should correspond to the size of the finger. Translation: "It should be pierced with numerous small cuts, as if it were rolled up; and the distance between each cut should correspond to the size of a finger."
And insert it into the cuts carefully and firmly, using a sterile needle that is as thin as possible, or cover them with something sterile; and adjust the bag accordingly. When the bag is inserted, it should be tight at the head of the incision between two distinct points with strong pressure; and then cauterize each cut. However, the quality of cauterizing with this method is that you fill the bag with the medication, which should be warmed according to the tolerance of the patient; but be careful not to make it too hot or too cold. Translation: "And insert it carefully into the cuts using a very thin sterile needle, or cover the cuts with something sterile. Adjust the bag accordingly. When the bag is inserted, tighten it at the head of the incision between two distinct points with strong pressure; and then cauterize each cut. However, the quality of doing this is that you fill the bag with the medication, which should be warmed according to the tolerance of the patient; but make sure not to overheat or chill it too much."
And the patient should be placed on their back, and raise their legs and place a cushion under them or a bolster; and then apply the exterior of the cautery with oil or albumen of egg or mucilage of fennel or similar substances. Then insert it gently into the buttock and have someone hold the bag and press it firmly, expelling everything that is in the incision until it is completely emptied from the intestine; and then remove the cautery and raise the patient's legs against the wall. Translation: "And place the patient on their back, raise their legs and place a cushion under them or a bolster. Then apply the exterior of the cautery with oil, albumen of egg, mucilage of fennel, or similar substances. Gently insert it into the buttock and have someone hold the bag and press it firmly, expelling everything that is in the incision until it is completely emptied from the intestine. Then remove the cautery and raise the patient's legs against the wall."
If the medication is not sufficient for that purpose, let it have as much as possible; and if it persists for an entire night, it is more beneficial in the end. Translation: "If the medication is not sufficient for that purpose, let it have as much as possible; and if it lasts for an entire night, it will be more beneficial."
However, if you cauterize that in cases of intestinal disease and the solution of the liver, then you should reapply the cautery until it is healed. Translation: "However, if you cauterize that in cases of intestinal disease or the solution of the liver, then you should continue applying the cautery until it is healed."
And if there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the buttocks, then let the incision be shallow and narrow, using those incisions that are used for children. Translation: "And if there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the buttocks, then make the incision shallow and narrow, using those incisions that are typically made for children."
The treatment of sores. Translation: "The treatment of sores."
It was already mentioned in the division of the treatment of sores what is appropriate for the free individual, and I will now explain the treatment of them using more specific methods and medications according to their needs. Translation: "I have already explained in the division of the treatment of sores what is appropriate for a free person, and I will now describe the treatment of them in more detail, using specific methods and medications according to their needs."
Therefore I say that sores are differentiated depending on what causes them and the location where they occur. Translation: "Therefore, I state that sores are differentiated based on what causes them and the location where they occur."
And the causes of sores that are made at various times can be due to injuries from stones, or cuts from a sword, or blows with a spear, a club, an arrow, or similar instruments. Translation: "And the causes of sores that occur at various times can be due to injuries from rocks, cuts from swords, blows with spears, clubs, arrows, or similar objects."
Plagues that are in the body's locations are similar to a plague that covers the head, neck, feet, abdomen, or back, and resemble those of the limbs.
And you recommend the cure for some plagues by stopping this reasoning and rule over the other plagues.
And you begin with the simple plagues of the head, for the memory of complex ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore say that when a simple plague occurs in the head (not a fracture), consider: if it is due to the throwing of stones or something similar, and the patient has already tightened the bandage only and it is a large plague and you fear that the patient may have an abscess, you immediately cut and flush the cephalic, not delaying; and remove it according to the amount of strength of the blood (if there is no other reason prohibiting flushing), especially if the blood that comes out is little.
And let the flushing of the affected area be opposite, and protect the patient from overfilling, vomiting, and heavy foods.
But if there is any reason for minimizing the food intake, then let it be diminished and avoid meat and wine.
And place a cushion over the plague if an abscess is formed, fill it with rose oil or wine that has been stabilized.
But if you are sure of the abscess, place a cushion over the plague if it is recent with its own blood and the air has not changed the powder that I recommend keeping small.
And if the air has already changed it, place some salve over it until it is healed.
But if the plague is large or due to an injury and the lips are not properly aligned, adjust them with suture according to my recommendation for suturing them.
But if the plague has already exposed the bone and skin, and there is only a small suspension, you should cut it and take care of the wound with medicine and restore the skin to its place with bandages, and command the patient to avoid heavy foods: meat and similar items, until it is healed.
And if there is rottenness in the bandage and it does not adhere to the bone, you should cut it all off and get rid of it, and care for it.
But if in these plagues there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow and it is not severed by medicine, you should explore the artery, and if the unexplored artery is rotten, you should cut it with a spatula or cauterize it; and if necessity compels that what I said does not conform, then you should cauterize until the blood is released.
And if these plagues are simple and small, the cause is slight; therefore you should sprinkle this powder over them, as it will solidify before the air changes them.
And the method of the powder is this: take one part of olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of uncooked substances; grind everything thoroughly and sieve it; fill the plague with the mixture, tightly bind it with good binding until it adheres to it, and let it coagulate with blood.
And apply it to the above with powder and release it when it is solidified, but do not remove it while it is still abscessed, for the medicine will not take effect until it is healed.
And sometimes do this alone with caution, when you do not have olive oil and dragon's blood at hand.
And perform this operation on large plagues when it is necessary to place a cushion over them and they are tightened, and only recent plagues with their own blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered it, and especially in summer, do not consider the position of this powder, but instead care for them with what I said before, placing over them some salves made from changed substances, or place over them flour powder mixed with water and honey until they are healed; and treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
But if a plague occurs in the bone as a fracture and it is small, you should extract it with a tool.
And I will tell you the cure for poisonous head fractures.
Of neck plagues.
But if the plague occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and it is similar to a simple head plague.
But if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery, you should be careful if it is a nerve, do not engage in its care using anything that causes violent stiffness, such as zinc and vitriol, which harm nerves and counteract them. And do not place any cause of all fire on the wound, for the substance of nerves is sensitive and their continuity is with the brain, which is the most important part of all members.
And if it is someone who is cured by light medicines, such as when washed with sweet water, sometimes infused in rose oil or not, and also washed with sweet water and other remedies prepared in this manner, swallow moisture.
But if the wound is large, then administer stitches, or sew the lips of it, and apply healing powder inside until it heals.
But if the wound is deep or it occurs in the lower part that has become putrid, then perforate it in the most depressed place.
But if an artery is already incised in the wound and blood flow occurs, then separate or dry it, or tie it, or cauterize it if it causes necessity at that moment.
But if the vertebrae of the neck or all are incised and the veins of the neck are saved, then you adjust the lips of the spine with sutures along the neck of the vertebrae without touching it; place it equal to its natural shape, and strengthen it with a decent structure, and allow it to rest for several days; and apply healing powder inside where there is stiffness and excitation until it heals.
But if the wound has reached the bone in danger, then percuss it, and if there are fragments of bones in it, remove all that you can; and what is not suitable for you, leave it until the wound heals, and separate it and the surrounding flesh should be relieved.
And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle powder on it that has been recommended to you. But if a fistula is made in the wound, then heal it with whatever comes to mind from its corresponding chapter.
If it is a spear or sword wound, and sometimes deeply, then consider more if the wound is airy when the patient sighs; you should know that the wound is fatal.
And if it is not deep and the wound is recent with the patient's blood, then pause in it at the first hour with powder, and do not strengthen it so that the blood is not retained in the depth of it and returns to the heart and increases the patient, but rather pause with an attractive healing powder, and remove it twice a day.
And if the wound is not accessible, then pause in the orifice of the wound with a piece of old rag to drain what comes out from the moisture; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that what is squeezed out runs where it is applied.
But if three days or more have passed since the wound occurred and no spasms, tremors of bad heart or chest tightness occur in the patient, sometimes along with other good dispositions of it, then you should know that the wound is saved; and then heal it with warm water and other healing methods until it heals.
But if the healing of it is excused and it remains open all the time, then you should know that a fistula has been made; heal it according to its corresponding chapter.
And if the wound is made by a spear or sword, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then heal it with what comes before stitches, if large, or with powder, if small.
But if it has caused danger to the bone and only fractured pieces remain, then you twist the wound and try to extract those pieces if they are separate. But if they are not separated, then leave them until the wound heals, as the removal of them is relieved.
And for other wounds that occur in other parts of the body, treatment is the same as what has been said.
Wounds of the abdomen.
The disposition that occurs in the abdomen is either large, small, or medium-sized.
A small disruption is difficult to handle in another way, and it is known that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not take care of the protrusion of them to their place immediately, because it opens up and becomes swollen, making the return to it difficult.
Therefore, the best disruption is medium-sized, because in it the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is in the two types mentioned before.
You should know that the abdominal suture is according to four methods, but two of them are common and apply to the sutures of other wounds in the body.
Two other special sutures are applied to other wounds, but they are particularly suitable for abdominal suture.
And I recommend to you with exposure and explanation.
Therefore, say that when the wound is small and there has been a cause of the intestine by it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then do one of two things: either because of the small disruption as mentioned before, or when the intestine swells due to the coldness of the air.
And so when that is the case, it is then necessary to heat the affected area and immerse a sponge or cloth in warm water alone, or squeeze it into warm water, cyperium, spike, and bind it inside the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
Occasionally, this condition presents with stiffness, and it is better for water alone to resolve the inflammation.
And so when you see the inflammation resolved, then you wet the intestine with water in which is added elder and marshmallow, for by this the pain of it is alleviated slightly.
But if the intestine is obstructed during this treatment, then you must cut the obstruction with a small instrument, with which are incised abscesses.
The primary treatment is better when it is appropriate that there is no cutting involved, and it should not be attempted without necessity and caution.
Of the instrument, cut its shape:
The rounded part of it should be sharp and the other part should not be blunt, and the end should be thin, but not as thin as a needle, with an oblique edge slightly blunt.
And so when the pustule is enlarged and comes out of the intestine, then its reduction should be in accordance with its natural form, in its proper place, if possible over that, for it is better.
When the obstruction is wide and located in the lower part of the abdomen, then it is necessary to make the patient lie on their back and place their legs apart as far as their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should raise their head and feet as far apart as possible.
And similarly if the obstruction is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then place your attention and consideration immediately on that side where the pustule is located to be closer to it.
And so you must administer this in large and medium-sized pustules.
In small pustules, apply what you have prepared and bring someone who is among your most trusted to administer it, who will hold the obstruction entirely with their hand and adjust the edges of it, and open one from that to the other where some cause of infection may be prevented.
This is the common method of suturing: take the needle (or a counting needle depending on the size of the pustule); and approach the edge of the obstruction of the finger, and draw the thread through one, but do not pass it through both ends of the knot, with both ends of the cord inside the incision, until you have made it penetrate from that side; and you have added two ends of the cord and two ends of the suture, making four orders.
And tie the thread with double knots around the needle, and sometimes from two sides at once, and bring together the edges and pustule by suitable approximation; and leave the thickness of the finger and insert another needle in that area, and pass it through as was done with the first needle; and do not stop until all the contraction of the pustule is completed with needles.
The needles should be medium-sized between coarseness and finesse, for fine needles penetrate the flesh easily; and large ones are difficult to insert in the suture, and therefore it is necessary that they be medium-sized in coarseness and thickness.
And it is necessary that the needle be inserted in both ends of the suture not too much, so that the flesh is not penetrated easily and the pustule does not burst before its healing.
Do not prolong the suturing so that the pustule is not prevented from healing.
And pierce the edges of the needles so that the patient does not feel pain during their sleep; and press on the suturing all over the pustule, which should have the edges of the needles; and leave it in until you know that the pustule is healed.
This type of suturing with needles in this manner is more suitable for small pustules, as it only requires one or two needles around them.
The second type of suture is common: and it is that you administer the four ends (two from the suture and two from the cord) in one application, with a needle wrapped in a fine thread in coarseness and thickness.
When you have penetrated the four ends with the needle, reduce the needle from that same side from which you began, so that the thread enclosing the purulent part is pulled back from the pustule to the wound, so that the suture is like a stitch with fabric, where the fabrics are strengthened.
Wait between each suture the thickness of a finger joint.
This type of suturing is known to men.
And so I sewed up the pustule that had occurred in a man's abdomen, which was injured by a spear, and the pustule bursting was larger than one palm, and it was near two palms from the intestine of the same location, and the obstruction was in the middle of the limb; and then I reduced that after the intestine had been out for 24 hours.
The wound was healed in the space of fifteen days or more, and it was cured and healed; it survived for many years, and it remained as it was, in its disposition.
The other doctors had judged that it would not heal; but by miracle, for I could not cure the wound because it was in a place where no remedy or medicine was known, only pressed on the wound twice a day and frequent washing with honey water healed it.
But I will say two types of sutures according to the narrative of the Word.
And it begins with the herringbone stitch, and you insert the needle from the outside to the inside.
Therefore, when the needle pierces the skin and enters the body in accordance with the rules and the length of the entire body, it should leave the end of the cephalac (head) where the needle has entered; then, the needle should be made to penetrate into the other extremity from inside to outside on the opposite extremity of the myriad (limb or organ).
Therefore, when you have made it penetrate (the needle), you should make it penetrate again in the same way on the opposite side of the myriad (limb or organ) from inside to outside; and leave the end of the cephalac (head) that is in this place, and let the needle penetrate into the other extremity from inside to outside.
Make it penetrate with that penetration, which you make penetrate into the head in the end of the myriad (limb or organ) on the inside of where everything is to penetrate.
When you begin this insertion and move to the side that is on the other end of the head, take out the needle that has penetrated, and return it to the skin where it entered, and move the end of the myriad (limb or organ) on the other side with this extramitation (extraction); then take out the part of the skin from there.
Do this repeatedly and do it again, repeating this process until you close everything that is outside according to that example.
The sum of this suturing method is that you sew with skin sutures, which sew the skin and fur, in this way you sew the head once from the end of the skin, and then let go of that other side until it is complete.
The second type of suturing specifically that is called Gualla, and this is about its name and is recommended for it, is that you sew according to half according to the way in which some physicians sew, adding all the parts to their corresponding part as nature dictates; and apply the end of one side and the end of the myriad (limb or organ) to the other end of it, and this is done according to what I have recommended.
It is necessary that you place the needle in the end of the myriad (limb or organ) near the outside of the part, and make it penetrate into the inside in one place, and leave two ends of the cephalac; and rotate the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside in the other two ends of the cephalac.
Then rotate each one, and make each one penetrate from the inside to outside in the two ends of the myriad (limb or organ) on the opposite sides.
This method of suturing is better than common simple sutures, and it is the suturing that comes before the reminder (the next step).
This is the Gualla sermon
Others also say that the ventral suture is corrected with two needles, so it is that you enter each one with a needle and begin from the incision of the needle that corresponds to you, and make it penetrate across the other side according to the suture of those who sew hearts together.
And you should know that when there is a disruption in the middle of the abdomen, the suture of it is more difficult than the other parts of the abdomen.
But the treatment of a wound (plaga) is judged according to other wounds (plagues).
That is because when you achieve the recent wound with the patient's blood still flowing before the air alters it, and reduce the intestine (bude) and sew it properly and prepare it decently, then pause over the powdered carminative (encarnativa).
And if the air has already altered the wound, then pause over those ointments that are present with you until they make it hard and seal the needle holes, and let it heal head to toe; and take care of it in this way as with the healing of other wounds until it is healed.
If you are not present with the medicine, pause over it immediately as it starts to drip, bracken, and change every two days, just as I have taught you, until it is healed, since you do not need another medication when the ailment is simple.
If you fear that the ailment will spread to the main members, it is necessary for you to immerse wool in boiled oil of suitable quality or in rose oil and apply it on the circle of areas between the joints, and leave it there.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, which continues for many days, then crystallize it with black violet-tea, and especially if the pus has reached the intestine and has penetrated into its cavity.
And know that the one coming from large intestine heals more easily than the one in smaller intestines.
It is difficult to heal because the intestine known as "gegunu" does not receive healing from ailments that arise in it completely; and this is due to the great number of veins there, its large size, the subtlety of its tissue, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
If the substance produced by the ailment is a membrane, and you obtain it promptly, reduce it according to your rule for reducing intestines.
If it has been some time and it turns green or black, then you should tighten it with a thread on the area that is affected by it, in order to obtain blood flow, because there are veins and arteries in the membrane.
And place the incision that is outside of the membrane and stop two ends of the thread hanging from the side of the wound, so that there is relief from the attraction of it, and you will release the tension of the membrane and the discharge of the pus from the ailment.
Remembering ailments when they occur in the intestine.
When there is a small disruption in the intestine, it can be restored in some people, because I have seen that which was ailmented in the abdomen with lance blows and was an ailment of the right side of the stomach, and the ailment was old and had formed a fistula, and it was treated with care and patience.
Therefore I continued the healing of it since it was not confirmed in its healing, but continued to carefully treat it until the fire healed and the area was consolidated.
And I saw the area consolidated, so I examined the patient who had sustained an injury to his abdomen; and no one should fall ill due to this unfortunate accident, and he should continue with his usual diet and drink, and enter into baths and exercise.
Experienced individuals say that when a small ailment occurs in the intestine, it is necessary to tie it in this manner: take large grains of wheat; and adjust the two lips of the ailment and place one grain from among them with its mouth open over the two lips of the ailment; thus when you press on it and tighten its mouth, it separates from it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
Place another grain next to the first one and do not cease making grains until the entire ailment is covered.
Reduce it and secure the ailment with the grains; and leave the grains attached to the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not harm the patient in any way.
It is possible to tie the intestine with a thin thread made from an animal's intestine since it is smaller in gauge; and you should take the extremity of this fine thread for the intestine, making sure it is well stripped, and tie the extremity of it with thread, enveloping it, and insert the thread into needles and sew it to the intestine, reducing the disruption.
This method of stitching with grains is not only by faith and hope.
If the ailment is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the small intestines, then you should not trust only in subtlety, but seek another method that can heal it completely.
Treatise on ulcers and fistulas.
Know that every ailment and boil that becomes old and festered, and does not heal and exudes pus constantly without being drained, is universally called a fistula and we call it an ulcer.
A fistula, in truth, is a hard, white nodule without pain and with a cavity similar to the cavity of a bladder stone; and for this reason it is called a hard ulcer, that is, bladder stone.
And it is in some men who have excessive moisture, which flows from the arm; and the moisture is frequently expelled within certain hours. And sometimes this moisture becomes moved, and it becomes little, thick, and subtle.
And I have shown all those causes, their signs, and the treatment with medicines in the division.
And so it is necessary for me to tell you the treatment of a fistula which is made by surgical means with a knife.
You should know that a fistula occurs in all parts of the body; because those are fistulas that reach the veins and arteries, or nerves, or the bladder, or the intestine, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the spine, or one of the joints composed in this way such as hand and foot; and those are the ones that provide proximity to the main member and similar parts.
Therefore, this type of fistula is one of those difficult to heal diseases that does not receive treatment and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
If one of these fistulas has such great depth that it does not reach the locations mentioned, and you hope for its healing, and wish to gain knowledge of it, then take a probe or an iron, and if the fistula is straight, then pierce it with this.
But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a probe of lead, because lead, having the lightness of its body, is alleviated and curved along the twist.
But if the fistula has multiple openings, it is not possible for you to signify over it with a probe.
Then sterilize the wounds with a solution, since the moisture used to sterilize one area will contaminate other wounds and spread from them.
Then carefully investigate whether you have a bone or nerve, and determine the shape of the fistula (long or short) or an abscess, and find out if it is a single or multiple fistulas and whether it is located in an area where all your strength, concentration, and treatment applied to the patient, and discover the cause of pain, then apply pressure with your hand on the spot, similar to the symptoms and causes of an abscess.
And when you have stood by all those causes with certainty, then go to the treatment according to your confidence: namely, that you consider whether it is an apparent fistula near the surface, far from a joint or nerve, artery, vein, or one of the places which you know.
Then you dry the fistula as previously mentioned in the narrative, remove any pus or corrupted flesh, and treat any new growths in the skin or tissue around the wound and let it heal once it is healed.
If the fistula is deep and long, then according to tradition, you must incise it as deeply as possible, clean out all infected tissue, apply hot poultices wrapped in medicinal herbs, insert these into the cavity of the fistula which you have grasped with an instrument.
And let it be done with the poultices for several days until the medicine penetrates and eradicates all the corruption in the cavity of the fistula.
Then restore it with clean bandages until it is healed.
If it does not heal with this treatment, then you must cauterize it as recommended.
If the cause of the fistula is a bone and you are certain of this, then investigate it and dry it as recommended if you do not rule out any possible causes of veins or nerves or major limbs as mentioned previously.
If the bone is discovered and there is any corruption or blackening in it, then you should remove it until all the corruption is stopped; and treat it with something that encourages healing until it is healed.
If it is not healed and continues to bleed as before, then you should realize that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; therefore, you must investigate further and cleanse and disinfect it with the utmost care, using your final strength, and then restore it.
And if it heals, that is good; and if not, then you should realize that the corruption is deep within the body, which has not been reached, and in this case, there is no hope for it but to leave it alone.
If the infected bone is small and can be extracted, then you should remove it with fine forceps which are suitable for this purpose.
If there are multiple bones involved, then carefully extract all of them, and do not overlook any potential causes of complications with your strength.
If there are any complications with the moisture or if the incision does not cause fear or error, then you should make an incision and drain any liquids or infected tissue, and remove the bones.
If you are not prepared to remove the bones at this time, then wait for the wound to heal a little so that it can be healed more easily, and leave it covered with flesh and liquid, and keep the wound from drying out, and compress the incision site that you have made during your operation.
If afraid, place a cushion on the spot submerged in boiling trissa oil, or a spot submerged in Egyptian anguent, or one of the bitter verts, for when those liquids boil, the bones are separated from their ablation, and the attraction is alleviated.
However, if it is a large bone like the hip bone or thigh bone or similar to them, and what is corrupt is only its surface, then remove that with resin only behind where the blackness and corruption remain, and apply healing to the wound.
However, if what is corrupt is a large part and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and cut through the area where the corruption was found, and heal that within until it is consolidated.
And you recommend to you what happens to a man in his thigh, that you hold it and assist him in your operation.
Take a young man approximately thirty years old, to whom pain in the thigh occurs, and from within the limbs there is bad matter approaching towards the center of the body into the thigh, and it is matter of an abscess with large abscess, and it is not caused externally.
Therefore, the time was extended for that by the error of the doctors until the abscess opened, and materials came out from it, and its healing was delayed until the hernia became fistulated, and they made openings in the affected areas which all became purulent and the body's humidity.
And after two years, many doctors tried to cure it without wisdom but with technique until I was called.
And I saw the hernia and the matter flowing from those openings through a large wound, and the body of that man was completely stabilized, and his skin was yellow.
And then I inserted a probe into one of those openings and reached the bone.
Then I approached and probed all the openings, and found that they were reaching from all parts of the hernia.
And then I took a scalpel and made an incision into one of the openings, where I discovered a bone fragment, and found it rotten and corrupted; and a portion of the hernia was already rotted out to the mesocolon.
And then I cut away what had been discovered and prepared from the exposed bone.
And I knew that it was not in the bone but the corruption which had abscessed and was cut away, and I had already drained it.
And then I applied healing to the wound with long-lasting consolidating medicine, but it was not consolidated.
And then I investigated and discovered further on the bone following the first discovery, and found continuous corruption with the bone.
And I cut away what appeared to be of the corruption, and then I attempted to perform healing and restoration on it, but it was not restored.
And then I continued to investigate further and did not stop making small incisions in the bone piece by piece, and performed healing on it, but it was not restored until I made an incision around a palm's width, and that extracted with its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it healed slightly and became well.
And it was not necessary to investigate or section the operation on him, except for the loosening of his flesh and the scarcity of his tolerance and fear of death, as he had experienced it at all times due to excessive bad syncope evacuation.
Therefore, it healed completely, and nothing was found in the bone area; and the positioning of him in his body and the return of his virtue were made good; and he was maintained in his positions and did not cause any harm to him by ambulation or any discomfort in any way.
However, if a protruding bone in the body is already broken, then it is necessary for you to section it according to this method: and take a strong liquid and soak that at the end of the protruding bone, and order someone to extend it; and place the liquid of wool thicker than the first one over the bone tissue, and spread it over the skin surrounding it; and stretch the area by pulling the skin away from the edges, and you discover the skin over the area you want to cut so that the cut does not harm the skin.
And place a board or table under the bone properly, as when you do this it is not forbidden to cut the rotten flesh with a knife.
It is necessary that the cut be made over the rotten area little by little, as if it is in the depression of the corrupt bone and does not appear on its surface, then perhaps the cut will have to be made at another time.
And if the bone is rotten but not protruding, then it is one continuous division with the other, and the corruption is in some part or parts of it, then you discover all the skin; and place a board under it, and cut that of the first division where the corruption continues until the cutting of the other division is also continued.
And the lock corresponding to the place of corruption should be small, as has been said.
If the corruption is at a joint, incise the corrupted joint and saw the bone where it joins with the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not reasonable but rather trickery.
If the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is difficult; however, you must investigate the corruption by finding out which method it appears to you, and then incise and clean it according to each disposition that is possible for you, and let every remedy be corrected without causing harm to your veins or nerves.
And you should know what incision tools and saws are for cutting these bones, which depends on the position of the bones, their preparation, and the coarseness and subtlety or smallness and rarity of the bones; therefore, you must prepare all types of operations with appropriate instruments for that operation.
And you should know that this operation concerns the type of instrument required for you; since you have extensive study and knowledge of the various methods of this art, and are familiar with the various symptoms of diseases, therefore you already know which instruments are appropriate for all diseases.
And you will learn at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you will use as simple ones with which you will perform the procedure that you have experienced on others. The form of the saw:
The form of another saw:
The form of another large saw:
The form of a ray (bone cutter): Let the head of this bone cutter be in the shape of a star-shaped nail head, and let the points be like the points on a saw.
It is not necessary except when the joints are crushed or their opening is wide.
The form of smaller scissors:
The form of lateral scissors:
The correct translation is: "Another suitable form of incision should be made: the arch above and its sharpness of iron should be made, and the member below should be pierced with a lance decently." Another suitable shape for the incision should be made. The arch should be formed above, and its sharpness from the iron should be made. The member beneath should be pierced with a lance decently.
Shape of a saw with a concavity:
Another suitable form for the scissors:
Another suitable shape for the curved-tip scissors:
Another suitable shape for small scissors resembling a clamp:
Another suitable shape for smaller incision knives:
The shape of another incision knife, resembling a ray, with a serrated edge that is used in various locations to cut through the bone.
The shape of a saw that is suitable for cutting through bones (perforating).
And the tip is triangular and has a sharp point.
It is made of Indian iron, and it resembles all the causes that we spoke about scissors, incision knives, and saws.
Of incision and bone sawing.
The endpoints can be narrowed or due to an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or when you have treated the corruption but the cure does not work, or sometimes the corruption spreads to a limb without any apparent cause, in that case, it is necessary to incise the affected member through the corrupted area, so that the patient can escape death or greater damage to the limb.
And the sign of that which happens is that the member becomes black before it burns out, or it may become swollen before the corruption enters into the same member and spreads throughout the body; therefore be cautious and incise it.
When the corruption is caused by poisonous striking of some causes, such as from a sea scorpion, viper, viperine or similar.
If the corruption or striking is at the end of a limb, then you should cut the limb and do not give space for the corruption to enter into your hand.
If you reach the hand, then you should cut off that part of the hand, and do not give space for the corruption to enter into your arm.
If it swells, then you should cut off the arm at the joint.
If the corruption spreads and reaches the joint, then it is the death of the patient; and administering another treatment to cure is as much virtue as possible.
If the foot's corruption swells, then you should cut off that part of the foot at one of the toes.
If it grows on the sole of the foot, then you should cut off the entire foot. But if it grows in the ankle, then you should cut off the leg at the ankle joint.
And if the corruption has reached the knee, it is not salvageable but dismissal, and you should let the patient die.
The method of cutting off a limb or sewing it is to tighten the ligaments at the place you want to cut, and tighten another ligament over that area; then extend one ligament on each side, and extend another ligament above it; separate the flesh between the two ligaments with a spatula until all the flesh is exposed; and then make an incision or sew it.
It is necessary to place linen cloth over all the incisions to prevent any injury to the site, and bring the wound to the patient with a fitting dressing and cauterized aposteme.
But if bleeding occurs during the operation, you should cauterize the site with caution, or place some restraining powders on it to stop the bleeding; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
And tie the affected limb with linen cloth at an appropriate place, and care for it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you that in the case of a man suffering in his foot, you administer the treatment which I also recommend, which is called "negro en el pie" due to its resemblance to burns caused by fire.
And that corruption initially occurs in the patient's affected part, spreading throughout the entire foot.
Therefore, prepare the man by applying more of the treatment as soon as possible to reach the affected limb with its intensity of pain and heat, and cut off that foot at the joint, and heal it.
Over a long time, that methodical corruption occurs in the hand as indicated.
And therefore, I advise you to perform a treatment that removes that excess from the hand using appropriate medications for cleansing the body of it; and do not let the excess continue in one hand without spreading to the other hand.
And the patient called me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to do that hoping for the recovery of the excess, and instead I feared the amputation of his hand would be fatal, since the virtue of the patient was in decline.
And after he lost hope in me, he returned to his homeland and informed me that the patient had prepared himself and cut off his entire hand, and it was healed.
I have not added to this narrative except as an aid for treating this ailment, and as a sign that it should be understood and acted upon accordingly.
Cure with sennas and the quality of clysters using medicines.
If an abscess occurs in any fleshy limb and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it collects pus, then break and perforate it, release the pus from it, leave the area as if it were a vessel, cover it with thin linen fabric, and do not allow secondary corruption to occur; nor does it press on bone or nerve or ligament. This is called a sinus, and is not called a fistula.
But if the space is prolonged until corruption begins in any limb, it is called a fistula and not sinus.
The treatment for it is to cut off that covering completely, as if it were rolled up, and especially when it has been thinned out and made like fabric, and make sure it does not stick to the area due to its corruption.
But if you hope that the covering will stick and that the corruption has not yet been achieved by secondary consequence, and there is a swelling in the covering, then you should treat it with a clyster.
And since you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the breath that comes from it has a foul smell, then clisterize it with the Egyptian medicine which is oil, wine, garlic, crushed into portions, mixed together, placed in a vessel, and poured over fire until the medicine becomes thin and reaches a specific point of boiling.
Then take the necessary amount and dissolve it in water and honey; clisterize the sinus with it, strengthen the openings of it, and leave the medicine there for a period of two hours.
Then extract it carefully; do this for as many days as necessary until the sinus is cleansed and the stench is gone.
Sometimes it is cleansed with water and ashes when the previous medicine is not available; in this case, take ashes from vinegar, put them in water, let it boil, and then strain it. Use this solution to cleanse the sinus until you are confident that it has been completely closed off.
When the patient is not tolerant of the Egyptian medicine or water and ashes, then clisterize it with a mixture of water, honey, and crushed garlic, or with wine and honey mixed together. In this case, honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and wine makes the sinus sticky, particularly when it contains an excess of stiffness and dryness.
When you have done this for several days and are confident that the sinus has been closed off, then clisterize it with a solution that promotes new tissue growth in the area.
And take defyfinkon oil, dissolve it in rose oil and vinegar of rosin, or clisterize it with other medications and remedies that have properties I have previously written about in the treatise on remedies.
If the opening of the sinus is narrow and the clisterium cannot be inserted, then widen it gradually with a small iron tool, stopping when it becomes wide enough to insert the clisterium. Cover the affected area with Egyptian or basilica oil until it is fully dilated.
If the opening is wide, sew together the lips of it and leave the remaining quantity inside the clisterium (medical instrument).
If the opening of the sinus from which the arm extends upward between the thighs is wet, dry it at the base where it originates so that the arm can run outside, because when the arm is constricted by a sinus, flesh is generated there.
If it is not possible to dry the sinus around the bone at its base as you wish, then perform the preparation necessary for moving the limb so that the arm comes out easily according to your ability and without being hindered by any cause of the arm.
That which is over the sinus opening should always be moistened, so that what is inside the arm can flow out. To determine if what runs from the arm is more or less, digestible or indigestible.
Consider the location of that sinus, if the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess.
When your treatment continues in this manner and the matter that is discharged from the sinus has adhered to the orifices, or it becomes adherent, then you must loosen or remove it on the third day, and when you have removed the plaster, change the bandage and renew the salve.
If the sinus has small and subtle cavities, do not despair of adhesion because the healing approaches, for some men have slow generation of flesh in their wounds, and it is opposite in those.
If the sinus becomes more than five days indigestible, you must know that the sinus does not adhere; if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and prolonged, then you should adjust in drying of the medications, and if the medications are wet in their substance and in their virtue, they should be dried like diaphetic ointment when excess moisture is added.
And the last remedy, which is curative, is to take diaphetic ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and have an ancient antidote in its substance, and apply it with it, and use it.
When that is not available, use diaphetic ointment, honey that is thickened, and apply it; or take myrrh, aloe, and sulfur, grind everything into powder over the hot fire, apply it to a linen cloth and strengthen it on the sinus; apply the powdered mixture with the thickened honey, and then strengthen the latter over the linen cloth.
Sometimes it is administered with long-term aristolochia and the juice of this celestial plant (this refers to the celestial plant) and centaury flour, and use these simple ingredients or adjust them, grind them and sift them, and powder it over the recommended honey; and use it.
If the sinus is prolonged and not cured by this treatment, you must know that the corruption is in the bone of it, and make an examination of the bones or other hard members or the ligaments; then cure it with a fistula treatment as described above.
Treatment for paronychia and nail abrasion, digit addition, and section.
Paronychia is an abscess that arises from the nail of the finger of the hand or foot, and it can be strong in other places, and when prolonged and its cure is expensive, it becomes an abscessed abscess or corrupted, and it eats away at the root of the nail, completely corrupting it, and its corruption spreads to the bone beneath it, causing a foul odor, and the tip of the finger turns black.
So when you have that with what has been said in the division and it does not conform to your treatment, then you must incise with iron all the superfluous matter remaining from the nail and cauterize the wound with it, as cautery is beneficial in this case.
But if the bone is good and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail press the flesh inward at the sides, and it begins to hurt and swell there, then you must stop a fine needle under the edge of the nail that pierces the flesh, apply pressure on it and cut the flesh with ease, apply medicine over what remains of the flesh from corrosive substances until it is completely absorbed; and heal it with ointment until it is healed.
But if the corruption has already reached the bone, you must incise the bone and extract it, as nothing can be healed when the bone is rotten.
If the corruption and rottenness move towards the finger, you must incise it in one of the knuckles according to its memory, and heal it until it is healed.
But if the nail is struck or crushed and causes violent pain, then at the beginning you should anesthetize the patient, and cut the nail with a flat chisel along a transverse section from top to bottom, ensuring that the incision does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, as this will cause the patient intense pain and may lead to the growth of excess tissue in the area; and heal the wound with a substance that relieves pain.
A large, well-built man, who is strong in flesh, bones, or nails.
The joint is located at the root of a large man, or it originates in a large man's bones. If the joint originates in a large man's bones, it is not harmful; but if it originates in the joints, it causes great harm.
If they originate in flesh, the sections are light, and you should cut them with a lancet.
If they originate in the root of a joint, the cure is difficult; therefore, avoid its abscessing.
If it originates in bones, you must cut the flesh first, using a round incision into the bone, then use an appropriate saw and cure that to heal.
Consolidation that occurs in joints between the muscles observed or due to the nature of the man who was born this way, or due to consolidation of wounds or burns, or similar, therefore it is necessary to cut that consolidation until the joint returns to its natural form.
Place cloth soaked in red oil between their swollen tissues to prevent them from consolidating lightly, and separate them or place a thin sheet of lead between them until it is consolidated as necessary.
Similarly, if there is consolidation in the palm of a joint, then you must cut that consolidation as necessary and according to the shape of the limb.
Incisions made without reason are varicose veins.
Varicose veins are varices, and they are large, swollen veins filled with melancholic superfluity, which move in the limbs of the body, and their major occurrence is in the legs, especially those who travel, work, and carry heavy loads.
Therefore, you must administer purge of the body with black bile several times with strong evacuation, and apply bloodletting from the basilica vein to the patient.
The treatment of these [varicose veins] with iron is according to two methods: the first is that it should be cut and black blood drawn out, or the second method is that the vein should be elevated and everything extracted.
The incision is made according to this method: first, the leg is wrapped with hot water until the black blood becomes thin and resolved, which is foul from the vein, and then the patient's leg is straightened above the knee joint to the ankle joint with a bandage, and the vein is cut in one, two, or three places, making a wide incision, and the black blood is raised with the thumb of the patient's hand from below the vein upwards and downwards until the desired amount and times have been reached, and this will remove the power of the patient.
And bind that up, and order the patient to abstain from foods causing black bile.
And repeat the treatment with phlebotomy when the veins are full and you notice this in the patient.
The elevation of them [varicose veins] is according to this method: if there are movements in the leg, immerse it in hot water and bandage the leg with warm water until it becomes swollen and the veins overflow; or exercise it with strong exercise, if hot water is not available, until the limb is scalded.
And cut the cunune (codena) in the correct position of the vein by making a long incision or short, depending on whether you want to cut the dorsum or the sole of the foot.
And open the cunune with scissors and strip the vein from all sides until it is felt, and you must be aware that when you see it reddening, it is approaching blackness.
Therefore, when you notice that the cunune becomes white like a cord, evacuate.
And place it downwards, the root towards the area to be elevated and displaced from the cunune, and suspend it with a piece of lion's hair.
And make another incision next to that incision for three fingers, and strip the cunune from above the vein until it appears.
And raise that and incise the lower incision towards the sole of the foot, and remove it and raise it until it is extracted through the second incision, and remove it from the incision above that.
And do this until it is completely extracted from the upper or lower incision of all the incisions, and then close that incision.
And if you cannot extract and elevate it, insert a double-pointed needle with strong thread and tie it off, or insert the root downwards and rotate your hand all around until it is displaced. And be careful not to cut it; because if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to elevate it, and this will harm the patient by that injury.
And when that is completely displaced, place a cloth soaked in wine and red oil over the wound, and treat it until it heals.
And if the life is contracted with curvature at the partition, which is an enclosure at the parts, and not as it should be according to what we have said, then it is necessary that you cut through that entire curvature of the partition and the places of enclosure of it, and suspend it with sutures within until you lift it up completely.
And beware that you do not cut into the vein and injure it, for it will be difficult to lift it up, and use your prudence in this matter.
Shape the incision near where life has been severed:
Make the incision not too close to the vein or sharp at its end so that it does not injure the vein, and it should be of a wide flexibility, for if it is too thin, it will cut into the vein due to its thinness; having excessive thickness like we have said.
Extraction of the leg vein.
This vein is born in the hips, such as the Ategi (Aegean) in Arabian lands and in the dry and arid lands of India where there is little vegetation and no grass or herbs.
And a strong vein is born in other parts of the body besides the hips.
And its reproduction is due to rotting, which comes from the intestine, such as snakes, worms and scabs and worms breeding between the intestine and the flesh.
The sign of the onset of this condition is swelling in the hip, and the location becomes inflamed; and from there, the vein starts to ooze like a plant root.
When the end appears (of the fetus), it is necessary that you cover that with a lead weight of about one dram, weighing between two and three drams, and hang it down from the woman's thigh.
And for as many days as there is any cause at the partition outside, cover it with lead and leave it like that. And if the mot (disorder or disease) persists, then you should incise a part of it and cover the rest; do not incise it too deeply until it is outside, for if you incise it too deeply, it will be contracted and enter the flesh and cause abscesses, pustules and ulcers in that location.
Therefore, it should be treated gently and extracted little by little, until it is completely removed from the body without any remaining cause in the body.
And from this vein, it has appeared in some men who are as tall as five palms and have already reached twenty palms in length.
If it is incised at the time of its treatment, insert the lance into the wound and pierce it deeply with a long lance through the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer purgatives to the location for several days with medicines; and take care of it with abscess treatment.
This vein sometimes has rampant motions (growths), and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, it causes many abscesses, and is born from each abscess separately.
And therefore, treat it as we have said in the division and with what was previously mentioned.
From the incision of worms generated under the skin, this condition is called cow disease (bovine illness).
This illness is called cow disease in some places because it often affects cattle and is a small worm that is born between the intestine and the flesh, which grows throughout the body and rises and falls, and is manifested through the sensation of pain in each member until it ruptures the intestine and comes out.
The generation of it is due to putrefaction of certain humors, such as when worms, snakes, roundworms, and parasites occur in the abdomen.
It is feared because of the malice of it, since when it goes through the body and reaches the head, it is carried to the nose, then it immediately invades it and destroys the nasal cavity, and this causes many observations.
Therefore, when you want to cure it and extract it, one must not do so without knowing its movement and appearance, and therefore it is necessary to strengthen what is above it and below it tightly and compress it strongly, and then dry it and remove it.
If it is embedded in the flesh and does not rot, you should wait until it emerges, then you must cauterize with fire on the area where it dwells. The main cause that is feared is its corruption which corrupts the place as we have said.
If you see that being carried to the head near the nose, you should strengthen above the eyebrow with strong compression, and dry it, and remove it; and it is necessary for the patient to use cleansing of the body with medicines that evacuate corrupt humors, and guard oneself from foods causing putrefaction.
From incision over the illness of the nose.
This illness is called "nafar" in our land, and it is pain that occurs in some members, and it is confined to one member from another.
And you have seen that as I advised. You were summoned to a sick woman in a village, and you discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and since it was left open for an hour, I saw that inflammation swell like worms rising to this point, more slowly than it should be, as if it were living silver moving from place to place.
And then the pain of that area settled in the muscle and remained there for about an hour.
Then it moved to the other body towards the other arm.
Then I advised you to turn it over the entire body as I saw it, and it was very astonishing at its change and the speed of one member to another. I had already seen that in the past in the most similar cases, but I have seen many times when pain is transferred from member to member. But not with the nose as in the woman.
I did not think that it was because of that, but rather because the woman was old, where old people have dry bodies and exposed veins, and in this case, it appeared to my senses that the putridity was transferred.
It is necessary that it does not appear according to this treatment in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with weakened veins.
And when you want to cure it and the patient feels pain, do not do it as I said at the nose, but rather strengthen above it lightly and dry it until the putridity is expelled, and cauterize the area.
But if you do not see it in your noses, then you cure it by cleansing the body and evacuating putridity, and singe it with foul-smelling ointments and serapion ointment and similar ones.
From the extraction of thorns.
Thorns are various depending on their species, and according to the places in the body where they occur, because of their diversity, some have large points, small, concave, blunt, which are solid ones; some have three angles, and those with tongues, and those that are prickly.
And concerning the symptoms of the brain, when an arrow penetrates the bone and exits through the skull, for it often causes violent bleeding, blindness, dizziness, fever in the head, inflammation and fever of the tongue, spasms and confusion of thought, vomiting of bile, the word is quickly lost and the voice destroyed, and pus oozes from the wound site, which resembles white moist powder similar to ash and watery discharge like that of flesh.
And therefore if such symptoms appear to you, then you should refrain from treatment and extraction of the arrowhead unless necessary.
But the symptoms of an arrow in the heart, which is near the left nipple, and feels hard when embedded, not empty; and the movement of the arrow is similar to that of a pulse, and bleeding from the wound is black, and there is chilliness at the site, sweating, and fainting; therefore know that death approaches.
And the symptoms of an arrow in the lungs are characterized by sputum from the wound that is foamy and bloody, and vessels near the neck become congested, and the color of the patient changes, and they expel a great amount of breath and ask for warm air.
And if the arrow strikes the diaphragm, which is located in the lower abdomen, then pain is characteristic of small ribs and is accompanied by severe and violent pain and heavy breathing, but all other parts of the muscles are not affected.
And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then there will be foul-smelling pus from the wound.
And if the arrow strikes the abdomen and is embedded, there will be a tear or opening in the wound, and intestine, hernia, or other tissue that is torn, and there is no hope of healing from extracting the arrowhead.
And if the arrow strikes the bladder and comes out through urine, and there is some cause for the rupture outside, then pain is severe on the patient, you know that it is fatal.
But other members such as the head, neck, jaw, shoulders, adjoining parts, spinal column, vertebrae, pelvis, and their similar body parts are saved if the arrow does not strike a vein or an artery, and the arrowhead is not poisoned.
And I recommend to you that you know the nature of these arrows, which signifies the treatment for them.
The cause is that in a man, an arrow strikes the lacrimal gland of the eye at the root of the nose, and I extracted it from another side, removing the gray matter of the bone, and he recovered without harm to the eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew that struck him in the root of his eye, removing the eyelid with it, and the arrow was already hidden and could not be obtained except for a small tip attached to its shaft, and it was a sharp Turkish arrow without iron heads.
And the Jew recovered well, and no harm came to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man that struck him in the jaw, an Arabic arrow with iron heads, and it was submerged in his jawbone; and so I cut it into two pieces, and then I carefully removed it, and the Christian recovered.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who had been struck in the stomach, thinking he would die from it; and since thirty days had passed without any change in his condition, I cut into the arrow and threaded it, and he recovered, and there was no further harm to him.
And I saw another man who had an arrow in his back, and the wound had healed over time, and after seven years, the arrowhead emerged from the wound.
And I saw a woman who had an arrow in her stomach, and the wound was healed on the inside, and there was no change in her condition over time, and the woman suffered no harm in any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man who had an arrow in his face and the wound had healed, but the arrowhead was broken off, causing no further pain or similar symptoms.
And I extracted the arrow from the man of the king who had been struck in the middle of his nose and it had declined a little on the right side, but the entire arrowhead was hidden.
You were summoned to the cure of him approximately three days after the arrow shot.
Then I examined the wound of the arrow, and it seemed narrow; then I inquired about it with delicate touch, but did not feel it; however, he felt a prick below the right ear, so I suspected that the prick was from the tip of the arrow.
I spread the area with a plaster containing attracting and digestive properties, convinced that the area would open up to me so that I could see where the arrow was, so that I could cut it off.
And no accident happened in the area that suggested the arrow had reached that spot; and I continued with the plaster on it for many days, but nothing happened; the wound healed in the meantime, and the patient felt the arrow in his nose after many days, telling me about it.
And then I placed sharp and corrosive medicine on the wound for many days until a pus opened, and with delicate touch I probed that area, and found the tip of the arrow thinly adhering to the shaft.
And then I adjusted the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow appeared to me clearly, and I waited for it for a time of up to four months.
And when the wound was enlarged, it became possible for me to insert forceps into it, and I left them there without them moving, then I did not cease probing and ingeniously working on it with various methods, until one day, using instruments made for this purpose, I took hold of it with descending forceps as described at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it; and then I restored the wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored it and the wound healed, and the patient recovered completely without any complication.
And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some arrows, which you should take note of and understand what I have not said, for the parts of this art and the difficulties in it are not understood with simple narration or reading that book.
And the wise craftsman understands little by much, and from what is present he understands what is absent, and he recognizes new operations and new instruments as a consequence of foreign causes in the art when they occur.
And therefore I say that arrows are not forgotten in the members into which they have been shot except by two methods: either because of attraction to the place entered, or because of the opposite side.
The arrow that is shot into a fleshy location or proceeds from a fleshy area and is shot and lost.
And if the time of the shot is not known, it is necessary that you leave it for some days until the surrounding tissue can soften and the attraction and its exit are relieved.
Similarly, if it has been shot into bone and you do not know the time, leave it for some days and apply pressure and movement to it every day, and it will be lost.
If you do not know the time of the arrowshot, it is necessary that you perforate around the arrow in all directions with a fairly sharp tool until the area is enlarged by the arrow, and then extract it.
However, if the arrow is embedded in the chest and cannot be felt, you should probe it with touch, and if you feel it, you should shoot it out with some suitable tools for attraction.
And if you cannot go over it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the probe, and this is neither bone, nerve nor vein, then you should make an incision on the wound until it is enlarged and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is in the ear with those that should be kept, you should cut the flesh around it in all directions using all the ingenuity you can; and work on it, if you cannot go over the exit of the flesh by breaking the eardrums and twisting them until you succeed.
And when you perform the extraction of the arrow in any location where it is, you should use twisting with your hand and forceps in all directions until it obeys; and work delicately to avoid breaking the arrow and making its extraction difficult, using subtle techniques for easy attraction of it and its extraction.
And if you cannot handle it at that time, then leave it for several days until the surrounding parts can be prepared, and then repeat it when it is relieved. But if there is bleeding from the wound, then administer what has been said for its treatment in its own chapter.
Be careful with the incision of vein or nerve, or tendon, and administer all means to prevent the suture from escaping; do it gradually, peacefully, slowly, and firmly as I and you recommend.
Therefore, tie the suture so that the patient is as in the figure according to which you must sew the suture there, because it is more beneficial. But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
But sutures that are missing on the opposite side of the other part, or that have already been cut from one part to another, or are swollen outside the suture line due to the part above the adjacent skin and sometimes protruding; in this case, you cut it; and make the incision according to the amount that the forceps take; then grab it, because it is made easily.
But if it is retained in the bone, then you should twist the blade against it until the suture penetrates the bone, and expand it to make room for it, and then pull it out.
And if it does not protrude, leave it for several days and repeat it until it comes out.
If the thread of the suture is in that area, then push it back with it.
But if the thread is cut and you want to administer pressure, insert your finger and push it in if it is hard, using a hollow spoon to guide it into the concavity of the suture and then push it back with it.
But if the suture is concave, you should push it in with a strong instrument into that area, because the suture will be relieved by this.
And if the suture is tightened, you must compress all the flesh around it if possible, and then treat it with what is appropriate.
If the suture is caught on the leg, abdomen, bladder, chest, or side and it is possible to cut it, then cut it and guard against incision of vein or nerve, pull it out, and sew the wound if necessary, and treat it until it heals.
The shape of the forceps for suturing:
Their tips are like a bird's beak, made with scissors when they grab the suture so that they do not let it go.
And of these are made various types, large, few, and medium-sized, according to the size and thickness of the suture, as well as the width of the wound and the tension of the tissue.
Like a rod to relieve the entry of the concave suture into it and push the hard suture with it.
On phlebotomy of veins.
The veins to be phlebotomized are usually .xxx., Of these, there are 16 in the head. There are two pulsating veins, which are near the ears, called "auricular"; there are two plants that are in the two temples visible; and there are two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of the two eyes called "lacrimal"; and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead, and the vein at the end of the nose; and there are two grooves that are on the neck; and there are two veins that are on the upper lip; and there are two veins that are on the lower lip; and these are the veins called "angular"; and there are two veins under the tongue. But the veins to be phlebotomized in the arms are .v., When discussing those [veins], one is cephalic, and it should be let loose the latissimus dorsi; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and it is deaf, and is a minor vein, and is composed of a branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic; and the people name that one "the vein of the whole body", and basilica is the vein which is stopped in the latissimus dorsi, and is named "cephalic", and common people call it "vein of the abdomen"; the one of the arm, and is passed over the elbow, and is that in which bloodletting is performed, and is that which appears above the point for a visible appearance; and saphenous, and is the vein which is between the named auricle and the smallest digit, and it is found in two branches.
And in the leg and thigh there are three veins: one of them is that which follows the curve of the outer border of the latissimus dorsi; and the second is saphenous, and its place is below the thigh of the latissimus dorsi; and the sciatic, and its place is below the thigh of the latissimus silvestre; and in the thigh are other veins similar to those.
The juxtaposition of the veins that are near the ears is remedy for ancient catarrhs, emigraines, and scalp sores.
And as for the bleeding of those veins that I recommend to you: it should be done with the patient's head shaved, and the patient's head should be washed in the occipital region where both veins are found covered by a large cloth with good friction; then tightly bind the patient's neck with a bandage so that they appear at two places on each side of the head; and you must seek those with your fingers, and if you feel their pulses with your fingers, here is a sign to try it.
Then take the surgical knife that is incisive, and insert it below the vein into the hollow of the neck until blood comes out. And then lift your hand with the vein and the neck towards the divisions above, and incise the vein with an incisive incision. And let the length of the incision be adjusted to two fingers or around that amount; and let the blood flow out as much as you wish.
And tightly bind it with pulvils and leave it until it is healed.
And already, at the beginning of this treatise, there is an incision of those and their cauterization.
But of the two arteries that are in the temples, the remedy for migraine, old and bad, and chronic optic nerve disease and disorders of the liver with acute excesses discharged to the eyes is bloodletting.
The quality of bloodletting those is as follows, which I recommend to you: tightly bind the patient's neck so that they appear at two places on each side of the head where their pulses can be felt with your fingers; and then you must test it.
Then lift the neck over the vein to the divisions above, as indicated by your fingers, and insert the bloodletting tool incisively below, and elevate the vein upward; and incise it in the same way as you did with the other two veins; and let the blood flow out according to your need.
And loosen the patient's neck, and place your fingers on the vein for an hour, and then place your hand on that area and bind it with pulvils and tighten it strongly above, and leave it until it is healed.
And already, the reminder of those (bloodletting procedures) has been made, and their incision, and their attraction has been mentioned at the beginning of the treatise.
And therefore, the remedy for bloodletting of the vein on the forehead is similar to that of the cephalic vein for ancient facial diseases, migraines, and sores with a foul odor.
The quality of the lancet operation on him is as you recommend, so it is that the patient strengthens his neck with a bandage until the vein appears; and take the instrument which is called the lancet, this is its form:
Pause the puncture at the head of the lancet on that vein and perform it with a downward or other cause in its method, and let the blood flow according to the amount you desire; then release the patient's perforation and hold it until it is healed.
Sometimes an incision is made with a lancet, but it's not necessary that the lancet be of sharp point as other lancets, it should rather be blunt, and make the incision transversely, because the bone is close and strong, so the lancet would easily break when it is thin.
Moreover, the advantage of the two veins that are in the tear-ducts of two eyes, due to the inflammation of the eyes from heat and scabies on the eyelids, and for facial diseases.
The quality of the lancet procedure is that the patient strengthens his neck with a bandage and then make the incision there, you should stand over his head.
And the lancet incision should be made transversely along a short length and only a little bit, since there is not much flesh in that area; if the lancet is too thin, it can easily break at its end.
And let the blood flow for as much as necessary, stop over that area, hold it with a new cloth and then release it.
Moreover, the lancet of the nose vein is used for acute fever and violent sweating, as well as facial diseases, migraines, and heat or inflammation that occurs on the face, especially in the elderly.
The quality of the lancet procedure on him is that the patient strengthens his neck and places his left hand near his nose, takes the thin long lancet and puts it in the middle of the nasal cavity where it does not appear to the touch, because the vein does not become visible there, and blood begins to flow immediately.
It is necessary that you gradually move your hand with the small lancet and let blood flow as needed; then bind it with a new cloth, because it will be restored easily.
Moreover, the advantage of the lancet procedure on both sides is for constriction of the glands and the beginning of leprosy and many other diseases and swellings, as well as impetigo and destructive ulcers such as erysipelas.
The quality of the lancet procedure on those areas is that the patient holds each one in his neck with a bandage; and the surgeon stands over the head of the patient, while he lies on a stretcher.
And make the incision along the long vein with a wide thin lancet little by little; and let out blood according to measured quantity or as needed, as it is observed; and then make the other vein look similar.
And release the bandage and hold both veins with moderate pressure to prevent the patient from being overheated and let them rest in a warm place until the wound is healed.
The advantage of the lancet procedure on the veins in the neck is for small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, destructive ulcers and cracks, as well as destructive ulcers that are in the nose and its surrounding area.
The quality of the lancet procedure on those areas is that you face the patient, hold his neck with a bandage and turn his lips aside, observe both veins of which one is from the right lip and the other from the left; and the demonstration of each one is by the darkening of both sides, and this is because in the area of those veins there are small black veins; then make an incision for each side.
If there is doubt about which one, then make an incision on the larger one and from the pus that will appear.
Make them look similar to the veins in the lips above.
And the advantage of two veins under the tongue is to use lancet procedure on the jugular for heat that occurs in the throat, disease of the uvula, and diseases of the mouth.
The quality of lancing those areas is that the patient lies between your hands, raises his tongue and looks down, observe from one side of him the vein and from the other side the vein, and the color of each one is darkening.
Then lance each one; and make sure you do not press too hard when lancing them because there are arteries below those areas.
And the veins that are lanced in the neck are in those which it is common for all men, and the lancing of them is performed in two ways, either with a sharp lancet coated with myrtle or olive oil to make it thin; or cauterize with a surgical knife, called alnisil, and this is its form:
The given sentence means: "The veins that are swollen and appear thick should be opened with concave incisions filled with coarse blood, and the veins containing clotted blood should be treated similarly." (English Translation)
The given sentence means: "And this lancing is smaller and has subtle end shape, and it should be used for lancing of subtle veins containing delicate citrus-colored blood." (English Translation)
The given sentence means: "Moreover, lancing of the basilic vein which is one of the three veins: it drains the blood from illnesses that are in the back and neck, and those of the legs and abdomen." (English Translation)
The given sentence means: "And it is necessary for the person performing lancing, when lancing that vein, to be careful and cautious, as there is an artery nearby, and if it is missed or incorrectly punctured during the lancing, it will cut the artery and cause bleeding, so it is essential not to lance that vein with a pointed lancet, but rather with a small incision like an opening." (English Translation)
The given sentence means: "And if the basilic vein does not appear clearly, then it is necessary that you find another one or seek one of its branches; or lance in the location where the end of the arm finishes, as this is clear; and cut it with a small incision like an opening, as we have said." (English Translation)
The given sentence means: "Moreover, if you wish to perform lancing of the wrist, then it is necessary to do it in front of the bend of the arm, touching the area between where you know the location of the hands, and place your hand over it with a cloth; and place the arm and cut the vein with a concave incision using a small opening like we have said; and be careful that the percussion hits the area for a space near the artery." (English Translation)
The given sentence means: "And when you see, as the limb is tense, inflate in the area that you have marked with a cloth, then this inflation is of the artery, and therefore avoid it." (English Translation)
The given sentence means: "And if you see blood flowing from the lancing similar to that of a child's urine, and the blood is thin red, then you should know that it is from the artery; and you should wait and keep your hand over it for a long time; and remove your hand when the blood is separated, as it is often separated, and then stretch the arm and leave it." (English Translation)
The given sentence means: "And take care of the patient from the discharge of that place, and be careful with it, and do not disturb it for several days until it is healed." (English Translation)
The given sentence means: "Moreover, if the blood is not separated and you do not have medicine to treat it, then you should cut the artery if it appears; as its end is contracted, and the blood separates; or you should take a fistula, make it, and take one of them and stretch it over the location of the vein with narrowness between the limb and pulses until the next day." (English Translation)
The given sentence means: "And if the blood is separated, it's good; and if not, you should treat it with what was mentioned before regarding the location of the powders that cause bleeding." (English Translation)
The given sentence means: "And the bleeding of that blood is difficult due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of the wrist limb." (English Translation)
The given sentence means: "Moreover, lancing of the dark vein is beneficial as it drains the blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; since it is composed of branches of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said." (English Translation)
The given sentence means: "It is necessary for the person performing lancing to be cautious during lancing of that place, as there is a nerve nearby; and if it touches the nerve during puncture of the lancet and damages it, it will cause paralysis, and recovery will be difficult, and some damage may not heal completely. This nerve appears with sensation after a few days, and if it is hidden and subtle in some people and is not noticeable, then you should wait for the lancing with a small opening, and avoid the nerve using your strength." (English Translation)
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you make the vein longer.
The advantage of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it drains blood from the head and provides relief to headache sufferers.
Therefore, for this specific purpose, if you want to perform phlebotomy on the olive vein or the myrtle vein; as it is safe from all veins, as there is no artery or nerve nearby.
However, it is very dangerous to perform an incision in some men if they are not initially phlebotomized, but do not neglect the incision itself.
The first is that you must know that phlebotomy is only administered for the sake of health preservation and hope for improvement and caution against illness, and that it should be performed on one of the veins that are in the arm, such as cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and that it should be performed at the beginning of spring, after fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter near meals when there is a sign of congestion.
The phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or at least one day after three hours have passed since the previous meal.
Phlebotomy that is administered should only be done when it is convenient and necessary, either during the day or at night, at any hour and at all times.
It is important that the child should not be phlebotomized before they reach twelve years of age, and a pregnant woman should not be phlebotomized except in the fourth to seventh month, and elderly people who have passed sixty years should not be phlebotomized.
If someone wants to be phlebotomized in any way, it is necessary to empty their intestines with leon clyster before the phlebotomy if they have a fissured wound there, so that the veins do not fill with excess fluid during phlebotomy of the wounds, which are clean, and that this does not affect the main organs.
Phlebotomy should not be performed on patients with nausea or vomiting, nor on those suffering from illness or intoxication until they have recovered, nor on patients with edema, and phlebotomy should be feared near colic pain, vomiting, abdominal conditions, and multiplication of the intestines and labor and exercise during fasting or vigils and for any cause that dissolves virtue, whether physical or animal.
Consider the subtlety of fluids before performing phlebotomy if the blood is thick, with food and drinks, and with medications if it is possible to do so.
Enter the bath if there is no prohibition, or perform exercise for the sake that the blood be thinned.
Stop phlebotomy of the feet during the day, especially around third hour, as we have said.
Ensure that the foot is kept safe on that day from all animal and physical mishaps, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and all labor and excessive pain, labor and similar things.
And on the following day, make sure to be present with the causes of which men often use aromatics and perfumes and balms similar to those according to the degree of possibility.
Follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is higher than the one of the patient who must be phlebotomized.
And pull out your arm and touch it with your hand three times or more, the phlebotomist will grip it tightly and tie it two times.
The constriction should be moderate, as excessive contraction or constriction with excess fluid, you should prohibit the flow of blood; or it is with dilution, in which case you should prohibit the heartbeat of blood.
And regarding the constriction, it is important to touch the patient's hands between them before the veins are inflamed and declared by feeling.
The phlebotomist should anoint his phlebotomy needle with a little bit of antique oil properly; and the patient's left hand should be placed on top of the vein, in the location where the phlebotomy is to be performed, so that the vein rises slightly, and the percussion test is softened because some veins are like cords fleeing, in which case the phlebotomy must be delayed until they fill up with vitality, and of these is one that has a lot of windiness and when you press on it, it contracts and the phlebotomist is discovered; and the phlebotomy should not pierce the vein, and if it pierces, it is tightened.
Therefore, for this reason, the phlebotomist must be firm and vigilant in all of these matters.
Approach the flank incision, but if the vein is swollen in a certain place, that's good; otherwise, you should wait for another swelling to appear in that location or hurry up if the location isn't affected (posthumous).
If the location is affected (posthumous) or the patient is sick, you should leave it for a day or two and do not apply a ligation, because a strong ligation will attract pus, or enter in bath.
And approach the lancing if necessary.
And if the opening is small and it flows thin blood that you fear does not flow as much as desired, then you should lance the abscess in that place according to right procedure and make an incision slightly larger than the opening and do so quickly before the location becomes affected, because a location that is affected in many men requires little opening.
But if it is already affected (posthumous), do not lance over there, because you have no excuse for it; and wait over some part of the oil hole, because it relieves the body of blood. And it is better in that location to use olive oil than other oils.
Similarly, administer an oil hole in all abscesses where you must prohibit the flow of blood, and do so thyriacum and sage when it is paused over one of those on the location, because the blood becomes thin and turns into pus when it is thick.
If a large abscess is generated in the location of the lancing, because many swellings happen, and especially that which is not blood-soaked but only that swelling, or in the opening of the vein little, and then you take cotton, place it on the location soaked with sponge infused with water and salt, slightly scalded, and hold it for an hour, because it dissolves.
And you should do this next to the coagulated blood of that vein with complement from another vein.
And if it remains in the location for several days with some blackness or greenishness, do not observe it; and if you want, wait over any cause of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or any cause of mint juice or chalk or similar.
And because many swellings happen, abscesses and elevations you should lance in the basilica.
And therefore keep your hand on it (the affected area), and if you need to press it, you should keep your compression on it, the elevation is bad and evil; then be careful that you wait over any cause of what has been said, because a strong flow will come from the artery.
And apply a plaster with what is stiffening, so that the location becomes hardened, and take care of it with the other treatment until it heals.
It is necessary to draw blood from every man according to the amount of its potency and according to the color that prevails in the blood according to what appears.
Because if the blood is black, you should let it settle until it turns red (coagulates); and similarly, if you see it thick, you should let it settle until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, you should keep its sharpness until it subsides.
It is necessary for a healthy and strong man who needs bloodletting in one swelling, that the incision of the vein be enlarged and the abscess be lanced.
And in a weak person, the opposite should be done, and it is necessary to draw blood from him too much and often, and that the incision be narrow.
And the best treatment in vein lancing is cross-section, not puncture.
And this method of lancing is safe from blood flow and nerve incision, and it is more permissible and safer than lancing according to width and length.
And in the case where fainting is common, you should perform the lancing, and it is necessary to cure him before the lancing with a small piece of bread infused in milk-grain wine or simple oxymel scalded; and draw blood from him every three or four swellings.
And if it is a swelling due to congestion, you should take before the lancing a drink infused with myrrh syrup or scented honey flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or aromatic syrup that has a pleasant smell.
If fainting occurs due to excessive blood, you should perform the lancing, and it is necessary to drink water of meat and a subtle-scented syrup; and use aromatics and place his feet in that.
Use the other causes mentioned in the section on fainting for evacuation.
Whoever wants to swell his arm and dissolve his blood according to the next swelling, it is necessary for him from whom lancing is for great evacuation, and its potency is weak, that he evacuates little blood every day, as much as the potency in continuous days.
Whoever wishes to amputate their arm and let blood twice, and their body is strong, then do it about seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body against its natural inclination, it must be done on the second or third day.
Whoever has a body in which blood is already scalded and inflamed, causing fever, it must be bled on one occasion and a large amount of blood must be drawn and the incision should be enlarged until fainting occurs. However, you must observe all conditions for phlebotomy and keep your hand over the pulse of the blood to prevent death from fainting, as many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant or negligent.
And it is necessary that when you wish to cut off the arm and evacuate blood on another occasion, with the orifices of the veins closed and the flow of blood being difficult, that you press hard on it with great force and stretch it slightly, as this is not good.
Leave it until it can be phlebotomized again; or leave off the phlebotomy because the blood is coagulated in the vein orifices; or place a leech or sage on it and compress it lightly until the blood has come out.
And if the vein is suppurated (or ulcerated), leave it and do not touch it until the suppuration has settled down.
If there is a necessity to bleed again, and this is not an excuse, then you must sign (i.e., mark with a cross or other symbol) the same place or in the other arm in another vein.
The vein called "the nerve of the arm" is phlebotomized in the crook or the basilic (vein), if it is not contracted or concealed because it consists of these.
The quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient immerses their hand in warm water until the needle becomes swollen and the vein appears clearly.
Then tighten it with strong and narrow bandage; phlebotomize along the transverse small vein, not longitudinally or according to its length.
Make the incision wide and make your phlebotomy in the joint of the hand with a small one.
If the flow of blood is forbidden, you immerse your hand in warm water and let the blood flow into the water until your need is fulfilled.
However, if you are in the summer days, you are excused from immersing your hand in warm water, and the body is prevented from bleeding in warm water during winter.
The phlebotomy of this vein is more secure than that of all the other veins because there is no pulsating vein or nerve nearby.
The phlebotomy of the cubital vein on the right hand is suitable for liver diseases.
The quality of the phlebotomy is that you tighten the arm with a strong bandage or your hand, then place it in warm water until the vein is inflamed and clearly visible to the eye; phlebotomize this transversely, and if you are unable to find a vein at all, do not try again.
And remember not to press your hand too hard during phlebotomy, as nearby are the exposed nerves of the fingers.
Then immerse your hand in warm water and let the blood flow into it, as if you do not immerse your hand in warm water, the blood will coagulate in the vein orifice and the flow is forbidden.
And when blood is drawn according to the amount of necessity, you must keep your hand over the olive oil and salt so that it does not solidify easily; similarly, you should do the same in all branches.
However, the advantage of phlebotomy from the left hand vein is that it is suitable for diseases of the spleen.
Similarly, do the same in the phlebotomy of this as you have done in the other.
The advantage of the saphenous vein phlebotomy is for diseases in the posterior part of the body such as dysmenorrhea, retention of menses, and diseases of the kidneys and old ulcers and their similar ones.
The quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient immerses their foot in warm water and performs friction on it until the veins appear; then place a bandage around the ankle, and the location of the vein must be indicated by pressure, as it branches out from the face of the foot towards multiple directions.
Therefore, phlebotomize the ankle joint or below the calf, as this is better and more secure.
If you phlebotomize on the face of the foot, you should be careful about the nerves that are nearby on the surface of the foot and your phlebotomy should be performed transversely as if you wanted to insert it.
And let the phlebotomy be done.
But if the bleeding of blood is forbidden, then you must make the patient walk in warm water and allow the blood to flow into that place until it is drained.
And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake in the first observation, then you must make him bleed again after a little while, as that place is salty; and do not fear trickery, but rather be careful of the nerves as we have said.
And similarly, do the same with the swelling in the other foot.
And for the sciatic vein, the place as we have said is below the heel of the separated leg.
The benefit of the phlebotomy in this case is to relieve back pain when it is due to blood clots.
The quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient enters the bath, and hurries to the latrine, and presses his buttocks from the lower part of the abdomen up to four fingers above the heel with a long, thin bandage, as it will not be apparent otherwise.
Therefore, when it appears, you must bleed that place according to your skill and according to the transverse, and it is better; or incise that place with an incision or cut it with a section, as that place is salty.
And it is in many men who are weakened; and if that area shrinks and does not appear to the senses, you must bleed one of its branches, and that one which appears near the heel opposite the ear and the ring finger.
Be careful of the nerves and let the blood flow the amount you want.
Release the constriction and place your hand over the location of the phlebotomy site and press it, as it heals easily.
Of ventosection and of the qualities of using those things.
Ventoses are for warts, or abscesses, or veins.
Ventosection is performed in two ways: one of them is by incision and extraction of blood; the other is ventosection without incision.
This ventosection that is without incision can be done in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
The ventoses that are administered with incision and extraction of blood are twelve locations in the body, of which one, where ventoses are placed, is alnocrati, and it is the lower part of the neck; the middle location from two necks; ventoses of the mentum just below the mouth; ventoses of two spatulas; ventoses of alohoster, and they are at the end of the backbone; ventoses of two foci, and they are at two elbows; ventoses of two thigh bones; and ventoses of two cuoyssas (femur bones).
Ventosection does not draw blood from veins, but only from small scattered veins in the flesh, and therefore it does not have the effect as obtained by phlebotomy; nor is it necessary that ventosection be done with fire or without fire in any disease caused by repletion inside the body before the entire body is evacuated.
But if necessity requires ventosection due to disease or continuous, administer it at the beginning and end of each month, as well as in the middle and at any time during that period.
Therefore, when it happens in some of these causes, and particularly if it is during the third or fourth week of the month, then you command that ventosection be done more than three hours after sunset.
The benefit of ventosection on the neck is that it relieves gravity in the head and helps to alleviate sinking in the eyes; but it is necessary that this be accompanied by total evacuation of the body.
This ventosection is in the location of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein.
It is not permissible to use it in those who have a complete or cold phlegm, as it causes great harm.
Therefore, it is not necessary to use that in the elderly, and in those with cold diseases of the head.
But for those who have persistent pain over it (ventosection site), memory loss occurs; therefore, you must command the ventosist to pause his hand slightly above the ventosection site, beware of the generation of amnesia.
But ventosection in the alveolus is at the location of phlebotomy of the femoral vein and basilic vein: it causes asthma, constriction of the airway, fissure of the tympanum of the ear, coughing, repletion.
The joint pain is made worse if the windpipe is closed a little, for if it is kept closed, it causes weakness in the body and the stomach.
The narrowing of the windpipe causes headaches and eyestrain, migraines, inflammation and toothaches; it is in the place for basilica vein lancing.
And command the windpipe compressor not to press hard with scissors so as not to cut the artery and cause bleeding.
The closing of the windpipe beneath the chin causes alcohol in the mouth, corruption of the gums, resemblance to other diseases that are in the mouth, and it is the place for vein lancing below the upper lip.
But the windpipe compression made on both cheeks causes coughing, which is caused by an accumulation of heat.
Also, the windpipe compression made deep in the eyes confers venepuncture of three veins: basilica, facial and cephalic, for it attracts the blood from all the vessels that are in the flesh, and the small veins of the other large veins converge into these three veins.
And command the windpipe compressor not to perform incision, for the area is exposed, and there are nerves and arteries below it.
It is a windpipe compression that is performed on the anus and causes hemorrhoids in the rectum and ulcers beneath it.
And command the windpipe compressor to make a deep wound, for the area requires strong incision; and thick, forceful windpipe compressions that are subtle should be avoided, and it should be cut with scissors.
But windpipe compressions made in the groin area cause bleeding of the entire body, and they cause old coughs and kidney pain, and bladder problems; they induce menstruation, and cause swelling and inflammation; they are located near two veins, one called saphenous vein and another called femoral vein.
However, weakening the entire body causes fainting in many men.
And the windpipe compression that causes bleeding near the groin area is also close to the windpipe compressions in both legs.
The quality of the position of the windpipe compressions is that they are initially closed and gradually opened, and not prolonged for a long time; but they should be paused lightly, and remain in place intermittently, and that the humors come to the area by coincidence. And do not stop repeating this and continue until the place reddens, swells, and the redness of the blood appears.
Then you make a small incision and gradually apply the suction, and be careful in the arrangement of the patient's body.
For a man with thin and rare skin, it is necessary to make a single incision and not more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And command the windpipe compressor to make a larger incision and be careful not to go too deep, and apply the suction gently.
And if there is thick blood, it is necessary to make two incisions, for the first incision opens the way for thinning and removing the blood. But in the second, during the vigorous exploration of the removal of thick blood.
And if the blood is very foul, make a third incision for the removal of the final part.
Finally, when we want to remove a small amount or a little blood, it is sufficient for us with one incision.
And if we want to remove a lot of blood, make a deep incision; and if we know that the blood is thick, it is necessary to make a deep incision with scissors.
The term "incision" refers only to the depth of the wound.
And if the wound is deep, hard, dark, and has tight pores, the area of the windpipe compressions should be treated gently and resolved more open; if it is in summer, use aloe oil or violet oil, or olive oil from two olives, or sesame oil from a goat's foot; and if it is in winter, use narce oil, lily oil, camomile oil, or bloodroot oil and similar ones.
And if the superfluity is thick and greasy, use oil of amaranth, balsam oil, aloe oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
But if the windpipe compressor has wide pores of thin skin, it is necessary to prohibit oil and to use water or warm water from solatrum, goat's foot, bordeaux water, or similar ones at the areas of their windpipe compressions.
And if the blood is very moist, wash their windpipe compressions with vinegar or lemon and sumac water and similar ones.
From the given text, it appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish and French. Here's the translation line by line:
The sores should be kept away from bathing; it is necessary that they be treated directly after the bath for an hour or two, and it is necessary that they sleep near the sore. (Translation in English)
What is required is that the veins of the sandy sore be drained before the bleeding. (Translation in English)
It is necessary to consider at the beginning: if the one who will bleed or the one who is to drain the sore is choleric and has hot blood and inflammation, then it is necessary to take cooling substances such as mustard powder, vinegar and lettuce juice, and dandelion, and to apply them, and so on. (Translation in English)
And pause their food such as poultry, game birds, and acidic foods, and so on. (Translation in English)
And for someone who is cold-natured, it is necessary to drink almond syrup or sage root syrup with cumin and sumac, and a moderate amount of fragrant wine between autumn and winter; it is recommended that they use moderation in drinking and eating, and pause the consumption of poultry and game birds and fish and small birds and doves. (Translation in English)
It is necessary that on the day of the sore treatment and bleeding, the drinking should be greater than eating. (Translation in English)
It is necessary to give to some men tarragon alpocras or medicines containing musk, that is musk oil, or celery water before the sore treatment or bleeding, or near them, so that the main limbs are comforted and the blood is made more subtle; it is not necessary for them to take that chalk. (Translation in English)
However, sores that are not incised are sores that have been stopped on the liver, on the spleen and gout, on the navel, in the joints of the fingers, and on the ankle, as these members cannot bear incision upon them. (Translation in English)
And it is not desired for those sores except the attraction of blood from a member, such as stopping a sore on the nipple in sickness of blood from the nose or nostrils; and they use that to dissolve cold and thick swelling of a member, such as stopping on the belly and navel; since it rarifies the member, chalks it, and softens the pain which resolves swelling. (Translation in English)
And it is stopped on the throat when it occurs in its opening or pores, because by the strong attraction of the blood, it relieves the opening and removes the pores from their place. (Translation in English)
And similar is when it is stopped on the liver and spleen, as it relieves swelling in those closed places. (Translation in English)
These sores are administered with juice only, and sometimes with fire. (Translation in English)
And some are administered full of hot water in sicknesses of the spleen. (Translation in English)
This is so that the sore is filled and is large, that is hot water alone or water in which appropriate herbs are immersed. (Translation in English)
Form of sore administered with fire: The size of the opening should be twice as wide as we have made it; and the depth of the wound should be equal to the width of a palm; and at the sides, in the area surrounding it, it should be as deep as it is wide, the cut should be small according to the quantity that an awl fits into it. (Translation in English)
It should be made with roasted earth or citrus, with thick edges, lion's teeth, and smooth to prevent the member from sliding during its position on it. (Translation in English)
And at the middle of it, there should be a crossbar made of earth or iron where the candle is stopped with fire. (Translation in English)
And this sore should be much larger than the one we have recommended; and it should be smaller according to the sicknesses and the state of the one who uses it. (Translation in English)
And the sores of infants and thin ones are different from those of young people and large adults. (Translation in English)
The quality of stopping this sore with fire on the member is that it should spread the flesh with fire decently in front of a small amount of wax candle, and it should be stopped on the middle of the crossbar in the middle of the sore, so that the fire is lit around the edges to prevent the body of the patient from being burned. (Translation in English)
And it should be stopped on the member of the patient, and the aforementioned should be over the cut that we have said, until when we have sores and do not need to remove the stopper and let the steam rise from the cut, then the sore will soon dissolve. (Translation in English)
And burn the flesh according to its method, and repeat it if necessary. (Translation in English)
In the case of an abscess with a cavity that is treated in pus-related illnesses, and it has no transverse or vertical furrow, and it is filled with water instead of being punctured, then it should only be covered over the member.
This abscess, the larger it is, the better, as it can receive a greater amount of water.
Chapter seventy-five.
Sanguisuge (leech) is not administered to any member but only to those members where the positioning of an abscess is not possible due to their small size, such as the lips, gums and similar areas; or in a member devoid of flesh, such as the nose and similar areas.
And the quality of using such leeches should be of those found in clean water bodies.
And they should be soaked in clean water for two days, and no cause remains in their stomachs; and evacuate the body at the beginning with phlebotomy and abscesses; and anoint the patient's member until it becomes red; and cover them (the leeches) over him.
And when they are full (of blood) and burst.
If it is possible to draw liquid from the abscess area, it is more helpful in treatment.
And if not, then wash the abscess area with warm water and apply damp cloth; and anoint and squeeze it.
If the bleeding of the leech continues for a long time and it secretes, then immerse a cloth in cold water and place it over it until the secretion is drained.
If the bleeding multiplies, then powder vitriol triturated, or similar substances from stiptics causes over it until the bleeding is stopped; or place the juices of cooked fava beans over the area and leave them there until they adhere to the area, and the bleeding is stopped.
And cover, if necessary, the repetition of leeches, when it is possible to replace them.
And if the use of leeches is prohibited, then anoint the area with fresh blood or insert a needle in the areas where bleeding occurs; and cover them, as these will soon stop bleeding.
And when you want them to fall off, sprinkle a little powdered allium (onion) over them, or salt, or ash and let them fall immediately.
Thus begins the process of the third division: restoration. This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and accidents involving bones.
Or son, my child, that the foolish physicians and the ignorant and those who do not care about the books of the ancients or read even one letter from them boast about this chapter.
And for this reason, the method of the wise men on our land is kept secret; and I have not forgotten about it even for a short time, and I have not applied what follows, except by long study of the books of the ancients and understanding of their works until I extracted the science from them.
And direct my efforts to experimentation and study for the rest of my life.
I have already described in this chapter everything that contains the core of my science and on which my experience has passed; since I abridge what follows for you and relieve it from the burden of lengthiness; and abridged in the end of brevity; and showed it in the end of declaration; and formed more forms of tools that are administered in it, as done by adding a declaration, just like I did in the previous two chapters.
Chapter one.
Summary and compilation of the causes of bone fractures, from which their premise is necessary before we begin the memory of fractured members and various ones. Therefore, we must state the summary of this chapter's speech, and the chapters that are understood by the skilled craftsmen at the beginning, who are placed in a position on the truth of these matters; so you and those who are quick to learn this noble art from you.
And therefore, we say that when there is a fracture, dislocation, twist, or rupture, it is necessary to start with phlebotomy or lancing of the affected area, or any other means, unless a specific cause prohibits it, such as weakness in strength, or it is the patient who is affected, or old age, or a time of intense heat, or intense cold.
Approach the diet with fresh herbs and birds (such as larks and thrushes); prohibit thick meats, filling with food, or any food that fills the veins with blood, until you are assured of a cauterized abscess, and if there is no fear of effusion of matter in the member.
Then return the patient to their original diet according to the usual practice of medicine.
As the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the patient be fed nutritious foods with dense and heavy nutrition containing viscosity, such as food made from wheat cooked with water, rice, peas, beef, veal, mutton, and similar foods, and with this diet coagulation of the fracture occurs more easily.
Know that the broken bones in young men and the elderly cannot be continuously healed and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying of the limbs.
However, nature regulates and corrects the broken bone in all parts with a similar cause resembling glue, thickening that adheres to it until it is consolidated at the same time, until the end of softness and firmness comes, such as fire at the beginning, until any cause does not prohibit it from its works.
Therefore, it is necessary to pause the food of the patient, food that is heavy and viscous and thick, as previously mentioned.
Know that the types of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of limbs, because a fracture in the thigh bone is different from a fracture in the head; and a fracture in the foot bone is different from a fracture in the hand; and similarly all other limbs are different among themselves.
I recall all species of fracture, explained separately in their own chapter.
The types of fracture are diverse in themselves. The types of bone fractures are diverse in their causes; there is one type that occurs at the star (stellas); and some are classified according to the length of the bone: and those of the tibia and fibula, and additions, whether present or absent, such as that which occurs when the bone is prepared for writing, and is a fracture with a wound and rupture in the head, and is a fracture with a fissure.
And every type has its own pain or torment in the healing of the bone, as will be remembered separately at their respective locations.
Sign of a bone fracture. By this is recognized a bone fracture: it is a crookedness of the bone, and from this prominence and perception of it by feeling, and only when you press on it.
Therefore, if there is no crookedness or swelling in the location, and pressing on the bone does not cause great pain for the patient, then it is not a fracture here.
If it is possible that there is crookedness or a small fissure in that location, then you must press and compress it with all your strength; pause on the medicine appropriate for that moment, according to the location; and apply tight compression using a subtle string.
Know that the location that is crooked and not split in two or anything that does not occur at the tibia, such as all parts of its circumference, then it is necessary to begin from your time the correction of it, having ensured that an abscess has formed due to cauterization.
If an abscess has formed due to cauterization, then leave it for several days until the abscess subsides; and apply any method of traction or manipulation that you can with ease and skill.
Know that the healing of the bone and the reduction of it is easier than that of a fracture in which the tibia occurs.
Strengthen it according to the memory of it.
However, if in the bone there is a fracture of the tibia, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from two parts, whether it is an arm or a leg; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or one cord and your hand.
Place yourself in a position according to which you will draw the fractured limb back according to its natural shape, while extending the parts of the broken limb, then you must ensure that you bring the additions back with skill and according to their respective locations.
Be cautious that your force does not harm the patient through your procedure or injury; and perform according to your ability, apply a bone with its companion in the best forms possible.
And in that time skillfully touch the patient and, if you see any other cause different from this, correct it and adjust it according to the amount of your power.
Exercise vigorous extension and compression, as foolish doctors do when they cause boils to appear through their procedure or contract the limb, as we have seen happen through the operation of their misguided treatment.
The quality of the limb's immobilization that I recommend is as follows: you should know that fractured members are various in their size and shape.
For small members like the arm and thigh, you must use a thin fabric covering.
For large members like the thigh or leg, you must use a wide and hard covering, since thick padding holds the large member together with stricture on all sides, so that dirt does not enter it.
Then, start by adjusting your position of equilibrium, placing yourself conveniently at the location of the fracture with three or four coverings according to the member's need; and hold it lightly but firmly with a small amount of pressure.
Approach the part above the location of the fracture with caution and apply pressure only enough to hold the fractured area without causing further injury. Approach the fracture location with the covering and gently loosen the pressure on it, gradually increasing the opening until you can take a large piece of it.
Take another bandage and cover the broken part with the previous covering, then approach the area below the fracture with new coverings; your operation should be in immobilizing the covering and loosening the pressure on it according to what was said earlier about the first covering.
Place padding between the layers of leather or fabric that straightens the deformity of the fracture if there is one; otherwise, do not cause any harm to it.
Place the bandage on another layer of padding, and quickly attach well-made stitches over these coverings if there is no inflammation or boil at that location. Then press down where the boil is present and relieve the inflammation; leave it for some days; then tighten the stitches.
The stitches should be made of strong linen thread, well-made and smartly formed; or of wood splints; or of palm branches. Each stitch should be the same length and shape:
However, the stitch that is placed over the fracture should be thicker and wider than other stitches, with a length proportional to the size of the member; and tighten the stitches over the other bandage according to your initial immobilization; and tie it securely with thread properly according to our earlier instructions on immobilization; and the immobilization should be tighter near the fracture and less so as it is further away from it.
The threads must be medium in thickness and fineness, made of linen; if the thread is thick, as I have seen some foolish people using thick twine to tie their knots, that is a great mistake, since the immobilization will not be even.
Very thin threads are not suitable because you will not be able to achieve immobilization with them, and it is not necessary for there to be a space of one finger width between stitches.
If the patient is injured by the ends of the stitches near the immobilization in those areas, then you must cover it with leather or camel's hair padding before that does any harm.
Some fractures are caused by wounds and rupture in the sinew, and I will come to a specific case of this in the next chapter.
And know that the entire fractured member is not immobilized with stitches on the first day; the reason being that the large member does not need to be immediately immobilized with stitches, but rather after three or five days or more, depending on your confidence in the prevention of a boil.
This is the method of plasters used by the ancients, which are applied to fractures, dislocations, and twists.
This is the method of plaster used by the ancients for restoring fractures, which are mainly suitable for dislocations and twists in women and children, as it does not require heat or friction: take powder from grinding and the medulla of wheat flour that you will grind with a millstone.
Fill that with the same substance, unless you filter it with albumen (huou), and let the mixture not be thick or too subtle; use that.
Another method to treat fracture and dislocation and twist: recipe of asafetida, of lapdanum, of acacia, of elm bark, and myrrh gum, which is made from wild miller's grass, of one pound; of frankincense and aloewood of half a pound; of aloes, twice the amount; all are ground and sifted and mixed with sweet oil or egg white if the patient's complexion is scaly; and apply this plaster, for it has good composition and restores broken bones lightly, and gives strength to many men.
Another method for plaster to treat fracture and twist: recipe of myrrh gum, one pound of white alum; half a pound of frankincense and aloewood; six pounds of acacia; two pounds of Armenian pitch.
Grind all three ingredients together in a mortar with a pestle, sieve them, and then mix with water or egg white before administering it.
Use liniment to soothe the joints and bones that have been separated from their places, and alleviate pain in those areas as well as for wounds and fractures: obtain clean wool, immerse it in sour milk and olive oil, then place it on the affected area.
Moreover, this liniment does not have the power of healing or treating abscesses and directly relieving pain.
Another liniment to heal fractured bones: take fig leaves and wild poppy flowers, grind them into a paste, and apply it as an ointment.
A quick-acting liniment for the healing of fractured bones and to resolve abscesses: take equal parts of althea (marshmallow), camomile, violets, erysipelas (a plant similar to redness), all ground together. Grind all ingredients together with water, if the affected limb is not scalded.
If it is scalded, use water from a cooling cucumber or water and apply it to the affected area.
Another quick-acting liniment for the healing of a long-lasting abscess that requires resolving an affected limb: take equal parts of althea (marshmallow), its seeds, balm of Gilead, clover, melilot, marjoram, violets, camomile, all ground together. Grind them with water from sweet willow, mild water, or plain water, according to the quality of the affected limb and the color of it.
Moreover, Hippocrates does not mention in his book that liniment should be applied to a broken limb for healing, but only a plaster made of wax and oil and nothing else should be used; and recommend it to be moderate between thickness and thinness.
Furthermore, it is seen in Galen's writings that liniments should be applied to a broken limb for healing and the conditions where drying with low heat are appropriate, such as myrrh, cinnamon, and similar substances from those recommended causes.
A liniment for injury and pain: take mallow, ceasar, human skin (without hair) or feather of an eagle, and althea (marshmallow), salt, all ground together; sift and mix, then make it into a liniment.
The quantity that is required to keep the wound open and to allow it to drain, if there is no pain or inflammation, and if the bone is not out of its place, then you should not discontinue for many days. And if the affected area experiences intense pain or inflammation, you should carefully discontinue the liniment from that spot.
Take a cloth and sea sponge soaked in warm water, immerse it in tepid water, then use it to clean the affected area until the inflammation and pain subside; ensure that the limb rests for an hour; place a cushion of clean wool immersed in sour milk and olive oil or rose oil over it for one night until you are certain that the abscess has healed, and that the inflammation of the limb is reduced, and that the pain from it subsides.
And ensure that the tightness is gradually released and the liniment applied gently without excessive force, until it is completely healed.
And if the abscess, redness, pain, inflammation, and all associated symptoms have been completely resolved, then you no longer need to apply liniment or tighten it as before.
And if there is no cause for the affected limb as described previously, do not remove it but allow it to heal for three or four or five or six days. After some weeks, all this is sufficient for the healing of the limb as described previously, until the fracture adheres and the skin connects over it.
And adjust the tightness more in the bandage than in your initial binding, and tighten the patient's wound dressing as prescribed, following the previously mentioned guidelines.
If you see the location of the fracture is already drained and stretched more than necessary, then you know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching it; therefore, wrap it with warm water all day long for three days; loosen the swelling slightly, and through this operation, allow the member to receive nourishment, and it will heal lightly.
But the foolish healers of a fractured limb perform this procedure later when it has not been restored at the beginning, as necessary, and restore it according to its twisting, which is an error in their operation, causing great fear; if they had followed the ancient rules and acted accordingly, they would have enlarged upon this matter in their books.
And I have not seen any of them do this, so it is reasonable that they should not do it.
Chapter Two: On Fractures That Occur in the Head.
The types of fractures are multiple, and the figures of their shapes are various, and the causes are distinct, for some fractures are caused by a blow to the bone, which shatters all the bone inside, leaving it as shards, just like when this is done in the shaft, and for that reason, this type of fracture is called splintering; or the blow cuts through part of the bone, and cuts through the flesh but does not go through to the other side; and this type of fracture is called absolute levation.
And the wound in these two types of fractures is either large or small, and whether it is a contracted or distracted fracture; and its cause is a blow with a hammer or impact on stones, and similar objects.
This fracture is either penetrating, approaching the panniculus that is behind the bone, or it is on the face of the bone, and the wound in these two types of fractures can be large or small.
And of fractures is that which is narrowed within the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair, and for that reason, this type of fracture is called the capillary fracture.
And the fracture is caused by impact or blow with stones and similar objects, which causes some layer of bone to break into the divisions inside, and it occurs in concave areas such as the hinge joints of an elbow when it is struck and is divided on its inner side.
Furthermore, this type of fracture occurs in bones that are soft, such as the skulls of infants.
And all these types of fractures require remedies, such as separated needles (splinters). I will return to the topic at hand.
I know all these types of fractures through detection on them and examination of their causes by testing and the removal of rotten flesh that is over them.
The capillary type of fracture is recognized by its discovery on the bone and its removal, and it is treated with probing because the fracture appears black.
But in the treatment of fractures, one must first consider the circumstances of the patient, and if you see through their symptoms that they signify danger, such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of consciousness, abscess of the voice, fainting, acute fever, inflammation or redness of the eyes, and similar symptoms in major cases, then there is doubt whether it will heal.
If you do not see any unusual symptoms, you hope for health, and then you begin the treatment of it.
The reason is that if the wound has been brought to you at the beginning as it was in winter days, then you must study the removal of the bone within twelve days according to all precautions.
And if it is in the summer days, then you must remove the bone within seven days, knowing that what remains behind the bone can be rotten due to the panniculus, and that the accidents mentioned above may occur.
And if the fracture has reached the panniculus covering the brain, and is made of small, distracted fragments, then you must compress the fractured area and hold it together as I will recommend to you.
And it is that you reason about the patient's head with the wounded area, and you discover on the bone according to your usual practice and method, depending on the shape of the wound, but do not be rough on the patient.
And if it occurs to you, you must examine the bone, flow of blood or pus, in that case, you oppose yourself with what is necessary, and use hops infused in wine and warm oil, let the wound rest until the pus subsides, and make sure there is no bleeding; and begin by circling the bone and removing it.
And this may be according to one of two methods of operation.
The first method is that you insert the bone with an instrument of straight shape, and this form is as follows: First, administer another instrument of slightly smaller size than the one used; and this form is as follows:
Then administer more incision than the second [person].
It is necessary that you have a number of different incisions, some of which are deeper than others; and some of them shall be shorter than the others and be at the end of sharpness of their tips, and they should be made with iron or steel.
Use them with ease while striking the incision to avoid hitting the skull and damaging it.
If the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary to pierce around it before administering the incisions with shallow channels, which are called non-penetrating channels.
They are not called this way, because the channels do not pierce the bone all the way to its end, but instead have a rounded tip or margin around the bone, similar to the edge of a small disk, which prevents them from being submerged and passing through the bone's thickness.
It is convenient that you take a large number of these channels, each of which corresponds to the thickness of each bone, until the end of every bone in your skull is sharp, and the length and width should be according to the thickness of that bone.
This is the form of three types of channels: The purpose of perforating around the broken bone is to place the channel over the bone and rotate it using your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the channel to another location, and stop at the point where the thickness of the ray or surrounding area is reached.
Then incise with the incision tool between each fracture of the bone, making it as thin as possible at the end of your reach, as we have said, until you have reduced the bone, or with your hand, or with some other means using certain tools that you will prepare for this purpose, such as a mallet and forceps.
It is necessary that you take great care to ensure that the incision tool does not touch any of the nerves.
Therefore, when you perforate the bone and it is continuous with the nerve, if it is separated from the nerve, you must extract it, and you must cauterize and tie it in the roughness of the bone using another tool similar to an incision tool, but it should be thinner and more delicate than the other incisions.
If there remains any small fracture or indentation of the bones, then take it with ease using whatever tool you need to use; and treat the wound with linen and ointments, as we have said.
The other method of operation is easy and remote from fear, which is called Gualla and the Lausor for great praise; and this is its meaning: it is necessary for you to begin at the start by discovering the fracture of the bone in the place where it is most visible and intense, until when you have discovered that fracture and stopped at the end of the incision, the shape should be long and slow as follows:
The lenticular fracture is convex and does not make an incision on any cause, and the acute fracture is concave from two sides towards the long side, like sometimes; that the lenticular fracture should be adjacent to the nerve with the sharp incision in the bone.
Then strike the incision tool of one fracture with a small hammer until you have incised the entire bone with ease and rotate it as easily as possible, and if you are certain that no accident will occur in any way, and if the doctor was the most foolish and ignorant of all men; certainly, and if he were asleep.
If there remains any nerve attached to the bone from a panniculus in some locations of the bone, you should incise that with the end of the incision tool in a lenticular shape, and deliver it with ease, because it is delivered without harm or fear.
If the bone fracture does not penetrate into the panniculus, and that which is separated or remains from the bone is its surface, and it remains rough and subtle indentations; then it is necessary to smooth out that roughness and remove those indentations with sharp razors that you have prepared in different thicknesses, so that you can use them anywhere and in the most appropriate way for each fracture of that broken bone and the shape of it.
It is necessary that you administer the incision with your reasoning, and you should use the most delicate of those razors first, and do not stop until you reach the thinnest and most delicate parts of them all.
In every other small capillary and subtle fracture, it is necessary to administer care according to what you have learned for the correction of it.
And this is due to the fact that not all those who have studied in that craft are skilled at it. Place it on what we have shown in large fractures.
If the fat (pannicol) is round when you amputate the bone, then you must take cloth according to the size of the wound, dip it in red oil, and place it on the wound; then take another piece of cloth folded or tripled, dip it in wine and red oil, and place that over the first cloth lightly so as not to press it too much. Then administer a healing ointment (liament lat) on it, but do not apply too much except according to the size of the wound.
Leave it like this for a day or two until you are sure that the wound is healed; then remove it and administer medicines for excessive dryness, such as linen rind and flour of eggs, powder of incense and aristaology, and similar things.
And you should make powder of these medicines and sprinkle it over the wound, such as the dry ones; and in general, administer all medicine with properties that help to heal and not harm.
And beware that the wound during treatment remains clean; do not let it get infected with pus or other filth; nor should you allow it to become more inflamed; because when it is in contact with the brain tissue, it corrupts it and then a fatal illness occurs in the patient.
And when the fracture of the skull is healed and the bone is removed and more treatment is given to it, and it becomes darker in surface; then consider whether the patient has experienced the symptoms that we have mentioned, because they are dangerous without doubt.
And if the blackness is not due to the medicine applied but rather from the properties of the medicine itself, then you must take some honey and three parts of red oil. And place a linen cloth on it and apply the appropriate healing spices until it is healed.
Chapter III
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken into two parts but rather split with a blow on top or one of them visible due to the fact that it has two bones, because the lower part is cartilaginous and is not really broken but bent and twisted, causing pain.
If one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert a small piece of wood into the patient's nose and hold the fracture inside with your finger or a wooden splint from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape. Do it as convenient for you but be careful not to harm the patient in any way during the procedure.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and does not reach the tip, you must align it with the end of the nasal bone where there is a small projection.
If the fracture is in both parts, then you should perform a similar procedure.
Try to repair it on the first day of the fracture if possible; otherwise, you should place a splint over the wound for seven or ten days.
Place a piece of linen cloth on the end of the nose if the fracture is in one part; otherwise, put two pieces of gauze, one for each side, with enough thickness to fill the cavity of the nose.
Some of the ancient restorers recommend that the gauze be covered with fabric and kept moist all day, but I do not see it; however, the gauze should be soaked in honey-oil emulsion with powdered milling, and then left in place until the bone is healed and the cartilage hardens.
And sometimes it should be inserted between the nostrils, in place of the septum, because it is covered with lion's cloth; and if the nose has been broken violently and the patient is not forbidden from breathing.
This cause is not necessary; and if you wish, do it, and if you wish, insert septum.
And if another abscess occurs cauterize the nose, fill it with wax or cotton dipped in strong vinegar and rose oil, or with diachylon.
But if there is no abscess, it is necessary to pack it from outside with sizam flour and cinnamon powder mixed with albumen of egg; place your hand over the lion's cloth, and do not let the nose become blocked for any reason.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or comminuted, it is necessary to cut them apart and remove them with the instruments appropriate for that; then suture the incision, care for it with what encourages healing and consolidation, and use appropriate dressings.
And if there is an ulcer inside the nose, it is necessary to treat it with hot compresses and administer lead cannulas until it is healed.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jawbone when broken.
When the jawbone is broken and the fracture is not an ulcer, examine whether the fracture is only on the outside and not broken into two, nor curved at the inner part, then its recognition is easy.
Therefore, if the fracture is on the right jawbone, insert your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is in the left jawbone, insert your right index finger; and push gently the swelling of the inner fracture at the outer part with one hand, and the other hand from the outer part of the bone with equal force.
And if the jawbone fracture is already separated into two, it is necessary to administer extension of both parts according to correct measurement until the alignment of the parts can be achieved.
And if there is displacement of teeth to disruption, stretch those that you hope will remain with gold or silver wire or suture; and place your hand over the broken jawbone, and place a double cloth over it, and another thick cloth properly made, or a piece of sole leather as long as the jawbone; and bind it as needed, according to the ligature method and the application that is appropriate for it, until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and tranquility, and stop the sour food of lions (meat or wine).
If you think that the shape has been altered in some way, you should examine it on the third day and correct what has been altered; and fill it with powder of milled charcoal, albumen of egg, or flour of cumin, as you will leave the wax there, and cover the dressing with lion's wool.
And so when the dressing is attached and adjusted over it, and the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it, as you will not remove it until it is healed and strengthen the fracture; for most fractures heal in three weeks.
And if another abscess occurs later, administer the same as was said earlier in its treatment until it is healed and the abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is an ulcer, examine whether it is a piece of bone separated or a fissure, and carefully remove those pieces with instruments appropriate for that purpose.
And if the orifices of the ulcer are narrow, enlarge it with a probe according to your need.
And when you have removed those pieces and they are not reabsorbed, sew the orifices of the ulcer if it is wide; otherwise, cover it with one of the dressings appropriate for that purpose and let it heal.
Chapter V.
On the restoration of the furculum when broken.
After some time, the furculum is broken at the anterior division and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
For it is broken, separated, or separated into two parts without any fissures; and it is easy to restore in the first case; or it happens that there are fissures, making it difficult to restore in the second case; or the fracture is an ulcer.
The operation in the case of a fracture without an ulcer is that you should have two assistants present, one to help hold the broken furculum and the other to extend the neck on that side.
And bind the fracture with the ties as described earlier until the shape is achieved, and there should not be excessive prominence or concavity.
And if more extension is needed, you should place a support under the patient's chin made of cloth or wool, and its size according to your need; extend and elevate the furculum and hold it with your hand until you bind the fracture as needed.
And if you cannot pull the extremity of the neckbone (clavicle) to the parting outside due to its being adhered to the shoulder, then it is necessary for the patient to be reclined on their neck, and a cushion half-sized in large size should be placed on the muscle of the shoulder.
And the minister should press on the muscle of the shoulder towards the parting until the bone of the neckbone (clavicle) is elevated up to the collarbone, and then you straighten the fracture and bind it with bandages.
But if there is pain in the neckbone (clavicle) and it is swollen, then it is necessary to cut through it and remove the swelling easily.
And if it is held in the bone, you make an incision through it with one of the instruments that you have prepared for this purpose, since you had placed the clavicle in a position to serve as a support; and this instrument is either a drill or iron of which its form is:
And it resembles a drill bit, the concavity of which is like that of a spoon; and its width should be according to what is necessary for it, depending on the size of the bone or the scarcity of it.
But its length should be such as is possible for the operation; it should have two extremities like this, and one extremity should be wide and the other narrow.
And if the wound resulting from the incision made when you have removed the swelling in the bone is wide and it is certain that there is an abscess, then you adjust the two edges of the wound with suture.
And if the wound is small or there is fear of an abscess, then you fill the wound with cloths and powders according to the size of the wound's incision.
And if an abscess occurs, then you fill it with cloth soaked in strong wine and oil of roses and leave it.
And it is important that the splint is not swollen over the broken bone; and therefore you must observe the patient every day, so that when the swelling subsides or the splint has been removed, then you correct this and strengthen the union.
And you place the patient's pillow under their neck, and at night you should sleep on their right side with your back turned away from them; so that the support of their arm is raised at the level of their armpit, and thus the fracture of the clavicle is elevated to the level of the muscle; or the arm is tied to their neck.
And do not remove the splint unless an abscess or pressure sores occur in the location before twelve days.
And you renew the plaster if you observe its appearance at that location, and adjust it in the narrowing and restore it until it is restored and the clavicle fracture is coagulated.
And it becomes strong and comfortable within twenty-eight days, and in some cases it is made in a period of time shorter than that.
Capital VI.
On the restoration of the shoulder fracture.
The spatula is broken at its side and not completely, only the edges.
Therefore when the location of it is broken - and it is broken at the middle of it - and it is not known except by touching, then according to the shape of the fracture, prepare for it and reduce it according to its natural figure in every way that is possible using any means at your disposal.
And you place powder of milled flour and egg whites and lion's stopper on the location; and you place double cloth powder; and you place a thin table-steel needle on it according to the size of the entire spatula or slightly less.
But if the needle is concave at one of the locations of the spatula, then you bind the concavity with lion's stopper, and you press the needle according to equal distribution.
And strengthen it above with warm baths with appropriate compression and the firmness of the needle until it is no longer swollen from its location.
Consider the plaster every day; and in all cases when it subsides, the following day and strengthen it equally if it is swollen from its location.
And let the patient rest on their side.
And the spatula is restored in twenty or thirty days.
When this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligament, and you know for certain that it is one of the bones, whose beginning or dissolution should not be feared.
Proceed to the site of the broken bone and place the bandage there, then you cut through it, remove it, and follow what has been said about the fracture of the vertebra or abscess in the cauterization of an ulcer if this occurs here.
Chapter VII.
On the repair of a fracture of the foot.
Sometimes the foot is broken in several places, but more often it is only the ends that are crushed and fractured. In either case, it is important to immobilize the foot as soon as possible to prevent further damage and allow the bone to heal properly. This can be done by splinting the foot with strips of cloth or wood, or by using a cast. It is also important to rest the foot and avoid putting weight on it for the time prescribed by the doctor. If the fracture involves the ankle joint, it may be necessary to immobilize both the ankle and the foot to ensure proper healing. In addition, if there is any swelling or bleeding, it should be treated promptly to prevent infection and promote healing.
When the midshaft of the bone is broken, it may collapse into fragments and cause pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, shortness of breath, fever, and vomiting. The fracture can be felt as a depression or hollow in the affected area, and is not hidden from sensation. If you suspect that someone has a midshaft fracture, it is important to seek medical attention immediately to ensure proper treatment and prevention of complications.
The treatment for a midshaft fracture is to carefully align the broken bone and immobilize it using a splint or cast. The patient should be placed on their back with a pillow under their head and shoulders, and the affected area should be gently supported to prevent movement. The muscles around the fracture site should be relaxed, and the costal margins (the edges of the ribs) should be aligned so that they are in the correct position. The doctor will carefully manipulate the bone into its proper alignment, taking care not to cause further damage or discomfort. Once the bone is properly aligned, it will be immobilized with a splint or cast to allow it to heal correctly. It is important to follow the doctor's instructions for rest and immobilization, as well as any other recommended treatments or medications, to ensure proper healing and prevent complications.
And you apply the plaster and stopper on it and apply a thin, delicate bandage of willow or walnut bark on top, as you wrap it in cloth; then tie a thin linen cloth over the broken bone so that it does not become infected; and go along the backbone several times with a ligature, tightening it decently; and consider the ligature at all times and when it becomes soft, tighten it again.
If there is inflammation, swelling, or pain that occurs in the wound, you should cauterize it or apply a hot substance to it, or let it drain naturally; then clean the wound and treat it as necessary for healing; and return the plaster if necessary; and tie the bandage tightly until it heals.
Chapter 8.
On the repair of fractured ribs.
Know that a rib fracture does not occur except in large places, and the ends of the breakage do not contract unless they are cartilaginous. And it is necessary to investigate this without being misled by symptoms.
And the repair should be such that the fracture is aligned with the symptoms as much as possible, until it is healed as needed; and plaster and tighten the broken bone with a splint, if necessary.
If the rib fracture is inclined towards the internal ends, the patient will experience intense pain and puncture, like puncture that occurs in those who have pleurisy, and for this reason cover the bones with a cloth; and there will be difficulty in breathing, coughing, vomiting of blood; and this is a difficult healing.
And the Ancients were skilled at treating this with various remedies.
And they say: it is necessary to place the patient on a diet that causes inflammation and bloating, so that the stomach is inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the external ends.
However, we should not do this if it is likely to cause an abscess or pus, unless necessary; and if it does occur, help with the remedy as needed.
Some said that it should be done over a windy place and that it should be drained with strength; and this is logical, but it is feared that the wind may attract superfluidity to the site due to weakness.
Others said that the site should be covered with wool that has been soaked in hot oil, and powdered herbs placed between the ribs until it is filled, and that the ligature should be tightened when wrapping it as needed; and the patient should be cured with a diet and medicine for pleurisy.
And if the intense pain that afflicts the patient cannot be borne and the bones are punctured with a cloth, it is feared for the patient; therefore, it is necessary to make an incision over the site, expose the broken rib, and place an instrument over it to prevent complications, as described earlier, and to split the bones with ease, and remove the foreign object.
And it is appropriate to approximate the two edges of the wound if it is large with stitches, and treat it with plaster until it heals.
And if an abscess occurs internally, you should clean and apply powder in rose oil over the site, and treat the patient with remedies as needed for internal abscesses.
It should be placed on a slab above the bed until it heals.
Chapter 9.
On the repair of fractures of the spine and neck.
Sometimes fractures occur in the vertebrae of the neck, and then there is swelling, and similarly in the spine. And if you want to know whether it will heal or not, consider that if the muscles surrounding it are softened, swollen, and dead and cannot be extended or strengthened, and when you press on them with your fingers or puncture them with a needle without feeling pain, then you know it will not heal, and in a matter of days it is fatal.
If that member experiences pain and tightness along with puncture, then you know that the neck of the bone is saved, and the patient will recover with treatment.
If the vertebrae in the neck seem like this and you want to know if it will heal or not, then consider the weight of them.
If you notice that it has become softened: then apply to those who have the same condition and when it lies on its back, there is wind and evacuation without voluntary control, and sometimes it is rolled over onto its back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you know it is fatal, and do not treat it with healing methods.
If there is no cause for those symptoms, the condition is better and easier to treat.
The treatment for it is to perform an incision over the hardened vertebra and let it drain pus, or use oil soaked mullein leaves; apply this to it for several days until the pus dries up.
Then apply a comforting and healing plaster to the affected area, and hold it in place with a bandage; instruct the patient to rest and remain calm, and not sleep on the side where pain occurs until it heals.
If there is a fracture of the bone or any other cause that has already been identified, then you must saw through the shaft and remove the affected bone; align the edges of the wound, stitch it if necessary; and care for it with bandages until it heals.
But if the bone at the heel is broken and it is the end of the coccyx, then you must insert your left hand into the anus and pull the broken bone with your right hand as much as possible in alignment; apply plaster and splints to it if necessary, and secure it.
If you feel broken fractures there, then make an incision over it, remove the bone fragments, and care for the wound with the appropriate treatment until it heals.
Capital .x.
On the repair of the anus.
The bones of the anus are often broken, and if they break, the fracture is not complete but rather a communication at the ends and they are inclined inward towards the sides; pain and swelling occur at the site and the cavity becomes stunned when the fracture occurs.
The repair of it is to extend your hand over the fracture until you cover its entire shape.
If the fracture is only at the end of it, then you pull it back as necessary to align it with its natural shape.
But if the fracture is in the shaft and bends towards the sides, you make the patient lie on their stomach until the repair of that fracture is prepared for you. And when you have pulled it back, apply plaster to the area, and place a splint of wood or bone over it, and secure it with a bandage that does not risk causing further fracture or removal of the splint.
Pull the concavity with that which fills it until it takes the bandage evenly, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their side that is not affected.
But if pus is present, stop the extension and repair of it until the pus dries up, apply that which soothes the area according to what is appropriate; then return to the repair of it, and secure it as necessary.
If such a thing occurs in the fractured bones or they are crushed, you treat them.
Chapter XI.
Restoration of the dislocation of the shoulder.
The joint between the arm and the shoulder (adjutor)
And if it is broken, the restoration of it should be done in one of two ways, and the first way you take a flat piece of wood about this size (indicates with hands)
Place them at both ends with ligaments, and hang it from a high place.
Follow the patient on a chair; place the broken arm over the stick and bring it to the point where the curve of the stick meets its midpoint.
And suspend it with some cause of pain or the minister extends it to the limbs on the opposite side; then the doctor and his assistant should hold the fractured bone with their hands until the fracture returns as required.
The other method is that the patient lies down on their back and suspends the hand with a ligament from the neck; then command two ministers, one of them to hold something over the fracture with his hands, while the other holds the foot below it; each extends their limbs to the side.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you tighten the ligaments on both sides of the fracture and each minister extends their limbs to the opposite side.
And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, it should be stopped halfway along the ligament at its midpoint and the other part should be placed on the opposite side of the fracture.
And if the fracture is close to the joint, it should be stopped at that location and on the opposite side of the joint.
Wrap it with ease and without effort, and apply it as needed and in a good manner. Then tighten it if it doesn't heal up and prevent the formation of an abscess by cauterization.
But if an abscess forms by cauterization, you should leave the bandage on for up to seven days and apply linen soaked in warm vinegar and olive oil to it until the abscess subsides, then tighten it again.
The method for tightening it is to apply plaster on the fracture and then cover it with gauze wrap. Then adjust the arm to the shoulder joint and place a handkerchief over the muscle.
Place the gauze and tighten it on the shoulder joint so that the arm is in a stable position, unless there is any cause preventing the broken bone.
Use splints (stelhas).
And it is that you place the broad and strong splint over the fracture; and between each splint, place the width of a finger, and the length of the splints should be according to the breakage, with an addition of three fingers on all sides.
Then press strongly on the hardened areas with the constriction mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And that your pressure on the location of the fracture should be stronger. And as much as the fracture becomes longer, the pressure should be less.
And so, when you notice the condition of the hardened areas and the pressure as we said in the time when you are restoring the member to its original position, then you do it.
And if you fear an abscess might form from the pressure, leave the hardened areas and the constriction for 7 days as we said.
And consider the liniment in all parts for 3 days, so that it does not cause any burning or swelling at the site; or food is forbidden to reach the member due to excessive constriction of the area; and therefore correct everything as we said.
If you are uncertain that there is no cause for this, do not remove the binding until at least three days or more.
The patient's sleep should be on their back, and their hands on their stomach.
Place a warm, woolen compress on the affected limb, and consider that the fracture figure should not be removed or dissolved at any time of day or night; instead, let the liniment remain moistened, so correct everything with your judgement.
Restrict the patient's food as ordered before, in such a way that the food is subtle at first until it becomes stronger; and therefore coarsen their diet.
After 40 days of using the compress and pillow, they should be removed, and a bath should be given with soothing medicine to correct it.
If the fracture is healing, leave the liniment and the hardened areas for days or up to two months.
Chapter XII
On the restoration of fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones that are called the two focils; one is small, which is the one that is near the wrist, and the other is large and is located below the small one, from the lower side.
If only the larger bone is broken, or both bones are fractured together.
If only the smaller bone is broken at the top, the restoration and healing of it is easier.
If the larger bone is broken at the lower part, the fracture is bad, and healing is difficult.
And even worse is when both bones are fractured together.
Therefore, if the smaller bone is broken at the top, it is appropriate for the doctor to pause briefly and extend the healing process slightly, as long as the limb is immobilized.
However, if the larger bone is fractured, an extended healing period must be applied more forcefully.
If both bones are fractured together, you should apply the treatment less forcefully.
You should immobilize the hand figure, restore it and extend the healing process over a cushion, place the fingers of the hand apart above, as we have said before, and place the ear on the other side, and the patient should be lying down on a slanted bed.
Place a cushion in front of him at his head or foot to prevent him from working.
And the minister should extend the arm from the lower side with his hand or linen, and another minister should do the same on top.
And the doctor immobilizes the bone until it reduces properly in the best possible way.
If a splinter is in the fractured bone, you must make every effort to remove it from its location with your judgment.
If a separated splinter appears that pierces the skin and is not hopeful for healing, you must cauterize it and remove it as we said before.
However, if the fracture is with a wound, you have already done what we said in that special chapter, and therefore take care of it.
If an abscess forms at the beginning of your restoration, you line up a cloth with a mixture of rose oil and white wax, neither too thick nor too thin, and place it over the abscess with gentle pressure until the abscess subsides; then remove the wax and apply a prepared plaster made of powdered milling and clay of huou, and cover the area; and let the hardened area, which is located above the fracture, be larger and stronger.
Know that the number of bones in the arm is usually two or three, depending on whether the fracture occurs in one bone or both bones together.
And apply your pressure on the location of the fracture forcefully and persistently; when more movement is observed above or below the fracture, reduce the pressure slightly as a reminder to the beginning of this chapter.
The soft, moist bandages that are wrapped around the fracture should not be hard or rough, and the one who binds it should be of moderate strength between fine and thick, as recommended.
Consider the limb and the ligament for several days. If any cause arises requiring correction, such as swelling of the limb, and you find it necessary to immerse the limb in warm water until the swelling subsides.
Release the limb only when it has recovered, and restore the constriction.
If the constriction has become softened and the bone has healed as in similar cases, then correct everything with your skill.
If the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive constriction, then you should soften it slightly and leave it for several days until nourishment reaches it again, and strengthen it.
If the patient does not experience any of the aforementioned causes, he should not be dislocated for more than about twenty days or less.
Place the patient's hand in a sling due to its relaxing effect on movements, and make him sleep on his back.
Know that this fracture is restored in thirty or thirty-two days, or at least twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the patient's complexion and the skill of the practitioner.
Chapter XIII.
On the restoration of the fracture of the thumb and fingers.
Know that the thumb fracture and finger joint fractures often result in simple dislocations rather than actual fractures, and do not treat them without careful observation.
And when the hand is fractured or dislocated, it is necessary for the patient to remain seated with his elbow resting on a flat surface and to rest the hand above it.
And the nurse should extend the broken bones and the doctor should align them properly until they are properly united.
You should apply a plaster and padding if there is no abscess; otherwise, insert a probe according to the size of the wound, and then wrap it in bandages.
If the fracture is in the inner part of the palm, you should make a dressing that covers the entire palm, and tell the patient to hold it with his injured hand; it should be tightly bound with long bandages.
The probe made of cloth should be light enough for the cure to be applied to the palm and tightened as needed.
If the fracture is in the outer part, you should place probes on both sides of the fractured area on the palm to keep it open and straight; then tighten the constriction as needed by rotating the hand in the socket between the fingers with ligaments.
If there is a finger joint fracture, if possible, make an incision and align the bone as needed, then immobilize it with bandages and if desired, insert a small straight probe to raise the fracture and prevent deformity.
If the fracture is in other fingers such as the middle finger, index finger, ring finger, or little finger, align and immobilize it with the help of the surrounding fingers; this is preferable. Or if desired, place a small probe on it as mentioned earlier for the incision.
Consider the disposition of cautery for abscess and opposition (immobilization) with your treatment, taking into account any cases that may arise as described in the preceding narrative.
Chapter XIV.
On the restoration of fracture of the hip bone.
The broken and displaced hip bone can be detected by palpation, as it becomes swollen in the surrounding area above and below the joint.
The restoration is carried out by immobilizing the bone with a bandage on both sides of the fracture and placing the patient on his stomach and face.
The nurse should extend the bandage to the entire fracture area if the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
If the hip joint is dislocated, the bandage should be positioned near the bottom of the pelvis at the pubic bone to bring the extension upwards, and another bandage on the opposite side of the fracture.
Similarly, if the fracture is at the bottom, make the bandage near the bottom and extend it to the opposite side of the fracture.
The doctor should align the bones with both hands until they are properly aligned and joined by good union; then you should apply a plaster and bandages, if there is no swelling in the limb. If there is an abscess, leave it alone for several days until the abscess is drained, and then return to your treatment.
The bandage should be wrapped around the fracture in this way: wrap a firm bandage around the fracture, fold it two or three times and soak it in warm water; then wrap the thigh area to reach the knee and hip joint.
Insert a long needle between the thigh and hip close to the groin at the pubic bone, and the extremities of the needle should come out from the other side of both parts, then turn it around on the thigh and hip so that any excess thread is removed from the stitch.
Place a cushion on the thigh at the location of that fracture splint, and place one pin over the bone of the hip.
Fill the void between the thigh and hip with soft cloth, to help clot the flow of blood.
Begin to tie the strong thread around the location of the fracture with three or four loops, and as you move away from the location of the fracture, your knot should be smaller, lighter and more moist.
Extend the thread to both ends of the needle as far as it reaches to the ankle of the foot, and tighten both ends of the needles from the other side so that the stitch does not come loose from its place.
Loosen the stitch over that area so as not to cause corrosion, cauterization, abscess or inflammation and similar conditions; and if any such problem occurs, then cut it off immediately, and correct whatever may have occurred appropriately, as I have said many times before.
However, if it is a bone problem that requires treatment, then you must pack it as possible; and if not, apply oil on it and leave it to heal, and cure it with what its previous memory suggests before it heals.
In some cases, this thigh fracture may require stronger treatment than the previous ones, as I mentioned in the ankle and arm.
However, in the healing of such a fracture, do not let the patient limp; and if it is only healed by itself, then apply the other leg as well, otherwise it is necessary that the one being treated limps continuously.
And know that the thigh heals in 40 days or a little less than a month, and everything depends on the complexity of the case and other conditions.
Chapter XV.
On the healing of the shinbone fracture.
Know that the shinbone fracture takes a long time to heal, but it happens more slowly than in previous cases.
However, if it is a fracture, then it is not simply a crack or break in its parts, but rather a wound or multiple wounds, and everything depends on the sensation.
The healing of it is such that the broken parts are packed with what I have mentioned before, until they are brought together and joined as possible by means of calculation, ease and construction.
Place plaster and place it over the round pin if necessary; and tighten with appropriate knots above it.
Consider all the dispositions I recommended in other fractures, such as cauterization and similar ones that counteract any accidents that may occur until it heals appropriately.
Chapter XVI.
On the healing of the thigh fracture.
Know that in the thigh there are two bones, one of which is large and is called the hip bone; the other is thin and is called femur.
And if any of the types of fracture occur in the two bones of the arm, and it is healed as the arm bone is, then the operation of it is one and the same.
If both bones are broken together, the thigh is broken into all its parts.
And if the thin bone is broken, the thigh is converted to fragments in front.
And if the large bone is broken, it turns backward, and this is due to causes that you are not familiar with.
Then administer extension, alignment and ligature of the splints according to the packing.
However, if the thigh fracture does not have many complications, then the extension should be less and lighter, and alleviate with your expertise.
And in the thigh there is some reason for operation on the arm, and this is when you pack the needles and complete all the work of that operation, then take pieces of pine wood that are placed under the causes that are placed alone, and they are made exactly like branches of palm; align those with a small thickness, and not be thick in the hands, and its length according to the length of the thigh, and from the hip to the foot.
Wrap each piece of cloth in two layers according to the length of it, and place one over the fracture of the thigh of one part and the other over the other part, and they should be from the hip to the ankle joint of the foot.
And tie the two needles in three places of the two ends and at the middle one, because with this stitch the thigh is prohibited from closing on the left and right sides, and this is a good position.
And a brace of pine wood according to the length of the thigh is administered; and it should be placed under the thigh to preserve its mobility.
And moreover, it must be done for a fracture, and when that is a wound properly.
Then apply warm compress to the wound every day and study it closely, and keep it from becoming an abscess or inflamed or affected by similar causes; and when any such cause occurs, immediately oppose yourself to it with something that is necessary until it heals.
Capital Chapter XVII.
On the fracture of the heel and the bones of the foot and the toes.
A fracture does not occur in the entire heel, but occurs sometimes in the foot bones; and in the toes of the feet, fractures occur rarely, and do not occur except during birth or at times of delivery.
And if the bones of the foot are fractured and those bones are sometimes raised above themselves, then the patient should place their foot on the ground prepared in this way as they walk.
Then place one foot on what is raised from those bones, and step on it, press, and hold it until it returns to its place.
Then apply plaster and stop it, and place a small table under the belly of the foot with two flat surfaces.
And strengthen that area of the foot with traction, because you have wrapped it in bandages and other means required for that purpose.
And after three or four days have passed, you remove the bandages, because you will discover the bones are held together, or broken or dislocated, and the operation on these is so difficult to perform.
But if the toes are broken, restore them and hold them together as I instruct you and recommend to you in the restoration of the hand. Then place the broken finger in position according to the length of the finger, and the hand should be slightly above it; and place this table which I have recommended under the foot, and strengthen that area with proper traction.
But if what is broken consists of two or three or more bones, then you place a splint on each finger according to its size wrapped in linen cloth, and strengthen the table under the heel, and stand on one of the table's legs away from the belly of the foot so that it holds well.
And it is important for you to remember that you should not overlook all the causes I mentioned in other fractures and the accidents that I described, and oppose yourself to every accident with what is necessary.
Capital Chapter XVIII.
On the fracture of the hump of a woman and the bone of the pelvis and the buttock of a man.
When the hump of a woman is broken, it should be made to rest in a sling, and incline it slightly to one side, and hold it behind.
And the midwife should fill the hump of cotton, and make it like that as hoped; and the woman should be confined, and raise her legs little by little, because all this is forgotten until it is in front of the hump as expected, and the broken bone returns to its place.
And place poultices on the legs, and when it is necessary to urinate, remove the cotton with ease and urinate, and reduce it and return it as described in the method used at the beginning, and return the poultice first.
And do this for seven days or a little more, because it is healed.
And if you wish, take a bladder of an ewe and strengthen it over the trough of the pelvis with a cane tube; and insert the entire bladder into the pelvis, and inflate the tube with air inside until the bladder is swollen in the pelvis, because the fracture returns.
And it should be filled with cotton and remain for as many days as recommended until it heals.
And when the bone of the pelvis in a man or woman is broken, administer to its restoration and fixation what I have recommended for the bone of the hip.
And that which is right should not be hidden in these proximate fractures and those which are rare, especially for the one who has studied this subject and knows my book; because that fracture indicates to you in the greatest dispositions the correct way of restoration and traction of it, so understand well.
But in the buttock of a man when it is broken, take a gooseberry leaf, and place the buttock on it; and place a cloth over it wrapped, and wrap it, and let it rest for three days or more until it heals.
Capital Chapter XIX.
On the restoration of fractured bones when they are infected.
It is appropriate to treat the person who has suffered a fracture with a wound, especially if the bone is large like the bone of the thigh or shoulder blade, or resembles it, to set and drain that as soon as possible if the conditions for setting bones are present as described previously.
If the wound bleeds profusely, it is necessary that you take steps to stop the bleeding by applying powdered hematostatic agent if there is no other reason for it.
Then proceed to set the fracture on that day and do not delay, unless an abscess occurs.
But if the abscess is cauterized, you should wait to set the fracture for up to nine days, until the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third and fourth day, for you will cause bad outcomes.
But if the broken bone is prominent above the skin, it is necessary that you perforate and reduce it with your hands with as little extension as possible.
But if the reduction is not prepared and the situation with your hands, you should reduce it with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight inches, and the width according to the size of the wound; and it is necessary for the physician to choose one or two of these instruments based on the size of the fracture in every type of fracture.
It should be round and as little curved as possible to ensure proper understanding of the situation during the operation.
It should have sharp edges at the margins of its extremities and be thicker at the bottom and smaller towards the middle.
This is the shape of it:
It is called "labre volentz atelarem" in Greek, which means it is a small, flat tool.
Therefore, the end of the instrument should be stopped when it comes into contact with the protruding bone.
You should probe it once to ensure that the bone has been reduced and is properly set.
Therefore, you should insert the instrument into the fracture ends to set them, and if the fractured bone is thin, do not use the tool for this purpose unless it has enough power to do so.
But if you cannot reduce the bone entirely with the instrument we have recommended, you should make an incision using the chisels that were mentioned; or it could be one of the saws in any manner that is possible for you.
Then file down the bone that remains rough and has small splinters.
Once the bone is set, and the patient feels intense pain gradually, you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural position; and then do what provides great relief to the patient.
When your procedure on the bone is complete, immerse a piece of black mustard-oil-soaked cloth in vinegar and apply it directly to the wound, especially if it is summertime; do not pause over the wound or other cause where oil might be present, so that it does not cause pus formation and rotting.
Then administer stitches at the time of your completion of the bone setting procedure, and leave the wound open so that you can make incisions with forceps and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
And be cautious not to strain the wound with the fracture, for many foolish physicians have done this before, causing their patients' death or corrosive and painful wounds, which is sinful. And if the ligature is loose, soft, and different from the ligatures of other fractures.
If the wound is large or a bad one and you are concerned about the potential for bad complications as we have warned, and there is pain at the site, it is not necessary to apply stitches; instead, apply a hard bandage in place of stitches and tighten it with them.
And when after one or two days the wound starts to form pus, which is a sign of infection, you should remove the cloth that you had placed over it with vinegar and apply ointments such as tetra-pharmacon or similar ones that are customarily used for treating wounds.
You should remove the dressing and inspect the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and make sure that the limb is prepared in such a way that the pus drains towards the incisions away from the wound site with ease.
If the wound persists for many days without healing or becoming abscess-free, you should know that this is a sign of the smallpox, and you must examine the wound with caution. And of these signs, those that are separated and extracted should be distinguished from those that remain attached and cause limb swelling and pain; if you can perforate them as is possible for you.
If the wound turns black or emits a foul odor, which are signs of corruption and putrefaction, you should pause until one of them is treated according to the treatment that was previously described in its respective chapter.
When the thighbone is broken, it protrudes from the member in a manner similar to the bones of the large limbs, and do not presume to attract or extract it, as many unfortunate incidents occur due to that, leading to death; leave it inside until it can be set properly, as it may fall apart within 20 to 30 days. Then treat the wound if you see it, and leave it untreated otherwise.
Capital XX. (Chapter Twenty)
On the treatment of nodes that occur in the trace of any fracture.
Nodes frequently occur in the trace of healing from a fracture, especially near the joints, and are swollen due to the figure of the member; therefore, forcefully prohibit the member from its natural operation.
Hence consider if the node is recent and administer medicines that have a coagulating effect such as aloes, henna, and so on; in this way take some or all of these, and bind them with wax or albumen, or vinegar, and place it over the node in a poultice, and constrict it well with good binding.
Leave the extraction untouched for several days; then loosen it and apply another, until the node subsides; or press a lead plate gently over it, as lead has the property of holding anything that is swollen in the limbs.
If the node has already turned into a hard and tight mass and it is necessary to remove it frequently, then cut it through the most elevated part of it, remove the superfluous matter and protrusion, or scrape it with sharp scissors until it subsides; and treat the wound until it heals.
Capital XXI (Chapter Twenty-One)
On the restoration of a fracture when it has been restored and keep the limb thin and weak, according to its nature.
When a bone fracture has been restored and the limb is kept thin and weak, this should not be done except for several reasons: one of which is an abundance of soluble ligament and the ligament made incorrectly; or due to excessive tightness of the ligaments before the nutrient is prohibited from flowing into the limb; or due to excessive swelling of the ligaments; or due to superfluous movement not at its time; or due to a small amount of blood in the patient's body and the debilitation of the same.
And the treatment of this is to feed the patient and make their heart tender until the blood is increased in them; administer baths; and give them nourishment and comfort.
And place a poultice over the limb, so that the poultice draws in the nutrient, or continue swelling of it with hot water, until the nutrient flows and returns to its natural shape.
Capital XXII (Chapter Twenty-Two)
On the treatment of broken bones when they have been restored incorrectly and prohibit their operation as required.
When the limb has been restored and there is a need for correction of tortuosity and protrusion in the broken bone and node, this is due to the shape of the member being distorted; however, do not prohibit the limb from its natural operation, but it does not necessarily mean that the limb was newly fractured.
However, there are many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is very condemnable and leads to great fear of the sign of which death is imminent.
If the limpness and nodes are recent, then it is necessary to swell them with hot water in which soft herbs soothing the pain are steeped, such as comfrey leaves and roots, marshmallow, and others similar; and make a plaster with a plaster made from mallow; or take the juice of althea root and bind it with walnut oil or olive oil, and apply it; or take ripe figs, grind them with pigeon flour, and others similar of the medicines that are named "merciful consolidation".
And in some cases it is dissolved with continuous light friction that is done with the most moist materials and movement of the limb is administered throughout all parts at all hours.
However, if tortuosity has already advanced forward and is made strong and turned into stone and requires treatment with iron, then it is necessary that the pus be incised and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and what superfluous matter from the node of the same be cut away with sharp scissors; and facilitate the process by applying heat and studying.
Capital XXIII (Chapter Twenty-Three)
On the treatment of dislocation.
Dislocation is essentially of one of the joints in its place, which is prevented from movement, and distorts the shape of the member, causing pain and great injuries to the patient.
Therefore, when there is a dislocation, it is necessary to perform the reduction as soon as possible and not delay in reducing it, as if it is delayed, the place becomes numb and it becomes difficult to reduce the dislocation.
It is not necessary that he be sick or lying down at the time of the amputation, for many times watching it causes spasms and painful shuddering.
When it occurs, it is necessary that you prepare for the patient's flabotomy, and be ready before the amputation resumes; and bind the amputated member with hot water and oil, and reduce it with ease.
And let every member be healed by the water that will come to mind at its location.
And you have already arranged the chapters of dislocation as it is done before in fractures, from the higher part of the body to the lower.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of a dislocated jawbone (lower).
If both jaws are dislocated and not torn, the dislocation of both is done according to one of two methods: that they are returned to their places with little movement, and softened slightly; or they are completely dislocated and compressed, until they are softened at the joint partition, so that saliva from the patient flows out and he cannot keep it in or close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in his cheek.
But if the dislocation is slight, then it returns to its place with little effort.
But if the dislocation is complete and compressed, it is necessary to administer a gentle reduction of it, and not delay it unnecessarily.
And the minister holds the patient's head, and enters his hand into the side of the affected jaw, if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both hands together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the others hold the rest of him outside; and commands the patient to stop moving his jaws and let them go from each side; and the minister holds the jaw and wraps it with his hand until it returns to its place.
If the reduction is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated, administer warm water and oil, so that the reduction of both can be done easily and not delayed unnecessarily, as we said before.
And so when they are wrapped and closed, the patient's mouth is clamped shut, and it is not softened, then you place those powdered pieces of cloth with wax on them, made of beeswax and rose oil; and let them lie there with ease and gentle pressure.
Let the patient sleep on his back, and his head should be between two pillows to prevent him from turning either to the right or left; do not force him to move in any way; let his diet consist only of lion meat until the pain is alleviated, and the jaws are healed.
And let this be done with ease, and do not strain the opening of the mouth by eating, drinking, speaking or laughing until the jaw is healed.
If the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at some time and not returned to their places, many times fevers occur, and constant vomiting of pure bile follows, and the patient's abdomen is swollen and his urine becomes dark yellow.
And when you see this, you know that it is a disaster; and many times he who suffers from this condition dies within ten days.
Chapter XXV.
Reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the extremity of the muscle.
The collarbone should not be dislocated from the chest cavity; and sometimes it is dislocated on the outside, which can be confirmed by examination.
The treatment for this is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms. Then grasp the area with your hand to firmly hold it in place, as it will return to its original position.
Place a dressing over that area and press down on it firmly.
The dislocation of the extremity that is connected to the joint will not occur in any day; therefore, it must be reduced and fixed as mentioned earlier and as you are equipped for.
Place a dressing over that area, compress it and immobilize it with bandages, and instruct the patient to rest quietly until they are healed.
With this treatment, the dislocation of the muscle's extremity is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capital. XXVI. (This indicates that a new section or chapter is starting)
Reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle can only be dislocated in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated at the shoulder joint on the outside.
And the second way is that it is dislocated at the top of the muscle, which can happen, but it is not dislocated behind the shoulder or in front of the nerves.
Moreover, it is dislocated and extends beyond the shoulder joint on the outside, especially in those with less flesh, it is easily dislocated; but in those with more fleshy areas, it comes out with difficulty.
And a strong blow or fall can cause it to happen in some men, and the muscle is removed by cauterizing the abscess, and it is treated as if it were already dislocated.
Therefore, you should be aware of this and treat it accordingly if you encounter it.
The dislocation of the shoulder joint on the outside is well-known; so you should distinguish between a dislocated muscle and an intact one, because there are clear differences among them; and at the head of the muscle you will find a concavity towards the inside of the shoulder joint, and when you touch the head of the muscle in that way, it feels like a hump, and the patient cannot reduce their arm or move it at all.
If it is dislocated on the outside of the shoulder joint or above it, you should clearly feel for it and not miss it.
The reduction of this dislocation is made easily when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
The reduction of the shoulder joint dislocation is that the caregiver lifts the arm above the joint and places their hands below the shoulder joint, lifting the joint upwards to its original position with force, and then the caregiver lifts the arm and extends it; and then they place their hands below it so that it returns easily.
But if it does not return after the treatment described earlier, and it is in its initial stage, a few days later, the patient should be bathed with hot water and administered an embrocation that softens and soothes like if it were a wound of althea, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and this should be administered.
Then the patient should lie on their back and rest with their shoulder joint placed between looseness and firmness, and the doctor should place their hand on the head of the muscle, lifting it vertically, and pull the arm of the patient towards the outside to prevent it from slipping out, and another caregiver should hold the head of the patient so that it does not slip out, because it will quickly return to its original position.
And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: that you bring a man who is taller than the patient to the side of the affected shoulder, and insert your muscle under the shoulder joint of the patient and lift the shoulder joint upwards towards the outside until the patient is suspended in the air, and another caregiver pulls the arm of the patient from below their abdomen. But if the patient is lightweight, it is necessary that whatever causes the weight be suspended to make it heavier, because the dislocation will quickly return.
Another method of reduction is that a long pole with a round head (similar to the shape of a mortar pestle) should be placed on the ground, not too thick or too thin, and then it should be placed below the patient; then two cloths made of lion skin are placed over the top of the pole, and the patient stands according to the length of the pole, and their arm is extended to the other side with force, because the joint will quickly return to its original position.
If the reduction of the shoulder joint is difficult due to all the causes mentioned earlier, use this treatment: take a pole whose length is two forearms and latitude of four fingers, and its thickness should be reduced at the head in this way:
Place round lion skin cloths over the round head of the pole to prevent the patient from being injured.
And it should be placed under the thighs of the patient, and the hand or arm should be extended inside the thigh, and the thigh should be tied to the support and the arm and the end of the hand.
And place the arm on a step according to its length, extend the hand towards the sides, and have something suspended from the other side, for the joint will soon be joined.
When the intestine of it is completed in any way that is possible for you, then you must place under the thigh a linen cloth of appropriate size; and over that, apply an emplaster prepared with powder of moly, oil of rosin, and album over all the muscle, so that it is rolled up, and strengthen under the thigh with a good string; and the hernia should be wrapped around the emplaster, and the hand of it should be connected to its neck, and let it rest, and the hand should not be harmed for seven days.
And it is necessary to restrict the food of the patient little, until the member is comforted, because it is easier for healing in it.
And food should be given more abundantly after seven or five days and exercise movements; and if it is stopped and not softened, then it is healed.
But if the joint is dislocated by water or other reason many times, then in that case it is necessary to administer cauterization with three cuts, as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization.
If all this is done and after seven days the hernia is not closed and the wrap is removed, and the emplaster and string are reduced several times without being closed and it catches and cannot lift that arm to the sides above, you know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, have become inactivated or extended or softened, and know that the hernia will never be fixed in its place.
From the dislocation of that one you must press on the shin and the breast or the sides behind it, the reduction is done with thrust and extension with hands until it returns.
And another string should be applied to it, and heal that one until it is healed.
And if there is serious healing in the member and slow movement of it, then you must use baths several times until that gravity is alleviated and it returns to its nature first.
Chapter XXVII.
On the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
You know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated on all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation of it is not disguised for you, because the bones are displaced from their place or touched by some figure, and when you adjust the dislocated shoulder with the hand, that is clearly declared to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch it with its own muscle.
And it is necessary to cut and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before an abscess forms, because if it comes to an abscess, it is difficult to reduce it, and healing of it is slow; and especially when it is behind, because it is worse than all other types of dislocations, and with more pain, and many times it causes death.
And the restoration of it, when that one can be reduced, is that the hand of it should be extended with two hands, and the arm should be expanded, and the doctor's hands should be on the shoulder and below it, and he should push the joint with his fingers or the tip of his palm until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is in front, then you must return it so that the arm bends with its own hand, until you strike the shoulder with the tip of your palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer violent extension and strong movement.
And two ministers should extend the arm, and another two should hold it so that the extension does not slip back.
And the arm must be wrapped entirely with folded cloth around it, or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with oil to help in the lubrication of the joint and ease of movement; and then push the joint forcefully until it returns.
And the reduction of that area must be stopped on that plaster where there is stiffness and swelling with serous fluid, and it should be compressed with a bandage, and the descent should be prevented with a constrictive device, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and it should be left for some days.
Then loosen it; therefore, if the joint is formed in its place, you must remove the bandage and leave it.
If the joint is not strong, you must rub the plaster and bandage, and leave it for some days until it subsides; then loosen it.
But if gravity favors the reduction of the joint, and its position is in motion, you should administer humid heat in bathing and gentle friction, and compress it, until it is relieved; or place something lubricated over the joint, such as greasy material; and bind it, and leave it on the bone for a day and night. Then remove it and put it in a bath; when it has cooled down, you should rub the joint with warm friction, and apply something lubricated over it, such as a roll of grease, once, twice, and three times. Corruption has reached the nail bed under the skin, let it be limited.
If you wish, place it over the wet and scalded cowhide seam and press on it; and do this several times, as the area is moist and reduces to its position.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the treatment of dislocation of shoulder (of the joint between the arm and the hand).
Sometimes the shoulder is dislocated, and the reduction of the dislocation of it is easy, but the opposite is true for other joints; however, it requires speed in the reduction at the time when it is dislocated, before the location becomes apophthegmatized or a cautionary incision occurs.
The reduction of the dislocation is that you place the patient's hand on a table and extend their arm, and place your hand or palm over the point of the joint, and push it back into its place.
However, it is important to consider whether the palm has already been placed on the patient's belly, in that case, the patient places their hands on a table and extends and reduces them; if the dislocation is preceded, you should place the patient's hand on the table with their arm positioned intrinsically so that the doctor's hand rests on the point of the joint.
And if it returns quickly, that is good; otherwise, you must compress it with bandage allowing the apophthegma to heal and leave it; do not rub it, as otherwise, pain will occur and you cannot bear it until several days have passed.
However, the joint may remain twisted; and you should not tell the patient about any cause, but rather soften the hand so that it cannot be compressed due to a cause; in that case, you should know that the nerves are broken or crushed, and you should not engage in it unless it is tightened with a pointed cautery for the purpose of healing and providing some relief.
When the shoulder is returned, you must place it over the bandage that has been recommended, and leave it compressed for 5 days, and then remove it and exercise the patient's arm.
If its movement is stopped and there occurs any gravity, you should loosen it with warm water and gentle friction several times, until it subsides.
Chapter XXIX.
On the treatment of dislocation of fingers.
Sometimes fingers are dislocated in all directions.
When a finger is dislocated at the base or in the palm of one of them, you should press on the finger and push its displacement with your thumbs until it returns to its place.
Then support the tip of the finger and suspend the part in which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
Then suspend it and extend it until it is straightened on that same day.
When it is night, do as described earlier, and do not stop unbinding it during the day and exercising movement, and leave it at night; and do this for several days until it is straightened.
Do the same if it is dislocated in the wrist of the hand, and place it in the opposite direction and do the first operation as described, until it is healed.
Do the same when it is dislocated in other directions.
Chapter XXX.
On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the spine.
When complete dislocation of one or more vertebrae of the spine or neck occurs, and some displaced vertebrae remain in their original location, there is no cure for it, as death approaches the patient.
A sign of this is that the patient's excretion is outside their control and they cannot retain it; several members of the body or two legs or both arms, or one of them, are swollen, or one vertebra remains in its original position, as several days pass, another vertebra remains in place, and several days later, removal of those vertebrae is made in four directions.
Therefore, it has already receded behind the parts (limbs) and is called goutiness.
The cure for it is that you should consider if goutiness occurs in childhood, because in that case, there is no cure or healing of it completely.
Furthermore, in those cases that occur from injury or blow, or similar to those, the ancient authors described the methods of cure at length, but I will condense it as much as possible due to the brevity of this text, with a more concise explanation; however, I have summarized and explained it using various instruments which I will show and explain here.
That which I recommend is the one that will be cured.
The patient should lie down with his back against a wall and his legs propped up with something moist to prevent them from being hurt.
Place a straight stick on the ground at the foot of the patient, and place another stick perpendicular to the first one under their heels.
The first servant should hold the stick, and not be fixed in a pit; the second servant should hold the other according to that form.
Wrap the head of the patient with a cloth and gently tickle the lion's mane (beard) so that it does not hurt him; extend the end of the liament (towel or bandage) to the stick that is under his head, and tie it there; and tighten the other liament over his lower back, around his waist, and cover his legs; and adjust all the liaments and tie them to the other stick that is under his feet.
And the servant should extend each liament to the side of the stick, but not recede behind both sticks and their liaments where they are fixed, but rather they should remain as I have said.
The doctor should place his hands on the spine with strength until it returns (becomes normal), or he may place a board under it and adjust his feet on the board until it returns.
If it does not return in this way, then you should take a board that is the same width or length as three arms, and carve a hole in the wall near the patient, in which the end of the board will fit. The servant should place the edge of the board on the spine, and the doctor should place his feet on the other end, and press it with force until the spine is twisted and returns to its original position.
If you wish, turn the pulley with your hand; and you should be on the ground at the foot of the patient with two sticks (rods), each one a span long, and the distance between them should be a palm, and make a hole in each rod so that it can rotate, and each one should be firmly fixed to the ground so that it does not move.
And let a bandage be wrapped around the thigh, and roll it up in both ends of the two bands.
And at the end of it (the bandage), there is a knot that forms the thigh, the length of which is one hand span and rolled up; and in the other two bands is similar to that.
Tighten the ligaments that you have tied around the legs of the patient at the joint that should be at the head, and the ligaments that you have tied around the thighs of him/her at the joint that should be at the feet.
Then you must hold each joint with one servant who turns it with his hand, and the doctor should manipulate the vertebra as we have said.
Once the vertebra is returned and held in place, you must apply an exisanguinating paste made of albumin of egg and stopper; and apply a plaster on top of the paste, the width of which should be three fingers or nearby that, and the length to match the size of the swelling, and over the parting of the vertebra.
And use the diet that we have mentioned for the patient until he/she is well.
If there remains any danger in the area at the end of healing, then it is necessary to administer medications that soften and smooth with long-term administration of liniment, which we have recommended; and already a layer of lead has been applied on that site.
Sometimes danger remains at the end of the two vertebrae, and this is due to dislocation; and that bone remains in a dangerous position which must not be corrected with this medicine, because it can lead to death.
Chapter XXI.
On the treatment of dislocated pelvis.
Know that the joint of the pelvis and the joint of the muscles do not only dislocate, but this only occurs in dislocation and not at those other joints where small movement and concavity occur.
The joint of the pelvis is dislocated in four ways, because it can be dislocated at the internal divisions, or at the external divisions, or at the frontal divisions, or at the posterior divisions.
Moreover, it is more often dislocated at the internal divisions and less so at the frontal or posterior divisions.
The sign of dislocation in the internal divisions is that when you adjust the thigh of the patient with the healthy thigh, the affected one becomes longer and the end is more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his/her leg; therefore, it must be straightened by placing a cauterized apostema at the place where it should be straightened.
The sign of the one to whom this dislocation occurs at the external divisions is that the symptoms of it are contrary to this accident.
The sign of the one to whom this dislocation occurs at the frontal divisions is that the thigh expands in compliance with it, but does not bend without pain at the end; and if it is perforated to go forward, it cannot be raised beyond the frontal divisions; and the urine is retained, and a cauterized apostema is placed on it, and you must walk on your heels.
The sign of the one to whom this dislocation occurs at the posterior divisions is that the end does not expand, nor can the front bend as much as the other; and the thigh is shorter than the other, and the pain is relieved, and the head of the thigh should be at that place.
However, the reduction of this type of dislocation is that you consider if the dislocation is old and chronic, which has already been treated with the application of reducing measures and leaving it in its position, then that treatment is not complete; therefore, in that case, correction should not be made.
However, in the one with recent dislocation, which is one of the four types of dislocation, then you must strive to correct the joint and stretch it at the internal and external divisions, and move it to the left and right, because this will return it and not require other care.
However, if it does not return in this way, then you must prepare a strong servant and stretch the thigh of him/her from the lower part or with his hand or with ligaments that are tied above the knee; another servant should extend his hand above it to the place where he touches the thigh; and another servant should tighten a cord around the head of the hip, and another servant should hold the end of the ligament.
The extension is either from the internal part to the ankle at the neck of the pelvis or from the posterior part to the end of the spine.
The extension is for all in one move so that the patient remains raised off the ground and hanging.
This type of extension is common to all four.
Therefore, if the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary in all cases to follow the remedy for this treatment.
In the reduction of it, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is in the internal divisions, it is necessary that the patient lies on his/her back; and you place ligaments over the head of the hip at the place where the head of the hip is between the pelvis and the lower end of the thigh; and extend the ligament above the knee to the most anterior part of the pelvis.
Then another strong servant grasps the patient's arms, and gently presses on the swollen part of the sick person's groin and spreads it out to the sides forcibly, as it returns to its place.
This type of treatment is light cure for the abscess which reduces that member unlike other types.
But if it is not possible to access the abscess with this type of treatment, then it is necessary to tie both the patient's feet together firmly and lightly on top of both ankles and wrists.
And let the length of each cord be four fingers, and let the sick person's abdomen be extended more than the other by two fingers.
Then let the patient be suspended over the post at the highest point, and let the length from the ground to that point be two arms (or about 50 cm).
And then command a strong young man to saw the head of the abscess off, and let another strong young man hold the patient, while another pushes the abscess out with force, as the joint returns to its place quickly.
But in the reduction itself, when it is a dislocation at the side part, it is necessary for the patient to walk on their toes as we have recommended in the previous section; and tie the cord firmly around the abdomen of the patient themselves and around their legs.
And let two posts be placed, one at the feet and another at the head; and let posts be placed adjusted to the middle of the pole that damp cloths are wrapped around, so that the patient is not harmed by the post being between their legs, so that the extension to the sides is not restricted.
And let each servant extend to his side, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to art (or technique).
And when the dislocation is at the front side parts, then let the abdomen be extended slightly and as in this narration on pole; and the doctor places his right palm on the sick person's groin, and with the other hand, he compresses that area, and with that compression, he extends the compressed area to the back side parts at the hip.
And if the dislocation is at the back side parts, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended to the sides and raised from the ground; rather, they should be placed on a hard surface, as in the case of an inguinal hernia when the groin area is dislocated outside, as we have said in the previous section about lying down on two cushions; and it should be on their back and the cords should be extended, as we have said, without any benefit.
It is necessary to apply compression with a table at the joint area where the dislocation is located.
So when the reduction is complicated, as you know, and the sign of the reduction of that member is not hidden from you (meaning you extend the patient's abdomens and when you see the cords contract and the patient expands their abdomen without excuse, then you will know that the member has returned to its place) - and then you adjust two cushions and apply ointment and compress with bandages so that the hernia is not injured in any of the sides; and keep the patient in rest for three or four days.
Then remove the cord and the ointment, and compare one abdomen with the other.
And if you see the cords in their proper place, then you will know that the dislocation has been closed and then let the patient walk.
And if you see any cause of softening, then you return and apply ointment to that area and compress it according to your first structure, and let it rest for three days.
Then remove that, and make the patient walk slowly on crutches for some days until they are comfortable.
Chapter 32.
On the treatment of inguinal dislocation.
The inguinal region can be dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated outside, inside, more to the back than to the front, but not at the front side parts.
The sign of inguinal dislocation is that you command the patient to apply their abdomen to the groin area, and then you will know that the inguinal region is dislocated.
And the recovery of all these dislocations is that you place the patient correctly, so that they extend their abdomen if possible; place your hands on the front part of them, and hold their feet between your legs; and then have another servant hold the inguinal region of them with their palms and keep those areas firmly pressed together until the inguinal region returns to its place. Another servant should extend their leg inward until the inguinal region returns to its place.
The sign of recovery is that the abdomen adheres to the groin area with a gentle pressure.
Then apply ointment to that area and have the abdomen adhere to the groin, and keep them together with bandages for three or four days, and then remove the bandages.
Do not use the patient for walking for several days until he is healed and comfortable.
If the reduction [of the hernia] is not possible for you, then administer strong extension with bandages in the treatment of the hernia, as mentioned in the previous account.
Capitolo XXXIII.
Del trattamento della dislocazione del piede.
Il piede qualche volta viene rimosso parzialmente, e altre volte  dislocato per causa di trauma, e la dislocazione del piede pu essere causata all'interno delle articolazioni oppure all'esterno.
Ed  un segno della dislocazione del piede che, in alcuni casi, si nota l'inflessione del piede nella zona della dislocazione.
Ma il trattamento della rimozione del piede  quello di ridurre semplicemente, rendendolo facile da espandere e compresso fino a quando non torni alla sua posizione originale.
Ma nel trattamento di una dislocazione del piede causata da trauma,  necessario tenere in posizione retta il paziente e avere un ministro forte e valido nella parte posteriore del piede in quella stessa posizione.
Poi prendi con la mano sinistra il lato destro del piede in posizione superiore della caviglia.
Poi tirai il piede con la mano destra verso te stesso, poi con la mano sinistra lo tieni per due volte, poi estendi la mano sinistra; quindi colpisci le ginocchia del piede con la mano destra senza lavorare.
E fai quello che ho detto in due volte.
E poi colpisci il ginocchio inferiore del piede con la mano sinistra sulla caviglia.
Se il piede torna alla sua posizione originale dopo una o due volte con questa tecnica,  buono; se non ci accade, allora prosegui con l'operazione, poich il piede torner indietro.
Ma se la riduzione del piede  proibita a te con quella tecnica raccomandata, allora lascia il paziente sedere sul suo fianco sulla terra, e metti un pavimento sicuro in terra fermo sotto di lui, e sia coperto da un lenzuolo per evitare che il paziente si ferisca.
E il ministro tenga le sue mani sui lati del piede, e un altro ministro estenda il piede con le mani o con una spugna che giace sul collo del piede; e un altro ministro estenda quello stesso lato in opposizione all'estensione del suo lato, e il pavimento sia tra le gambe del paziente per tenere in posizione quello.
E il medico riposiziona la dislocazione del piede con le sue mani, e un altro ministro tiene le gambe in posizione opposta, perch la dislocazione ritornerebbe facilmente.
E quindi, quando la dislocazione ritorna e viene dichiarato che la riduzione  stata effettuata correttamente, allora posa dell'impasto su di esso e ti rimuovi con forza l'imballaggio e legami il piede alla caviglia.
E  necessario essere attenti ai nervi che sono dietro al piede, poich i legami sul piede non devono essere troppo forti e dolorosi.
E lasciare quello per due o tre giorni; se i legami diventano mollificati, rimuovere quelli.
E lasciare quello libero nel terzo giorno o nel quarto; proibisca al paziente di andare per quaranta giorni. But if it is necessary to go before that space, it is not certain that the dislocation is not already resolved and corrupt, and it should be approached with caution as it may not receive treatment.
If it is a case of cauterizing an abscess, you must administer in the area where the treatment and dressing will be applied until it has healed.
Capital (chapter) 34.
On the treatment of dislocation of the toes on the feet.
It is necessary that the dislocated person be tied up with little extension and not too tight, because it should be easy to move.
But if the dislocation is in one of the toes of the foot, then it is necessary to hold the patient's foot on a wooden or earth platform so that it remains stationary as if it were walking.
And place your foot on that which supports the joints, and press it with your foot against it firmly until it returns, and observe if it remains tied and does not come out of its position.
And press the belly of the foot to a table that supports the entire foot with two ends, and tighten it with a structure that is strong and firm for three days; and release it and let it rest from walking for several days, until it has been strengthened and recovery is assured.
Capital (chapter) 35.
On the types of dislocation caused by injury, fracture or any combination.
When any of these causes occur and you are engaged in treating it and restoring it, death often occurs after a while.
Therefore, it is not necessary to presume on the treatment of it (the dislocation), but rather one who is skilled in the art, with long experience, mercy and compassion, cautious, not hasty or presumptuous; and who uses medications that cure abscesses only at the beginning, leaves the patient to divine judgment, not to one for whom hope of salvation from perdition is doubtful, but rather to one for whom there is hope of alleviation from illness, and in which there appears some hope. And so, you should make every effort to reduce it (the dislocation) as soon as possible at the beginning of the cause, before an abscess occurs.
And if the limb returns as desired, then administer a treatment that heals the abscess and treats the wound with what is appropriate for dry dressings.
If the dislocation is a fracture and there are separate splinters in the bones, then you should perform a setting of them, and do as we have said in simple illnesses in the places where they occur.
And guard and avoid as your virtue dictates the instrument in the dangerous paths following my preaching; for that is better for you should be to your Creator, and more permanent for your glory, and healthier for your true body in your time. Thus ends the words of Albucasim may God be praised. Amen.
