Therefore, my sons, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, by complying with it, its end is achieved in it, and by explaining it, and by declaring it, it seems to me that I should complete that treatise for you, which is about surgery.
For surgery is utterly deserted in our region and in our time, such that its science is greatly endangered, and its instruments are abandoned; it remains only some small descriptions in the books of the ancients, which have become obscure and lead to errors and confusion until their intentions are closed and their strength and art is prolonged.
And it seems to me that I shall revive that order of the treatise according to its exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes with the shapes of cautery instruments and other tools of work along with the addition of a description, as well as their preparation, which is necessary.
However, the reason why there is not a good artisan with his tools in this time is that the art of medicine is long, and that its practitioner must be exercised in the science of anatomy which includes knowledge of the joints and shapes of the members; and the connection and separation of them; and have knowledge of bones, nerves and ligaments, as well as their number, and the incision of them; and of the arteries that pulse and those that are quiet, and the locations of their emission.
And as Hippocrates said in his words, much depends on the name, but in work, it is even more so in the art of surgery.
However, we have already said about that in the introduction of this book; for whoever is not skilled in what we have told you about anatomy cannot avoid error, and it causes men to die as I have seen many times, because some are trained in this science and abandon it due to lack of knowledge and experience.
For I saw a mad and skilled doctor make an abscess called scrophilus in the neck of a woman, and cut some arteries in her neck so that a large amount of blood flowed until the woman died among those present.
And I saw another doctor who took out a stone from a man who was in his condition, and the stone was large, and it came to him and cut out that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that the man died on the third day.
And I called for it to be extracted, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient, it was clear that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who took a fee from a duke of our land for surgery, and went to a black prisoner who had a fracture in his thigh; and the doctor prepared himself with ignorance, extracted the fracture, over the wound, with bladders and sticks with strong structure, but did not let the wound breathe.
And he wrapped it according to his desires, and applied the dressing, and left him for some days and commanded us to remove the bandages; and thus it was until the thigh and leg became abscessed and came to ruin.
And I was called for it, prepared to remove the bandages, and achieved calmness and alleviated his pain.
However, corruption had already been confirmed in the member, so that it could not stop, and the corruption spread throughout the member until the patient died.
And I saw another doctor who punctured an abscess called cancer, and it became ulcerated in several days, so that the evil of it was magnified by its lord.
For the cancer is free of black bile, therefore it is not necessary that it reach the entire body, but rather some member which is hostile to it.
And for this reason, my sons, it is necessary that surgery be divided into two categories: one is the operation associated with health, and the other is work associated with danger in greater situations.
And I have already explained this throughout the book in which there is an operation where there is error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to guard against it and leave it alone, so that fools do not find a way to speak and deceive you.
And thus, take up your weapons with diligence and protection of God, and your patients with compassion and firmness.
And use the best way for God's grace to obtain salvation and a favorable outcome, and leave terrible diseases with difficult healing, and abandon the weapons that make you fearful, so that examination in your faith and in your name does not deceive you: for it remains in your glory, and thus in the world and in eternity in your sanctity.
Galenus already said in some of his teachings: "Do not treat bad diseases, for thus bad doctors will not be named."
And I have divided this book into three chapters.
The division of the book begins, and the first of the first section. The first capital section deals with the feet, their shapes, the instruments used and the ironwork of cauteries, as well as what is necessary in the operation.
The second division. The second chapter, on abscesses and perforation, fumigation, boils, extraction of stones, and similar issues, all dealt with and organized according to the shapes of the instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and the cure of twisting and similar issues; a section organized concerning the feet and the shapes of instruments.
It is necessary for me to discuss the quality of those cauterization remedies and their adverse effects, as well as when cautioning against cauterization is appropriate.
Thus I say that the discussion of the quality of the cauterization remedy and its adverse effects is lengthy, complex, subtle, and secret; it has been spoken about greatly by many wise people, and they disagree on it, but I will only discuss a small part of their discourse, fearing prolongation.
And thus I say that cauterization generally involves all materials universally, with the exception of two categories: those that are called cauda without material.
In the category of dry and material-less cauda, there is disagreement; some say that cauterization is beneficial for this condition, while others argue the opposite, stating that cauterization is not suitable for diseases characterized by quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate to treat a dry and material-less cauda with something that is hot and dry.
And he replies to the contrary, stating that cauterization is beneficial for all cases of dry and material-less cauda found in human bodies, as when you compare the body and its humidity with the nature of fire, you find that the human body is moist.
And I say by the discussion of this, that I have experienced this many times in practice.
However, it is not necessary for me to repeat what has already been proven and practiced in the chapter on cauterization after further experience, and to understand the diversity of human conditions and the placement of diseases within them, as well as their causes, symptoms, and the time span of those diseases.
However, in other cases there is no need for fear, especially with moist and cold diseases, since all doctors agree on those, and there is no disagreement about the use of cauterization for them.
And understand, my children, that the secret of curing by cauterization with fire and its benefits is due to the simplicity of the fire, since its action does not extend beyond the member being cauterized but only causes minimal damage to other adjacent members.
However, the action of burning medicine extends to members that are adjacent to it, and strong fire can bring disease difficult to cure and speedy decay.
However, fire, due to its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not cause anything except excess, and it is already known by experience and long study in the art of truth about the causes; thus I am excused for the length of my discussion, and if it were not hidden in this book, I would reveal the secret about fire and the operation of it in bodies, as well as its expulsion of diseases, with a philosophical demonstrative speech that would aid you in your pains.
And understand, my children, that they disagree on the appropriate time for cauterization and delay the best time of spring.
I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, since the adverse effects of time are submerged in the benefits provided by the cauterization, and especially if cauterization is for pain or necessary pain-relief, such as fistulas, which cannot tolerate delay because of the risk of malice, which is greater than minor harm due to the passage of time.
And thus, do not let this discourage you, or my children, since those who are ignorant and foolish doctors only believe that the disease that is cured by cauterization does not recover at all times, and they delay its consequences.
And the reason is not as they think, for cauterization is simply a medicine that alters the condition and dries up the humidity that causes pain.
However, excessive cauterization surpasses the medicine in terms of its power and the effectiveness of its operation and the greatness of its master.
It is possible that the disease may return at some point in time, depending on the condition of the patient and the location of their disease, as well as its power, and what is prepared in their body due to an accumulation of superfluidity, and what is acquired by them through their diet and similar causes; otherwise, if the disease that receives cauterization is a subtle disease in a member with few superfluidities and humidity, such as cauterizing a tooth for pain or similar conditions, it is possible that the pain will not return, but rather it will be minor.
And more common speech is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is rightly said, not that I understand in it, for I believe it is not healing that improves with medicine or any other reason for caution.
And the cause is contrary to that; and my intention that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is not to say when we administer methods of healing in some diseases, and those medicines do not help, but rather at the end of the disease, they administer caution, and it helps with that. And from here on, let's clarify that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the common interpretation or the superstitions of foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, but they didn't say so because of the equality and nobility of gold's substance.
The ancients also said that the place of cauterization does not burn, but this is not absolutely true, for I have already proved and observed that it does not do so in some bodies, and cauterizing with gold is better than iron as they said; however, when you perform cauterization with fire from gold, it is not recommended because the amount of gold used depends on the roughness of the gold itself and its ability to absorb, and if you adjust the flame to melt the gold in the fire, some layers may be formed due to the artisan's occupation of that material.
Therefore, cauterization should be performed with iron more delicately and properly in the execution of the procedure.
And I have already organized this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and I have ordered the ones related to feet within that section, for a clearer understanding of your request.
The first chapter.
This cauterization is used for coldness and moistness as the main cause of a number of symptoms, such as headaches, runny nose, ear discharge, excessive sleep, toothache, and hoarseness, as well as general illnesses caused by cold, including paralysis, convulsions, apoplexy, and similar conditions in those illnesses.
The method of this cauterization is as follows: first, the patient should be purged with a purgative medicine for three or four nights, depending on the severity and age of the patient and their habits.
Then command the patient to shave his head with a razor and instruct them to sit on a slanted bench with their hands resting on it.
Then place the palm of your hand on top of the patient's head, just above the bridge of their nose between their eyebrows. However, as the correct position has been discussed, mark that location with a pen, and then perform the olive oil cauterization, which is the form of this procedure:
Then place that small marking tool (tenta) on the location marked earlier and slowly draw it downwards in a way that your hand remains perpendicular to the surface, keeping it slightly constricted while you rotate it.
Then lift your hand slightly and observe the location, and if you see any part of the bone being exposed, such as small grains of sand, then raise your hand, and if not, return your hand to that spot (or another nearby one) until the bone is visible as I have explained to you.
Then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the area, let it stay there for three days.
Then press on the affected area with a linen cloth and leave it there until the burn scar is destroyed. Then treat the painful area with a four-drug ointment until it heals.
They say that when the wound is open, it should be kept moist, as it heals better and faster.
They say that the coccyx should be cauterized to the bone, and the cautery should remain there until some part of the coccyx bone is burned away.
Then shave that which is close to the bone, and let it heal.
They say that if the cautery reaches the vertebra, it should be pressed strongly against the bone until the bone cracks, and this is the way to perform a small operation. They estimate that the steam from the head will pass through that area.
The wound should be kept open for a long time, and it should be treated until it is consolidated.
I do not recommend these two types of cautery for everyone, but only in certain cases due to fear; and you should leave it, because in my opinion, it is better for your health when it is. For the head is exposed by solution of continuity of this kind, as we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head is naturally frail.
The first type of cautery is safer and better, in my opinion; and that method is the safest for your health.
Chapter Two.
On the head cauterization.
If chronic and long-lasting pain in the entire head occurs in the patient and it has been treated with hellebore, skullcap, caper bush, plasters, ointments, guaze, cudgels, bandages, and similar remedies, and if cauterization with one cautery has not helped or worsened the situation, then consider whether the patient's head is naturally strong in creation; and if it is not frail and does not suffer much harm, then cauterize it again with another cautery after a short time. Then cauterize that spot on the patient's forehead with a cautery until the bone is broken through. Cut the bone and expose the amount that we have estimated and cauterize it with a cautery in the back of the head at the location known as "was," where the pustule is located. And be careful not to expose the bone in this case, because the patient suffers great pain different from the pain of all other head cauterizations.
They will say that this cautery is in its place, because the cautery used to cauterize the forehead and occipital region is more subtle than the one used for other head cauterizations, and this is how it should be done.
Chapter Three.
On non-ancient migration cauterization.
If pain persists in the area of the skull or extends to the ear, medications that modify the head should be administered, followed by other treatment, which I have described in the guidelines for diseases; and if this does not help, cauterization is performed in two ways: either with an acute-burning medicine, or with iron.
Cauterization with an acute-burning medicine requires you to take a pair of tweezers, remove the hawthorn leaves and sharpen their ends on both sides of the skull. And make an incision in the area of pain on the temple with a sharp lance until it enters hidden.
Press firmly on the area under compression for constant pressure and leave it for three hours; then remove the hawthorn leaves and let the wound heal for two or three days, and press on the affected area submerged in oil until the area heals.
Treat that with honey until it is healed.
If you wish, do this with some acute-burning medications that I have written about in the treatise on acute-burning medications.
Cauterization with iron in this way: fire method for cauterizing is as follows:
It is called "clavih claus" because the head of it is shaped like a nail with some curvature, and in its middle part it has a small protuberance.
Press on the painful area, rest your hand - so that the archery string is not harmed - and rotate the small iron slowly with speed.
If the amount of bone that is burned by the bone's edge is too large and the bone itself is destroyed, raise your hand to protect the artery that is nearby, so that blood does not flow out.
Then immerse the affected area in saltwater and let it stay there for three days; then press the affected area with mustard oil and treat it with honey until it is healed.
If you wish, cauterize the end of the culetar with a pointed cautery, and beware of cutting an artery in this modern emigration procedure.
Title fourth.
Title of ancient emigration cauterization.
When you treat emigration as you have said in the previous cure and what you have said in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not help with the cure, and sometimes because of the illness that does not fit what you said about the first cauterization with medicine or cautery with fire, then you must ignite the cautery rod until it is white-hot, indicating that it is on the location of pain along a line of sufficient length, or whatever; and then withdraw your hand for a moment and strike the artery and pierce through to the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to be cautious of the movement of the mandible, which is essential for chewing, and that the ligament not be injured and the nerves associated with it, and that there be no spasm.
And if it is about the care and caution of bleeding from the artery that was cut open, since in the cutting of it there is fear, and especially to those who do not know what they are doing and are unskilled and inexperienced; let the operation be started with this.
And you will come with the reminder of the regulation for bleeding an accident of the artery according to its method, in its place in this book.
And if you see that this illness is not treated by this cauterization and the body of the patient is tolerable, cauterize it in a more appropriate location on the head as we have said before, and cure the wound until it heals.
And if you wish, administer the cautery as we have said in the chapter on artery compression with cautery having two handles, and this is a better cauterization and more convenient.
Title fifth.
On the cauterization of ear pain.
When there is pain in the ear due to inflammation and it is cured with caustic agents and other treatments mentioned in the division, but the pain persists, then ignite the cautery, which is called "puncture," as follows:
And place the point of the cautery near the inflammation, and direct it towards the environment of the entire ear as a wheel is turned, or in the vicinity of each example if the pain is in one location. With the cautery rod of the ear lance, go along slowly, inch by inch, since you need to probe the location with it.
If the cautery points all over the ear, and if that is the case, then be careful with the areas until they heal.
Title sixth.
Treatise on cauterization of turtles.
The turtle disease that is cured with cauterization is not any other species that comes from the arrowhead, as it has been said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cauterization of the species that enters by drying or spasm of the nerve.
When you treat that species of turtle disease with jars and ointments and bandages, and if the treatment does not work, it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first one should be made at the ear lobe, the second a small one on their temple, and the third should be the joining of two lips.
Place the cautery opposite to the diseased side, because the softening does not happen except on the healthy side.
The method of cauterization is that you cauterize it on the right side of the ear lobe above a small one on the forehead, and in the temple another, the length of which should be according to the length of the finger, and after that place your hand over the cautery until the amount of the thickness of the skin has been burned.
This is the shape of the cauter, it is a surgeon's specialty, whose shape resembles a table. Nevertheless, it is very delicate that the cauter you see there; and it is necessary to cut off any excessive roughness.
And take care of the area with the medicine until it has healed.
Chapter VII.
Treatise on cauterization of old apoplexy.
When old apoplexy is treated with the medicine mentioned and the treatment does not work and the patient has no fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: first on all the corners of their head, second at the most suitable place on the head as previously said, third at the neck. The method of cauterization is done as previously mentioned.
This sentence seems to indicate that cauterization has been done at the mouth of the stomach, it is later in the treatment, and it should be cured with something that processes (heals). However, without more context, I cannot provide a definitive translation or interpretation.
Chapter VIII.
Treatise on cauterization of forgetfulness caused by arrowhead.
It is necessary to give the patient large jars and pills for softening at the beginning.
And shave the entire head of the patient and place a plaster described in the treatise on plasters at their neck.
Let that area rest for certain periods, as it is the method of cauterization. And do this according to the orderly method mentioned previously.
And therefore if they recover well with that, otherwise do three cauteries in the lower part of their head, which are descending from the upper part of their head towards the neck. Let there be rest between each cautery and take care of the cautery with something that processes (heals).
If the patient is tolerant and you want to add something more, then cauterize in the most suitable place, if you want even more, then cauterize it over both corners.
Take care of that until it heals and make sure the cauteries are olive-shaped as previously described.
Chapter IX.
Treatise on cauterization for relief and softening of the entire body.
It is necessary to process the head with jars and the medicine mentioned previously, and shave the patient's head, cauterize it in the most suitable place on the head, over all the corners of the head, at the lower part of their head, and three cauteries over the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary for softening the body of the sick person due to numerous cold humors and the patient cannot tolerate it and the disease is severe, then cauterize that area with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and cauterize again until the pain subsides, and raise the patient's head. Then heal it until it is healed, and this should be done with olive oil cauterization.
Chapter X.
On the cauterization of epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized, but rather that epilepsy caused by poisoning.
Therefore, first treat the brain of the patient at the onset with mercury and with the other treatment which we have said in the division when the patient is strong and can tolerate the exception of medications.
And if the patient is a child who cannot tolerate medications, then administer emetics and powders to cleanse, with this for several days, and improve the quality of food.
Then shave the head of the patient and cauterize that area with one cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and another cautery on the occiput of the head, and above each ear, cauterize as well. If the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize that area with cauteries as previously mentioned, having paralyzing and softening effects on the vertebrae of the neck and back.
The cautery should be olive oil according to what was previously mentioned.
But if the patient is a child, pause with fine cauterization according to this method.
Chapter XI.
On the cauterization of melancholy:
When the causes of melancholy are rotten and heavy cold humors, then cauterize that area with the cauteries which we have mentioned in having a paralyzing effect.
And if the cause of melancholy is excess declining into melancholy and the body of the patient is wet, then give that which cleanses the brain of the patient as mentioned before in the division.
Then shave the head of the patient, and apply the turtle shell properly made on top of the circle, and then place it in the middle of the head.
The patient should be lying down, and held from all sides.
Then place liniment; it is worth binding with sheep wool. And heat that area on the fire for a moderate heating until it feels warm when placed there. Then place it back in the middle of the head on the circle and leave it until it is sweated out.
Do this with the patient every week once, and with the other treatment for him until he is well; or if you wish, cauterize that area with small points as much as possible, without having your hand with a prepared cautery: this is a type of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
Then place that area in bandages or in gauze of linen.
Chapter XII.
On the cauterization of descending water in the eyes:
When you have announced the start of fever in the head through the signs I've mentioned earlier in the division, then begin and give the patient a drink that clears their head, and keep them away from all moisture.
And make him bathe in warm water for several days.
And have him shave his head, and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head; and cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if it's the beginning of fever in two eyes, or one cautery if it's the beginning of fever in one eye.
Cut all the veins and arteries that are under the skin with a cautery; and make the cauterizations in a long line across the temples.
Keep yourself away from blood flow when you are cauterizing; and if you see any blood flow, stop it with some medicine that is available to you.
I will come with knowledge about the extraction of arteries and the abscission of those, and caution regarding blood flow.
Sometimes, the neck is cauterized just below two bones with two cauterizations carefully performed.
Chapter XIII.
On the ancient method of cauterization for tear ducts.
When tear ducts in the eyes are chronically discharging due to the veins and arteries that are evidently outside the head and it is determined that this is excessive, then cauterize it with a cautery as mentioned earlier in the chapter on the beginning of fever in the eyes, and with a cautery at the middle of the head and two cauterizations at each temple, and two cauterizations at the neck below two bones. If there is need for additional treatment, then cauterize it along the entire length of the inner corner of the eye above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
On the method of cauterization for nasal discharge.
When you are treating the condition I mentioned earlier and your treatment is not effective, then prepare yourself and give the patient eye drops for three nights; and shave their head and cauterize it with a mild cautery using olive oil. Then cauterize it with a camphor-based cautery and two cauterizations on both eyebrows, just under the hairline.
Be careful not to cut the artery while performing the procedure.
The form of camphor-based cautery is as follows:
Chapter XV.
On the method of cauterization for softening eyelids in eyes.
When the eyelid of an eye becomes soft due to illness or moisture, then cauterize the eyelid using a cautery and this lunar cautery; here is its form:
And if you, cauterize it on both eyebrows with a small pair of cauteries in all parts, and they should extend beyond the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the size that the third part of the eyelid is burned.
Chapter XVI.
On cauterization of the eyelid when the hair turns into parts inside and the eye is inflamed.
When the hair of the eyelid turns into parts inside so that it pricks the eye, cauterization is done in two ways, because cauterizing can be either to burn or to cure with medicine.
If cauterizing with fire is done, command the patient to wash their eyelids as those who clean them do, until they are elongated and cooled down; and if it hurts him, you should anoint his eyes with something so that it does not get worse until the hair grows back.
Then wait until the hair is grown and cooled down, place a cloth on the patient's head, and hold your hand over the eyelids of his eyes with a sign according to the shape of a holly leaf, and let the start of the sign be near the hair.
Then wait for a suitable time in goose oil or chicken broth over the eye.
And bring the heat of the cautery that is its form.
And cauterize slowly over the shape that you have marked, in small dots, until the surface of the skin, which is like a holly leaf, is burned completely.
And the sign of healing for your work is that you will see the eyelid of the eye contract and the hairs rise above the puncture of the eye.
And therefore lift it up and let it rest for three days, and wait over it until the scar is healed. And cure that one with saliva until it is cured.
But if it returns for some cause with saliva and the eyelid is softened, then do another time the cauterization over it as you did the first time.
But if the hairs are in the eyelid, then cauterize it until it rises to its natural place, cools down and the hairs do not prick the eye.
But if cauterizing with medicine is done, command the patient to wash their eyelids until they are elongated and cooled down, and make a paper or cloth of the shape of a holly leaf.
And take known incense and live coal to burn. That is, And what is it for, and mix those things well, and do it with haste so that it does not get spoiled; and spread that mixture over the paper that is made in the shape of a holly leaf, and let it rest on one eye or both; and rest the eye in goose oil or chicken broth, and let the patient's head be on your lap.
And let it rest on the medicine and press it gently without causing discomfort to the patient, because discomfort is like burning.
And therefore when you perceive that the anus has been burned, remove the medicine and wash it with water; therefore when the burning stops, reapply the medicine and wash the eye with water; and then consider if the eyelid is raised as it should be after burning or cutting, because in this case it is good; and if it returns to the medicine on the same spot where the medicine has not been pressed and has not deteriorated until your operation is healed and the hair grows back.
And wait over it until the skin is healed by burning or another method until it is cured.
It is necessary for you to guard your operation with diligent vigilance so that no foreign body falls into the wound, and if the eyelid becomes swollen within a few days and any cause of pus forms in the wound, then you should repeat the medicine on that spot which has become swollen from the eyelid, and proceed similarly as you did at first, and place it there until it is healed.
Here is the mullein leaf form.
You should know that the wounds of men are diverse according to their size and smallness, and therefore, according to this, make your stitching.
Do not conceal the direct path for that one who is learned in this art.
Chapter XVII.
Here is the translation of the provided line:
When you treat fistula as I have told you in the divisions of diseases and do not provide a cure, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to tilt their head towards you, and hold their head with some servant between your hands in such a way that they are neither harmed nor agitated by the tilting.
Then place a cotton swab soaked in olive oil or mullein leaf paste on the eye of the patient.
And approach with an iron-tipped cautery that has this form:
That is concave, similar in shape to a reed or feather quill with one end where the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it should be penetrated into the other end. And if you want, let it protrude like that.
However, the one that is concave is better for your work.
Then press the fistula if it is open and drain and dry it. And if it is not open, then you should open it and remove the pus from there.
Then place the hot cautery on it and hold the cautery with your hand a small distance from the eye, so that neither you nor the patient is agitated, and then press the cautery on the corners of the eye and burn the area.
Therefore, if the cautery enters the bone at first, that is good; otherwise, you should repeat the cauterization once or twice, if necessary; and leave it like that for three days, then press on that spot with a binder and pour exsiccatiu (a drying agent) onto it until it is healed.
However, if it has been more than ten days and it is not healed, then press a sharp, corrosive medicine on it until the bone is exposed and scraped as necessary in its respective chapter.
Here is another method for cauterizing a fistula that was mentioned earlier: Put your finger in the location of the fistula and press it so that it closes, then place a small camelian (a type of shell) containing the amount of lead melted into it; hold your hand with good control, so as not to harm the patient because the molten lead will not reach the eye of the person; and you should press on the eye of the patient with a cotton swab soaked in olive oil or water, because lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it through marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed with the cauterization and treatment as I have described, that is good; otherwise, it is necessary to administer a nose drop and reduce the fistula into the nostril in its respective location.
Chapter XVIII.
Here is the translation of the line:
Swollen sores often occur in the lips, especially in infants.
Since the treatment you've been using for the sores in the lips does not seem to be effective, then use a small pointed cautery knife according to this procedure:
The concavity of the area should be according to the fineness of the knife.
Place a cushion carefully over those sores until the cautery reaches the edge of the sores.
Apply the ointment (cerote) over the area until it is healed.
Chapter 19.
On the cauterization of a fissure in the mouth.
If an abscess appears at the root of the uvula or palate or in the gums, and it breaks, becomes chronic, and turns into a fistula (tunnel-like opening), and if your treatment does not cure it, then it is necessary to cauterize according to the size of the fistula, putting the heated cautery into the fistula tract, keeping your hand in until the fire reaches the edge of the fistula, do this once or twice; and apply the ointment (as previously instructed) until it has healed.
If the abscess is drained and healed, that's good; if not, it is necessary to discover its location and excise the rotten bone as will be discussed in its chapter.
Chapter 20.
On the cauterization of teeth and softening of the gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are bad and not cured with medication, then place the patient's head on your lap, hold the cautery tool in the form specified below, place it on the tooth and quickly insert it into the gum, keeping your hand a little away from the tooth so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
Lift up your hand, and repeat the cauterization several times as you desire.
Have the patient rinse his mouth with salt water and keep it for an hour, then stop, because a bad tooth is closed and a softened gum becomes strengthened and corrupt moisture is dried up.
Chapter 21.
On the cauterization of tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to heat or inflammation, or there is no improvement with medication, then cauterize in two ways: either with a cow's horn (i.e., a bovine horn) or with fire.
The cauterization with the cow's horn involves taking a bovine horn and heating it in an iron container, then carefully cover the end of the horn with a cloth and immerse the heated horn bulb in a container of boiling water (or oil), and place it quickly over the painful tooth until it is warmed up.
Repeat this process several times until the heat reaches the root of the teeth.
If you prefer, immerse wool or cloth in the bovine horn mentioned above, place it on the painful tooth, and keep it there until the iron becomes hot and reaches the root of the tooth.
However, the cauterization with fire is when you pay attention to the tip of the instrument (either metal or wood), making sure it has some roughness and the heat of the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.
Heat the cautery tool in the specified form, place it on the tooth and keep your hand there until the cautery is warm; do this several times as the pain subsides or on another day.
And it is necessary to apply pressure to the patient's mouth with that pointed cautery and hold it for an hour, and then gently rinse it; this is the form of the cautery.
And cauterize (the affected area) with whatever sharp instrument you have available.
This is the form of the cannula:
Chapter 22.
On Cauterizing Hernias.
If the hernia is due to inflammation and cold humors, and it does not respond well to medications, and you want to facilitate digestion of those, then ignite the pointed cautery in the shape indicated below, having two ends pointed for the smoke to escape through one end, and hold the ignited cautery on top of the abscess once, and if necessary, enter it further until reaching the edge of the abscess.
If the abscess is small, wait for the cautery according to the size of the abscess and let it rest for three days and place it on the edge where the humors have gathered until it has burned what the fire has ignited.
Apply ointment, poultices, and bandages to it until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On cauterization of throat ulcers and constriction of veins.
When moisture comes upon the throat and more so when it is accompanied by inflammation, it is necessary for the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicines at first, then carefully cauterize the affected area with a silver-tipped cautery.
Be careful not to touch or burn the glottis with the cautery nor char the surrounding area, only a small part.
Cauterize that area with another cautery on the joint of the neck at the lower spinal area. The cautery should be pointed as shown in the previous method.
Take care of it with what was previously described until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
On cauterization of lung disease and cough.
If cough and lung disease are due to excessive moisture, the patient does not have a fever or runny nose, and it is an old affliction, then cauterize the affected area with two cauteries on the furcula in the depressed areas near the lion's mouth and bull's horns; and with another cautery at the midpoint of the leg between the nipples; and ensure that the cauteries are pointed as shown previously.
And if you wish, use punctate cauterization with the cautery called "puncta," whose shape is as previously shown in the treatment of ear pain.
Make points at those places; and take care of it with what was previously described until it is healed.
Now, the cautery should have three prongs for cauterization: with one application, you can perform three cauterizations in this manner:
Chapter XXV.
On cauterization of ticks that are at the head of the helper (i.e., the lymph node).
When the head of the lymph node is dislocated due to lubricous humidity and has not been properly repositioned at its return, you should keep the dislocation in place until it is time for it to return, and with a slight movement, move it back into position as described earlier. In this case, first, you must reduce the dislocation, then have the patient lie down on their back or side, and lift the skin that is inside the tick near its base and raise it above the affected area with your left hand if the joint is dislocated internally.
The cautery should have two heads; and this is its shape:
Cauterize the skin, making sure it penetrates through to the other side; and you will find the figure of cauterization when using four cauterizations with four cauteries.
In some cases, it is adjusted according to this count and because there are eight cauteries.
Place the patient on the cautery covered with salt, and have them remain calm, ensuring that the affected limb is not injured for any period of time until it is comforted.
If the dislocation is above and it cannot be repositioned, then cauterize over the muscle with a pointed cautery or multiple punctate cauteries, as the joint will be strengthened, the humidity will be reduced, and the patient will be healed.
Title .xxvi.
When the stomach is burned with a hot iron (cautery).
When there is froth and mucus in the stomach that expands rapidly from its original location and multiplies, and if you continue with the methods of treatment without consulting another doctor, then it is necessary for the patient to be lying on their back with their arms and legs extended, and carefully cauterize it with three cauteries: one below the feet about the width of a finger, one below each costal bone (rib), forming a triangular figure; and extend between them so as not to form a blister.
And if the depth of the cautery is twice the thickness of a fingernail.
The shape of the cautery should be in this form without addition. If you wish, cauterize at the appropriate place in the stomach with a large cautery in this shape; and this should be a cautery shaped like a circle in this way:
The stomach should be cauterized in the location that is scared by this cautery: and you may make points on the stomach as much as you wish with trial, and carefully cauterize those locations with the cautery; and care for it with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
De cauterizacio del cors.
Of cauterizing the groin hernia.
When pain occurs in the groin due to heat or moisture or swelling that moves outside of its normal position by excess efflux and the patient is treated with what has been mentioned without consulting another doctor, then it is necessary for the patient to be lying on their back with their hips elevated, and three cauteries should be made according to this shape and quantity at the groin below the hip bones.
The space between each cautery should be equal to the width of a finger, and the cauterized areas should be along the length of the body in a straight line.
And do not press down on the cautery too much.
And if the amount of medicine applied is equal to the thickness of the skin, and it is not properly adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then make them sit, which you have already extended their legs, and lift their arms.
And it is possible that you can use this cautery with a cautery scalpel, when you are skillful and careful in the art. [This sentence seems to suggest that using a specific type of cautery requires skill and care.]
Be careful not to overdo the cauterization, and ensure that the patient's wound is covered completely so that all parts of the body are affected, as the wound here is delicate; beware. [This sentence seems to warn about caution when performing a cauterization, emphasizing the need for complete coverage of the patient's wound due to its delicacy.]
Chapter XXVIII [The number indicates that this is the twenty-eighth chapter of the treatise.]
On the Perforation of an Abscess in the Liver with Cautery. [This title suggests that the following discussion concerns a medical procedure to drain or remove an abscess located in the liver using cauterization.]
When you suspect or discover an abscess in the liver and wish to know whether this abscess is within the liver tissue or its capsule, if it is located in the liver tissue, the patient feels heaviness and pain intensifies. [This sentence appears to describe a symptom of an abscess located within the liver tissue.]
If the abscess is located in the liver capsule, with intense and sometimes prolonged pain afflicting the doctors attempting to treat it. [This sentence seems to describe a difficult situation where treating an abscess in the liver capsule can be challenging due to the intensity and persistence of the patient's pain.]
Therefore, the patient should be turned over on their back; and then, gently probe the location of the abscess with tweezers; and apply a pointed cautery resembling thread, whose shape has been described in the previous page. Then cauterize with that same cautery until the whole abscess is burned out, until it reaches the skin, until pus comes out.
Then cure the one by treating other abscesses until it heals.
And it is not necessary to use this cautery method alone, but rather study the art of medicine extensively and learn about other treatments for various diseases; however, in some cases, experimenting with this operation may be necessary, but always read what has been written before, and it is better.
Chapter XXIX.
On the cauterization of wounds.
The ancients cauterized wounds using the cauteries of aristry for treating wounds; and it is this that you should take from the long dry cautery, a long thin one which can be found, and it should be as thick as a finger.
Then submerge that one in oil and heat it up, and cauterize at the location between the neck and the collar with a small cautery guided by two smaller ones, one slightly sloping down near the beard area, and two more on the side between the fifth costa and the sternum, slightly sloping downwards; and another in the middle of the leg; and another on the stomach, and three on the rear; and one in the location between the shoulders, and two more on the sides of the thighs, after the cautery located between the shoulders.
And it is not necessary to press your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be clearly visible on the surface of the abscess during operation.
And some ancients used a cautery of iron resembling a ray and heated it, placing it in the location between the ribs until it reached the abscess and pus was drained out, as has been said about the abscess in the thigh.
But there is no fear in this perforation with cautery, for one can quickly die if a fistula forms at the location where healing does not occur.
Chapter XXX.
On the cauterization of boils.
When treating a boil as described in the previous section and you do not follow the treatment guidelines, then cauterize at the location where the boil is using one of three methods, all of which are appropriate. The first method is to make three or four lines according to the length of the boil, following the figure of the cauteries described for the thigh.
The size of each cautery should be about the thickness of a finger or slightly larger, and the method of cauterization should be as described in the treatment of the thigh.
Do not press your hand with the cautery; instead, let the patient lie on their back.
Another method of cauterization is to ignite the cautery with two tweezers, as described in the section on dislocation of a muscle. This causes the skin around the boil to lift, making it easier for the patient to lie still during treatment without causing further pain or discomfort.
And your elevation should be such that you lift the bed in accordance with the length of the body, so that cauteries can be made according to the width of the body.
Then insert two hot irons into the opening where the bed penetrates that of the other part.
Then take out the cautery; therefore, four cauteries should be made.
And if you see, cauterize with a cautery having three hot irons.
And cure the cautery which has been laid for three days, because it is more suitable than the other causes in the healing process.
Chapter XXI. (Note: I've corrected the number since the text you provided seems to have skipped a chapter.)
On the cauterization of dropsy.
Cauteries should not be used in dropsy, but rather in specific cases.
When you treat dropsy with the methods of treatment mentioned in the division and your treatment does not confer improvement, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauteries around the navel and one cautery on the stomach, another cautery on the liver, another cautery on the spleen, two cauterizations between the vertebrae of the back, one cautery at the right side of the feet, and another cautery on the stomach. And the depth of the cauterization should be proportionate to the size of the bedsores.
Then allow the cautery to cool down for a long time.
Do not remove the patient from treatment after cauterization, but rather let them rest for two intentions, and hasten their recovery with assistance.
The shape of the cautery used to treat the abdomen should be rectangular, as per the shape mentioned earlier, and it is the one that is used to treat the back which is oval, as per its shape in the preceding description.
Chapter XXXII. (Note: I've corrected the number since the text you provided seems to have skipped a chapter.)
On the cauterization of feet and joints.
When the feet are affected by dropsy and filled with sterile water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot between the ankle and heel, raise your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; then lift your hand, but do not pull it completely away as the sterile water flows out.
The cautery should be shaped as follows: Two cauteries should be made on each joint, and in each joint, a cautery should be made with the cutting end of the cautery. And let the cauteries be as long as the joint: the first one at the top and the other lower along the joint; and on each joint, two cauteries.
Allow the wound to heal slowly without treatment for a long time, so that some water drains from it.
And treat these conditions as mentioned earlier.
Chapter XXXIII. (Note: I've corrected the number since the text you provided seems to have skipped a chapter.)
On the cauterization of abdominal masses.
When an abdominal mass is due to putrefaction and moisture causing it to soften the vertices (vertices), it is a digestive and retentive virtue that resides in the stomach and intestines, and is cured with the methods of treatment mentioned earlier, but sometimes the patient suffers from cauterization revealing virtue. In such cases, cauterize it with a large cautery on the stomach as described in the stomach cauterization process, with the circular cautery and four subtle cauteries around the navel, a thin cautery; and with a cautery on the liver that is large or two cauteries.
And if excess moisture persists and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize that area on the flanks and on the intestines, pressing two cauteries together strongly on the stomach near the inguinal region, as this treatment is perfect for such a condition without error.
Chapter XXXIV. (Note: I've corrected the number since the text you provided seems to have skipped a chapter.)
On the cauterization of chronic diarrhea.
When chronic diarrhea is of a natural origin or due to cold humors or corrupted moisture, and they are treated with the methods mentioned in the division but their treatment does not confer improvement, then cauterize it with three cauteries on the pus below the small spinal bones and on a small triangular shape, and with a cautery above the navel through two times.
And if you suspect that the stomach of the patient is congested and their food is not spoiled, and sometimes their face swells, then cauterize it on the stomach with a large cautery as described earlier; and one cautery on the liver, another cautery on the spleen with a thin cautery, leave the cautery for some time, and treat the patient until he is cured.
Chapter XXXV. (Note: I've corrected the number since the text you provided seems to have skipped a chapter.)
For cautionery of an athlete's foot, it is appropriate for its abscess to be drained.
When you drain the athlete's foot, then apply the cautery that resembles a ray (for searing or stopping bleeding). Place a metal instrument (tweezers) into the abscess of the athlete's foot, and ensure that it goes deep enough to reach the vein from which the pus is flowing.
Do this once or twice, because if the abscesses are numerous, you should cauterize each one as needed, and take care of them with bandages until they are healed.
If a large cautery is used on someone, it works better in healing.
Chapter 36.
For the cauterization of fistulas that occur naturally in the groin area.
If nature does not obey the work that has been recommended in its place, and the patient is afraid of it, heal it with cauterization.
Therefore, when someone has a fistula in nature, and it is old and the corruption of decaying flesh and pus accumulates there, it is appropriate to try to cure it gently with subtle probes and measure the depth of the probe accordingly.
Apply the cautery that resembles a ray (for searing or stopping bleeding). Place that heated cautery into this fistula, and to the depth that the probe penetrates.
Repeat the cauterization over that area until the decaying flesh is burned off one time or two or three times, according to your necessity.
Be careful not to burn nerves or veins; or if the fistula is in the bladder or intestine, beware of all those areas; and do this only when the fistula is in a fleshy area, and you think it does not penetrate any further.
Then bandage the area until it heals.
If the area is sealed and the material is drained from it, and remains in this state for a long time, then you will know that it is completely healed.
If the material is not expelled from the body, you will know that it has penetrated deeper or is rotting in the bone, or be cautious of these causes as they may return to the area.
Chapter 37.
For the cauterization of the nose (nasal polyps).
When the nose is painful due to inflammation or congestion, and the patient experiences discomfort, it is appropriate to cauterize that area on each nostril with a pointed cautery, preceded by memory of the previous cauterization.
And make the cauterization with a smaller delay between each one, so that three cauterizations will be lined up, and thus they work better in healing.
Chapter 38.
For the cauterization of the bladder.
When the bladder becomes weakened and softened due to inflammation and humidity, causing the patient to be unable to retain urine, you should cauterize that area below the bladder, starting at the base of the penis, and cauterize with a pointed cautery on the right side, and another on the left side.
The length of each cautery should be according to the size of the hole; cauterize that area with a pointed cautery in the lower part of the wound, or with two cauterizations if necessary.
Use a pointed cautery as needed.
Chapter 39.
For the cauterization of the uterus (womb).
When inflammation and humidity occur in the uterus, making conception prohibited, and the menstrual flow is corrupted, delayed, and painful, it is appropriate to have that area cauterized with three cauterizations around the navel, similar to the cauterization of the bladder; and with a pointed cautery on the lower part of the wound or two cauterizations, and use a pointed cautery.
Chapter 40.
On the cauterization of ankle dislocation.
When moisture collects at the joint of the ankle and causes swelling of its location, the sign is that it is elongated compared to the other one when compared with each other. And the location of the dislocation is sought where there is a gap.
Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the ankle joint with a circular cautery because you will have a sign of the test in the circle around the joint as it is rotated, and thus the joint falls into the center of the circle.
And let the shape of the cautery be the same as that used for the stomach.
And if this cautery is not at hand, then cauterize it with three small cauteries and a large olive-shaped cautery.
Make the cautery according to the size of the swelling in the entire limb, and apply it to the area that needs healing.
Chapter 41.
On the cauterization of sciatic vein.
When pain is felt in the ankle joint and caused by cold and moisture, the patient is healed with the water that we have said and not contraindicated, which is ancient remedy. Therefore, you should release the patient from heavy humors with fetid or artificial pills or similar ones; and apply a cautery to it.
The method of using the cautery in that case is according to two methods: either cauterizing with medicines that burn or cauterizing with fire.
If you use the method of burning, then cauterize it on the ankle joint with three triangular cauteries in this manner; make sure to achieve good depth. Make the space between each cautery equal to the thickness of the finger, and if the large olive-shaped cautery or the small one is used.
Sometimes, the cautery is applied at the middle of the ankle joint because there are four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with the circle that precedes the shape in the cauterization of ankle dislocation, the one that is circular and burns the entire swelling.
This is the method of cauterization for sciatica when pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend into the leg.
But if it extends into the leg, then you cauterize it with two cauteries on the leg at the location where the pain is felt, and one cautery on the thigh for four fingers away from the shin.
If a knife-shaped cautery is used, the depth of the cautery should correspond to the size of the swelling in the limb.
If the pain is extended into the location near the toes, then you cauterize it here where the pain is felt with a cautery for three or four points or more if necessary.
If the patient experiences pain behind the thigh, then you cauterize it here with a knife-shaped cautery.
Keep in mind that in all cases of cauterization, you should not overdo it with the cautery such as burning nerves or large vessels, because by doing so you are causing harm to the patient or contractions.
And I have seen one or more of those who cauterized on the thigh and overdid it in the cauterization, and the leg became inflamed to the point where the tumor reached the foot, and the foot was burnt and corrupted completely. And in this case, there is no solution other than death.
If the pain is in two joints, then cauterize each one according to this method.
They say the wise few in the cauterization of ankle joint that this is the method: make it similar to a circle of iron with its circumference equal to a palm; and its opening should be according to the thickness of a finger or a little more.
Inside this circle is another third; and the space between them should be equal to the knuckles on the back of the hand; these circles should be open on two sides; and the length of these gaps should be one or two knuckles, and make a decorative edge on the circles in an appropriate manner. And this is its form:
Approach the fire and place it inside until it burns and sparks, and approach and hold it over the ankle's incision, the patient lies on the affected side. And therefore cauterize that area with three cauterizations at a time.
Keep it closed for three days, apply ointment to the border and leave the wound open for several days, and treat it with poultices until it is healed.
In the name of Al-Zahrawi, my son: we have used this type of cautery sparingly due to fear of its appearance and because few have found those who can use it effectively.
More than the other cauteries on the one who endures it, and identify where it is in him.
More cauteries are those that are mixed with medicines which you should make two circles, one perforated ring through which passes the iron rod of the door's hinge; its width in the depth should be two knuckles or whatever their size is.
And if the space between each finger is of a certain width, and they are open from above and below, and they contain something in this manner:
Place it over the ankle's incision while the patient lies on the affected side, press your hand on the ankle incision; take hot water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that should be similar to a small fire gradually, and hold it for the duration of one hour, and make the patient bear the pain and adjustment of it - since this biting sensation is like fire - until the pain stops.
And raise your hand with the instrument and wash the hot water from the entire ankle with sweet water.
Keep it closed for three days, place ointment on the border until the blackness of the adjustment has subsided, and keep it closed for several more days, and run pus from it; this is the last step in treatment.
Treat it with poultices until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended into the thigh or leg, make it in a position that contains water as was done for the ankle.
This is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medications. Recipe for alkali and for the quenching of both ankle parts with a single layer, and stir and pause in a new wave, where the surface below is perforated by a small hole, according to the amount that enters it.
Wait below the wave and the following wave, pour the alkali and living water on it, which rises for a finger, and press them with your hand for good compression, and let the hole that comes out of the sharp water in the perforated surface below flow into the wave below.
Approach and adjust all that water, pour the following living water and more alkali over it, because at this point it will have a strong acute action, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterizations of other members, since it is an operation that produces fire.
And these are some of the medications that are cauterized widely, such as tamarind and honey with cinnamon mixed in them.
And Galen recounts the operation and treatment of a man from antiquity by which ankle pain and sciatica pain are cured, and it is a great miracle that this was done, and he says that no other treatment is necessary, since it is healed in one day as recommended, for this remedy has proven effective over time.
And it should be taken certain herbs such as wild celery root, and if it is not found, then fresh figs should be used; and it should be stirred with a little salt and placed on the ankle where the pain is located, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and left.
It should be left for the duration of three hours or until the patient bears the adjustment pain.
And immerse it in hot water, and when the patient's body is warmed up, apply it to the skin, since the pain stops and it heals.
And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use these medications with cauterization, but rather promote the evacuation of the body.
Moreover, Scorides says that when a sheep's vein is stretched and cauterized, it will improve more; the method of cautery for this should be: take wool and soak it in ancient oil, and place it between the toes and the heel.
And take a dried sheep's vein and inflate it with fire until carbon is formed; place it on the wool and let it expand. And repeat this procedure, and do not stop until the sensation of biting reaches the ankle and relieves the pain.
This method of cautery is called the cowhocautery.
Chapter XLIII.
Treatment of pain in two places.
Sometimes pain occurs in two places due to various causes such as injury or blow, or excessive evacuation, and for reasons similar to these, by the infusion of cold and wet matter.
Cautery does not apply in any other case except for this particular one, which is caused by the effusion of cold matter.
Therefore, evacuation of the patient is performed with pilules dissolved and similar to them, made on the two places where there is pain three fingers' width away from it, except that more tentative cauteries or fewer are used along each line, according to the quantity coming from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the cautery.
The cautery should be applied with a pointed cautery.
If you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries using a medium-sized claw shaped cautery in the following manner:
Chapter 43.
On the beginning of gouty inflammation.
In most cases, this illness occurs in children; and the sign of its onset in children is that their structure becomes swollen and stiff, with limited mobility.
And it gradually becomes noticeable in the lower end of the spine and the neck bones that are beginning to rise above the others.
Therefore, when you see this and wish to stop it, cauterize with a circular cautery in the following manner: that the cautery should be taken over the entire spine in all directions.
If you wish, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery of two or three lines. The points should be close together.
Attend to the place until it is healed with what has been said above.
Also beware that a cautery should not be administered in gout caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter 44.
On cauterization for gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And since gout is treated by means of cure and the pains are not alleviated, then apply cautery.
It is that you cauterize the joint in the foot's area with many cauteries.
Let the olive-oil cautery be its form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains go into the nails or other joints, and it seems necessary, then cauterize that spot on each nail with three or four cauteries all around using this olive oil cautery.
If you need more cauterizations, then cauterize it and do not press too hard with the cautery beforehand; just surround the area with the cloth.
And if the pain goes into both nails, then administer the cautery as mentioned in its previous chapter.
If the pains are only in the toes and it is called sciatica, then pierce the circle of the toe as it rotates, and pierce along those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the aforementioned areas, then pierce the circle of the toe around each nail and on the base of the thumb.
And if the pains approach after some days to the joints or muscles, then cauterize all around their assistants.
And do not evacuate the patient with good care and reception of medicines, for if it is done well with proper diet and this cautery is applied, God will heal him.
Chapter 45.
On the cauterization of ruptures.
When you find a rupture in the groin and it is preceded by intestines appearing below the hernia, then you should have the patient fast on his own days and use softening agents to relieve the hernia of his stomach.
And you should keep the patient close to your hands over his groin, and order him to keep his legs together until the hernia is expelled or it appears again.
And you return it to the place mentioned and tell him to try to stretch the rupture over the bones of the pubis, pointing out the end, which should resemble the size of a small circle at the upper parts of the body.
And you heat the cautery that has this shape:
Until it is red-hot and sparks. And return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And you place the cautery on that spot with your hand holding the cautery steady, and bring it into the bone of the pubis until you reach the middle of the duct; repeat this process if you did not reach the bone in the first examination.
Be careful to observe the intestine during your cauterization, so that you do not burn the intestine, which would cause death or some other great harm to the patient.
Know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, do not consider your procedure successful.
It is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size and measure.
Cautiously care for the burned area for three days until the scar of the fire has healed.
Care for it with other ointments until it is healed.
The patient should remain on his back for forty days until the wound and the blister have been sealed.
It is necessary to feed him according to the length of his healing time, which should relieve his stomach, and the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
When it is time to move after forty days, administer medicine gently and keep him for another forty days.
Let him rest from work and replenish his food and drink, and abstain from excessive speech, for if he uses this method of healing completely, he will be cured.
I will explain the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the stomach, and first of all, do not stop. If you want to cauterize the rupture using a ring-shaped cautery of the appropriate size, then it should be done as follows: pierce the hernia with the third part (the area between the two ends) of the body, and care for it according to what has been said, not otherwise.
And some of the first ones said that rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery, for it is named in this way by trial:
and a line is made across the width at the length, then above the rupture, and another line above it; and press your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better.
This seems to be a reference to a chapter number. The numbers in Roman numerals are: I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, XI, XII, XIII, XIV, XV, XVI, XVII, XVIII, XIX, XX, XXI, XXII, XXIII, XXIV, XXV, XXVI, XXVII, XXVIII, XXIX, XXX, XXXI. The number xlvi in Roman numerals is LXVI, which does not appear among these numbers. It seems that the text might have been miscopied or the chapter numbering system used is different from standard Roman numerals.
This line appears to be a title of the text. The translation would be "On Cauterization of Twisted Things". However, without context it's hard to say for certain as the term "torcio" is not found in standard Latin or medieval medical texts and might have a specific meaning in this particular treatise.
When accidental or traumatic pain occurs in some parts of the body and persists for a long time without relief from medicine, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
The cauteries should be of all members according to their size and smallness, their virtue and development, and the location of twisting and pain in them.
Therefore, if the first cauterization heals, it is good; but if not, repeat the cauterization on it; for it is customary for such pains to be punctured in a member adjacent to the one affected, so you must achieve that with cautionery before the patient is healed.
This line appears to be another chapter title number. The translation would be "Chapter LVII". However, it's unclear which numbering system the author used as LVII in Roman numerals is LXVII, not xlvi or LVII in standard Roman numerals. It may have a specific meaning within the context of this treatise or the author's culture.
This line appears to be another title of the text. The translation would be "On Cauterization of Leprosy". However, it should be noted that this treatment is not supported by modern medicine and that leprosy can typically be treated with antibiotics rather than cauterization. The use of cauterization for leprosy may indicate an earlier understanding of the disease or a different approach to treatment in medieval medicine.
Some forms of leprosy are treated with cautionery to great advantage, and particularly if the type of leprosy that is caused by corruption of flesh and melancholy.
Therefore, when you want to cauterize it, consider if the leprosy is common and can be cured with what has been said in the division and not dissipate, nor spread, and fear that corruption spreads throughout the body of the patient and their entire complexion, then cauterize it on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, another below it, move the forehead to the end of the hairs; and both on two corns; and one behind, on the nape or serve.
And finally, place your hand with the cautery a little into the bone and make a small indentation, and from there displace the scars so that the expulsion of thick vapors is alleviated from it; and cauterize on the marrow as previously specified.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with the cauteries that have been specified in the head; and cauterize on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on both cheekbones, and two cauteries on two spondylus bones in the neck, and six cauteries on the spondylus bones in the back, and a large one near the hip, and one on the hip, and two on each ankle, and one on each heel, and two on each elbow, and one on each wrist, and two on the wrists, and two on the fingers, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of his feet; and cauterize it over all the joints of the hands and feet, and over each talon of his feet, and over the phalanges of his hands.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are on top of the talons.
Some forms are cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the penis and another on the opening of the stomach, and others on the liver.
Know that the more closely cauteries are adjusted, the more beneficial and effective it is; know that the patient does not have pain in the cautery, as they do when burned, because the body of the patient is already paralyzed.
It is necessary that the cauteries be large or few according to the members and joints, depending on the specifications of the instruments.
Care for the cautery with flour of errors cooked with honey and other cure until it is healed.
This line appears to be another chapter title number. The translation would be "Chapter LVIII". However, it's unclear which numbering system the author used as LVIII in Roman numerals is LXVIII, not xlvi or LVII in standard Roman numerals. It may have a specific meaning within the context of this treatise or the author's culture.
This line appears to be another title of the text. The translation would be "On Cauterization of Paralysis".
When a member is stiffened or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it does not heal, then you cauterize the stiffened member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
And the cautery should penetrate the thickness of the skin a little. Care for it with honey until it is healed.
Some forms of paralysis that occur in the hands and feet, in the spine and vertebrae, and affect the nerves that move that member, are cauterized; and the paralysis is relieved.
May not presume over this, except he who is skilled in the anatomy of members and the exit of nerves throughout the entire body moving it.
(This seems to indicate that we are reading the 49th chapter or title of a text.)
On the cauterization of hernias which is morphia.
When the hernia is old and does not respond to any of the medications, then you cauterize it with a cautery for a short time according to the size of the cystic swelling inside, until the white color and color of it changes.
Then heal it with a mixture of barley and lentils with rose oil and the leaves of arnica, and the blood of a pigeon or the blood of a lark, each part separately, mixed together, then bind it with a cloth on top until it is healed.
(This seems to indicate that we are reading the first chapter or title of a text.)
On the cauterization of crabs (a medical term, possibly for a type of skin growth).
When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around the circumference as it is rotated.
And the wise ones say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery at the right place; but I do not see this, because I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have seen it some times.
And it is more appropriate that it should be cauterized around the circumference with a circular cautery as we have said, or with a cautery instrument.
(This seems to indicate that we are reading the first chapter or title of another text.)
On the cauterization of abscesses.
When an abscess is delayed in maturation, either due to excessive fluid or due to the state of the patient who is old and frail with little blood, or due to time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize it around its circumference with a cautery instrument puncturing small points, and place leeches there which will hasten the maturation.
But if you want to make a perforation with the cautery, then you do this by igniting the cautery whose shape is as follows: and place it in the middle of the abscess until it penetrates the cystic swelling.
And if the cautery is in a location that is further down (on the limb), to relieve the body of the arm; then heal it until it is healed.
(This seems to indicate that we are reading the second chapter or title of another text.)
On the cauterization of corroded areas.
Corroded areas are corruption moving in the limbs, which corrupts it just as dry wood is consumed by fire.
Therefore, if you see the corroded area in a place that requires cauterization with fire, then ignite the cautery spikes few or many and large according to what is appropriate in the location where it is corroded.
And cauterize it completely from all sides until you eradicate the entire corruption and no cause of it remains.
And let the leeches sit on it for three days, and place them over the cauterized areas so that they are sprinkled with oil mixed in between until all scabs are eradicated and all corruption is gone.
And heal it with meat-based medicines.
But if after three days the flesh does not grow healthy in which there is no corruption, good; but if not, then you return to ignite the cautery over what has been cut in the corrupted areas.
Corroded areas are sometimes treated with sharp medicine because such medicine is halfway between cauterization. But cauterization with fire is of greater assistance in the end.
I have already said the healing with sharp medicine in the division (of the text), and therefore take that when you will have need of it.
(This seems to indicate that we are reading the third chapter or title of another text.)
On the cauterization of nails and their similarities.
Many times in the lower parts of the foot a disease occurs that is called a nail, which is large and deep-rooted, damaging the foot; and cauterization in these places is done in two ways, namely cauterization with fire and cauterization with hot water.
But cauterization with fire is igniting the hollowed-out cautery shaped like a pen, which should be made of iron according to the size that contains the entire nail from all sides, and it should have fine grooves.
Then place the heated cautery on the nail, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the circumference of the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail. And let the leeches sit on it for three days, and let it start to ooze pus. And apply the plaster made from wild mallow leaves mixed with salt on it, and let the leeches sit on the plaster during the night, because that will be eradicated from its roots.
And heal the location where the flesh has grown with medicines.
And if it does not convert (meaning: the nail does not heal), and many times an abscess occurs on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you must administer cauterization with water, namely by taking a syringe or needle or pen, and place it on the nail; and let the water flow slowly from the syringe into the groove of the nail, and hold the syringe, and rotate it with pressure from your hand all around it, and press the edge of the syringe against the root of the nail to force the hot water to enter through the root of the abscess; and let the patient wait an hour for the pain caused by the hot water to subside, and then remove the syringe, because the nail along with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus, arrange them (the patient) one against another facing all of whom is in the body (i.e., the physicians).
Then clean the wounds from which the pustules of scabs have been removed, and treat with the ointment those parts of the flesh that have been grated.
Chapter 33.
On cauterization of tremors (trembling or shaking).
When someone has tremors due to cold affecting the nerve or because of a fever caused by cold, or for some similar reason, it is necessary that you cauterize that person with four cauterizations on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra there should be one cauterization; and on the feet, and over the stomach, use an olive-oil cauterization.
And the tremor subsides and hastens the healing of the cold-induced disease.
Chapter 50.
On cauterization of abscesses in the body (Translator's note: In this context, "albati" is used to refer to an abscess or boil)
When an abscess appears in the body and is formed by large, corrupted materials, it must be cauterized at the beginning when it appears, with a thin cautery made of myrtle wood and its tip extended to fire; or with a long erostological lance; or with a slow cauterization (cauterio lentecular).
When some abscesses are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion (rupture) according to this method, and it is not believed, they are disrupted and healed from them.
However, it is necessary that this be done with appropriate evacuation using lancing (fleubotomy).
Chapter 60.
On cauterization of fluxes (influxions or inflammations) of blood in the body caused by arrow injuries through incision with a lance (arceria).
Some abscesses caused by arrow injuries that are incised must be left uncovered (defored) or be lanced with a lance (apostema) or cauterized on the member, and similar conditions apply, and it remains difficult to heal it.
Then when it happens to someone, take your hand and press on the site of the arrow injury, and place your hand over it so that you hold the wound tightly for several observed days until the influx of blood stops and does not come out again.
And place the olive-oil cauterizations few and large (i.e., thick) in the fire for many minutes until they become hot.
And take either a small or large one depending on the location and wound where the artery has been broken, over that vein you must apply pressure as soon as possible to stop the bleeding, and then cauterize it before the bleeding becomes excessive.
And if the blood continues to flow from the opening of the artery when you apply pressure and remove the cauterization, then take another cauterization (prepared in the fire) and do not stop doing it until the bleeding is stopped.
And be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is here (nearby), and that another harm comes upon the patient.
And know that when the artery flows with blood, it is not possible to stop the blood in such cases, and especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods is used: or cauterization as described earlier, or extraction when it has not been extracted, because when the extremities are burned and the blood is stopped, or using ligation with a strong ligature, or pressing over medicines whose purpose is to restrict the blood; and they should be tied firmly with a pulvinar (bandage) or compress.
Whoever administers a proper and necessary restriction to him, with bandages or by position for the purpose of healing and similar causes, should not cease doing so, but continue instead.
If anyone has a vein wound and neither the doctor nor medicine is present, then pause the treatment on the indicated vein over its openings as we have said, and understand the great precaution to be taken until the blood stops from the superior part of the wound, and do not raise the archery (tourniquet) over it; and above the archery spray with cold water of great coolness until the blood is congealed and thickened; but continue in that which requires cauterization or necessary medicine.
Of incisions and perforations, and abscesses, and phlebotomy, and wounds, and their like.
We have already said in the first chapter all disease in which cautery with fire is appropriate and medicine burns, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for that purpose and the forms of the cauteries; and we have arranged the chapters from the top of the head to the feet.
And so, we will proceed in this chapter for the purpose of relieving the one who is suffering, as he has requested.
Before I begin, son, know that in this chapter is explained what was in the first chapter about cauterization.
And because you must be in great caution, since in the operation that is in this chapter many things are observed for evacuation which is with blood from which life depends, the aspersion of the vein or incision over the abscess or opening of an ulcer or purification of a wound or extraction of pus or incision of stone and their like. And of all these things there is fear and trembling, and in the greatest of them death lurks.
And I warn you not to let this happen to you, since in some cases you will have to behave like a healthy person with the behavior of sick people. And there is some who will leave with their sickness and death is easy for them, and so in this case by the vehemence of what they find from their sickness, and by the length of their sickness, and with the sickness that means death.
And from these there is one who gives you his wealth and instructions, hoping for your health, but their sickness is harmful to you.
And therefore you should not consent to the one who comes to you with this kind of behavior; and your caution should be greater than greed and your avarice; and do not presume any cause about it without certain knowledge that confirms it, and on which good success depends.
And in the treatment of all your patients with prognosis and indication for the one to whom health has been converted, since in that case it assists you in acquisition of fame, memory, praise and glory.
Oh, sons, God inspire your understanding and do not take guidance or protection from it, since it is in His hands.
I have arranged this chapter divided into sections as was done in the chapter of cauteries, for the care of the head to the feet, so that you may be relieved of what you request and of which you are in need.
Chapter one.
Of the care of water contained in the head of children.
Know that this disease often affects children, and when the newborn infant is born with a swollen head.
Some periods occur mysteriously and are unknown.
I do not see this illness in children; and all those whom I have seen are near death, so it seems to me that it is the work of Satan on them.
I have seen a child whose head was full of water, and his head continued to swell so much that he could not stop eating due to the great size of his head, and moreover, the moisture increased until it caused death by suffocation.
And this moisture is added either between the skin and bone, or below the bones on the skull.
If the moisture is between the skin and bone and the abscess is small, then you must make an incision in the middle of the head with a longitudinal slit, and the length of the slit should be about two inches so that the moisture runs out, and this is the shape of the spoon:
And if the moisture is greatly increased and the abscess is larger, here are two incisions according to this method:
And if the moisture is below the bone, it is a sign that you see the joints of the head open on all sides and water flows out when you press the area with your fingers and not hidden from you. You must make three incisions in the middle of the head according to this method:
And remove all the moisture from the incision; and strengthen the incisions with cloths and feathers; and broach it with vinegar and oil for five days, and then loosen the bandage and heal the wound with poultices and salves, and strengthen the head with equal amounts; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is comfortable and healed.
And there is another method of incision, which considers the size of the abscess and the collection of water, as sometimes it is in the occiput or in front, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore pay attention to the incision where the abscess and repletion of water appears, and do so according to what is most possible for you.
Be aware that you do not cut the artery and make bleeding flow and kill the patient by the flow of blood with water drainage.
Chapter Three.
When cataracts or swellings appear on the eyelids or feet, and it is an old problem and the medicine does not help, then the last resort in this case is the incision of those two arteries.
And when you want to incise those that the patient raises his head, first rub the area with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and hold the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the vein pulses; and press each one on the places that are near the ears, and they become hidden in some men.
And hold onto the artery with a probe, and incise each one with a sharp tool that penetrates into the bone along the longitudinal incision of each part.
If you want, insert the probe below the artery and break it at the incisions above.
And the length of the incision should be two fingers' width adjusted, because when a vein is incised, the blood flows out with a pulsating discharge, which jumps out frequently.
If the artery does not appear at the touch, you must measure three fingers' width from the ear and probe inside the bone.
The amount of blood that should be drained is one cup. And be careful not to drain more or less, and all of this is according to the amount that appears from the nature of the patient and the filling of the artery of him.
Approach the wound, and since any cause of the fracture remains on the bone, then incise it to prevent purulent caution.
Approach the wound with linen and bandage it, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the extraction of the hernias which are in the temples.
When an old or chronic headache occurs due to unwholesome humidity in the temples or a sudden, violent, and similar headache, which is not amenable to medical treatment, we will treat this condition by hernia extraction in the temples or cauterization of those areas as described earlier.
The method of operation and hernia extraction is that the patient shaves the hairs in the temples; and understand the hernia visible in the temple as it is shown by its pulse, and it is hidden in most people due to coldness.
If it is hidden, then tie the neck of the patient with some cloth; and warm up the area with a rough cloth or moisten the area with hot water until the hernia appears manifestly. Then you take the spatula, which has this shape: Approach the hernia with the spatula and press it gently until you reach the hernia; then cut it where it is easy to access and extract it from the abdominal cavity into the hernial sac and uncover the tunics that are underneath, on all sides.
But if the artery is thin, you encase it with the index finger, and then make an incision along its length according to how much the extremities are contracted, and there will be no bleeding, because if they are not incised, blood cannot rise from it all.
Then evacuate the blood of a certain amount (unc). to three (cubits).
If the hernia is large, you must tie it in two places with strong double silk or cedarwood thread, and not cut it prematurely before the wound heals and bleeding occurs.
Then incise the excess that is between two bandages; do it at that time or some other time.
If you wish, cauterize it with a cautery to the bone using a cautery knife until the extremities are incised, and remain in place for this surgical operation.
It is better not to perform the operation if the patient has fever or is completely heated, because cauterization helps reduce moisture, and therefore it is more beneficial in combination with other treatments.
It is necessary to perform the hernia extraction in a clean and dry place, and place the patient comfortably, then treat it with dry medications that promote tissue healing and warm compresses until it is healed.
If during the examination or treatment, bleeding from the hernia occurs, then you must stop the bleeding, either with a cautery, or by applying pressure to the area, and keep your hand over it until the bleeding stops. If any cause of these is not present, then place your finger over the area until the bleeding clots, and moisten it with very hot water until the swelling subsides, and press it as necessary.
What is easier in the extraction of hernia is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two handles, since you have tied the two places and untied them alternately, until they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities can be elongated, because it is not consolidated by this cauterization.
This is the shape of the cautery:
and the thickness of the two handles should be uniform. However, if the handles are not uniform in thickness, it is better, because if they are sharp like two blades near each other, they will not incise the flesh quickly.
Thus, because there is some thickness in them, the heat of the fire should be maintained in them and the flesh should be incised easily.
This operation is better than all others and easier to perform.
And the space between the two handles should be the same thickness as the finger.
Chapter Four.
On the treatment of sharp and acidic coughs in the lungs.
When sharp coughs occur and the lungs are located above the neck of the head and no cause for medical treatment is present, and sometimes the face of the patient becomes red and feels like ants are crawling on it, and the lungs become thinned, moistened to the point where their skin is known, and the paracelsus used this operation in the treatment of these conditions, and I name this treatment "spassa".
And you command the patient to raise the hairs that are on their forehead, and then make three incisions longitudinally spaced apart according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the fissure is two parts: one fissure should be as long as the distance from the nose to the middle of the forehead in the same place, and the second as long as half the movement of the eyelids which is at the lacrimal [area], and the third on the other side.
Keep your hand away from the arcus (bony rim) of the eyes which are on both sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space of each incision is adjusted to three parts.
And if you have a sponge soaked in vinegar or dry cloths to absorb the blood with it.
Place the spatula of two sharp points inside, of which this is the shape of the incision: This is from the parting of the temples to the second incision. Excise all the caul that is between the two incisions and close the one that is over the bone, then do so from the minor incision to the second incision. Then straighten this spatula and insert it again into the first incision with another instrument called a knife, sharp on one side and dull on the other.
And stop the sides of that sharp instrument, cut the attached flesh and skin, and the edges of it the bone, and push it towards where the fissure is, and separate everything that descends from the head to the heels with it.
However, if the incision is continuous, do so in the median fissure to the other fissure.
And when the amount of blood flow has ceased, squeeze the places where the clots of blood are located.
And stop at each fissure whenever a piece of old skin appears, and pause over those powdery substances embedded in wine, oil, and vinegar, and observe that it does not produce an abscess cauterized.
On the third day remove the linen and administer a large infusion of hot water or tea, and care for it with basil oil and others until the sores are healed.
Chapter 5.
On the treatment of ulcers by cauterization and sores descending from the divisions inside the head.
When an acute and continuous ulceration comes along with the weakening of sores in the patient's feet, and their observation shows that they are extended slightly, and their examination reveals debility, ulcerated eyelids, and loss of hair from them, as well as pain sharp and prolonged at the front of the head, then you should know by these signs that the matter and ulcers do not come except from the many veins that originate from inside the head.
The best treatment for this is: command the patient to shave their forehead, and make a small incision in it at the same place on the forehead, starting from the left temple to the right temple; it should be an incision over the bone; extend your hand away from the eyelids of the temples which are painful due to chewing.
Excise all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth and fill between the lips of the fissure with a piece of old skin or dry cloth. And strengthen over them powdery substances embedded in wine and oil to prevent an abscess cauterized from appearing.
And when you remove that and see that the abscess has decreased, then it is necessary to cauterize the bone up to where it begins with raw flesh, and care for it with a drying regimen which will make the flesh heal, such as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and from this make a plaster and administer it in these sores on raw flesh.
Chapter 6.
Chapter on the treatment of what cats in the ears.
All causes that are found in the ears belong to four species: either they are mineral substances or resemble them, such as iron and glass, or are from plants like cheese or beans, or are fluid-like such as water and sweet wine and their similars, or animals.
Therefore, when grit or other similar causes that do not fit or agree in the ear occur and the ear is stopped, if you see the stone, then distill some violated oil or sizam into it, and administer its extraction, and make it shake with condition, and apply drops to prevent sneezing. Then stop the ear canal with some cloth or wool pieces and stretch the ear at the top openings, as the movement is forgotten due to these causes.
And if it's not resolved, administer the extraction with the instrument called gests epiticiarios, of which this is its form:
And if it's forgotten with the syringe, that's good; otherwise, administer the extraction with a thin cannula of little duplication.
Therefore, if it's not forgotten by that, you make a cannula of brass and insert the end of the cannula into the ear canal and seal around the cannula with wax and soft oil to prevent it from opening except for the cannula. Then draw out the earwax with strong suction, as too much of that has been accumulated.
But if it's not forgotten in this manner, take alum powder or beeswax prepared with the tools where birds are pressed into a certain quantity, and place that on the tip of the cannula, and then cover that area properly. And insert it gently into the ear canal with ease, and extract the ear with moisture.
Therefore, if it's not forgotten with all the causes as mentioned before, you cut that area that appears to be an abscess or spasm.
The method of cutting that area is to first anesthetize the patient with the saphenous vein and extract the blood as per its virtue, then hold that scissors between your hands and turn the ear towards the openings, and make a small incision in the base of the ear at the spot pressed. Make the incision in the shape of a crescent moon towards the stone, and if possible remove the stone with appropriate instruments; and sew the incision at that time with speed, and heal it until it heals.
If the cause in the ear is one of the fats that grow and inflate, you administer the cure and its extraction; but if you do not take care at that time, you take thin spatula as follows: and administer the aspiration of that fat which has grown in the ear.
Do not do that when you think that it has already been moistened by the steam of the ear, and place it in many small pieces, and extract it with onions or fine syringe, or make an incision as mentioned before, as the extraction is relieved.
But in the water that enters the ear, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze with condition at the beginning, and fill their ear with some old cloth, and squeeze over the affected ear where the water is, and if it's forgotten by that, that's good; otherwise, you take many sharp needles or leeches according to the length of the finger, heat them up slightly in the fire, and let the patient insert one of those into the ear canal and sneeze on the other side of that area and percuss the stone inside the ear with another needle. Therefore, do not stop this with a stone until all the water is forgotten.
Therefore, do not stop this with a stone until all the water is forgotten. And when the water has been forgotten to such an extent that you take paper or gauze, and put one end of it into the ear and extend the other end towards the fire until it is burned at its tip.
And then place another gauze and do this many times until all the water is forgotten, and strain it with a cannula as mentioned before for stone removal.
But in the removal of animals that enter the ear, if it's small, you can do as mentioned before in the division; but if it's large and causes swelling at the front of the head, administer its removal with syringe and onions, and the cause of that is easier to deal with than all other causes that occur in the ear.
When extracting worms born in the ear, when treating that patient as you have said in the division and treatment of distillations, but you do not confirm your treatment, then you must look at the ear to the sun.
Furthermore, if any cause of the worms appears, then extract it using some method or subtle means, but if no cause appears, then take a thin and wide cannula whose shape is as follows: Insert the distal end subtly into the ear according to the quantity that can be tolerated by the patient; and apply strong suction with it, and do this repeatedly, until all the worms are expelled.
But if the patient suffers from an obstruction, then you should close and seal the circuit of the cannula with wax as previously mentioned; then administer distillations which have already been proven effective in the treatment of worms, and observe the procedure in the treatment of distillations.
Let your effusion be with which you infuse the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument whose shape is as follows: Make it of silver or brass, narrow at the base, with a small hole at the top.
And so let it be shaped as if it is in the concavity of the continuous cannula here where it will be necessary. If you wish, take the ray and cover its tip appropriately, then pour oil in the concavity of the ear (or juice from some herb, or any medicine that you want) into the cannula, which is in the ear, and insert the ray with a suitable angle and press it with your hand until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil deep inside.
The oil that is to be infused in the ear should already have been heated slightly with fire. And be careful that the cause you will be distilling in the ear is not too hot, because the remedies for the ear do not tolerate such heat.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of opilacion (earache).
Some children suffer from ventricle inflammations of the womb that have not been perforated, and this can also happen in some men, an earache in the meat of the ear due to a wound or non-healing tissue there; and sometimes this earache occurs at the piercing of the earlobe, which does not heal properly, and sometimes it is located elsewhere.
The one that occurs at the piercing, which does not heal properly, is in the greatest dispositions for difficult healing.
And in the one where healing is achieved, it is necessary that you clean the ear of the patient and observe it. And so if obstruction appears in the ear, open it with a thin spatula whose shape is as follows:
The spatula should have a small width at the end, with one side sharp and the other not; and the spatula should be twice as long as the ear so as not to harm the ear.
And so if the earache is due to born flesh in the ear or in its meat, then remove it with subtle means and cut off the flesh as quickly as possible until all the flesh has been removed.
And if the earache is at the piercing of the ear, then take a thin ray and heat it slightly with fire, and place it in the meat of the ear.
And so if you notice an obstruction with the patient's complaint of difficulty hearing, relieve the pressure with ease; and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear.
Place cotton gauze in the ear according to the size of the hole you covered with the Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take any substance and soak it in water and grind it into powder, using it as directed; and if the earache has already healed, it is necessary to remove the cotton and replace it with another gauze that you will wrap in cured fat (cauterized) until the abscess subsides; and care for it until it is healed.
But if there is bleeding, submerge sponge or cloth in hot water and place it over the ear, and use the other treatment that stops the flow of blood, which is discussed in the treatment of distillations.
Chapter VIII.
On the treatment of athazel which enters the eyelids.
Athazel that enters the eyelids of humans can sometimes be moist, but sometimes it is dry.
Therefore, you must have the instruments to cut and remove them with an eyelid spatula, and place the eyelids back as directed.
If pain accompanied by bleeding occurs, then you cauterize those areas with a thin linear cautery.
The best cauterization is near the incisions and trophies that return when any cause remains; and when they are cauterized with fire, those causes are burned up and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for swelling that comes to the eyes of humans.
Swellings that have penetrated into the eyelids of humans are caused by something similar in strength and hardness to swelling, and because of this hardness it is called swelling.
And it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the eyelid both above and below.
Therefore, the operation is that you examine whether the swelling arises from something that comes out of the eyelid and spreads all around; and the cause of this is light.
Therefore, make an incision through the width of it, and carefully excise it from all sides with ease until it comes out, and suspend it with a thread and cut it off.
If the figure is large, then you adjust it with stitching; and care for it until it is healed.
If it is small, there will be no harm to you because the angue of it restores and fills it.
If the swelling is receding into the parts within the eyelid, you should treat the inner surface by evacuating the eyelid and suspending the swelling with a thread, another which you need for incision, and press it from all sides; and if the eyelid is stretched by incision, do not notice any cause.
And apply salt water to the wound, and care for the place until it is healed.
Chapter X.
On the treatment of excoriations on the upper eyelid of humans.
Excoriations that are gray and are generated in the tunica of the upper eyelid, especially in children, worsen the eyes of those and lead to their catarrh, the most severe; and they cannot bear the light of the sun because tears flow into them.
Because of this, you often find them on their faces all the time, and on their faces when they sleep; and humid overcrowding covers the lower eyelids, which have already been inflamed, and signs of impending infection appear in the eye; and that when you press the place with your fingers, pus is released into them.
One method of treatment is for the patient to place their head on your lap and then you press a cloth on him and make it warm, and make a circle according to the quantity that contains arsenic on all sides; and then place that on top of it and press with your fingers all around so that pus is accumulated in the middle of the circle, and then make an incision in the middle of the humidity with a spatula, and the incision should not be larger than the incision made in lancing.
But in the case of children, it is necessary that you cut the cord entirely until you reach pus, because in more serious cases pus is released by incision according to the form of white grease.
Therefore, remove it with cloths which you have wrapped between your fingers on the sides and turn it between your right and left hands until it is dispersed.
And be careful not to close the incision because with the spatula you will not reach the eye and scratch it.
But if pus does not appear at the beginning of the incision, but rather in the incision itself, then you should close it with a small piece until pus is released; and remove it as we have said; and submerge it in water and vinegar and place it on the place and press it with powders.
And so those that strain salt press it in the concavity of the incision so that what remains of the humidity is removed.
And care for it until it is healed.
But if there is an abscess at the cauterized place, you should treat it with plasters made of cedar until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
On ways of touching the eye.
When in the eyelids of humans are born from the natural hairs and are old, you should touch the eye and make methods of diseases such as persistent tears and softening of the eyelid that is called tactinir of the eye, and treat it in four ways: or by cauterization with fire; or with sharp medicine as was said in the chapter on cauterization; or by touching through incision and stitching; or by cannulas as I will say.
Therefore, you should place the patient's head on your lap; turn the upper eyelid towards your left hand, and if it is turned, good; otherwise, insert a needle into the side where pus is present below the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through the same side, and this should be  near the edge of the eyelid in which the hairs grow  near the hairs, and pull the thread above the eyelid to the sides, and turn it towards the ray.
Approach the inner division of the eyelid, adjusting the hairs to make an incision in the lacrimal major and direct it towards the lacrimal minor; then extract the eyelash, place powdery cotton or cloth under the eyelid, press it gently, and apply a pledget (or pad) soaked with oil of myrtle on the eyelid, as if it were a myrtle leaf.
However, it is necessary that the shape should correspond to the degree of swelling of the eyelid, because it varies among men, for some of whom a large incision in the eyelid is required according to the degree by which the eyelid is softened.
Then make an incision along the two lines that you have marked, starting from the lacrimal major to the lacrimal minor. And if the incision is made along the natural furrow as thick as a king's finger.
Then place the onion in one of the two angles of the incision and scrape it all out, then adjust the edges of the lips with a fine woolen thread, wipe away the blood, and apply what remains of the hairs over the eyebrows to certain adhesive substances, if you wish to do so, but otherwise, do not bother.
Take care of the stitches of the hairs for three or four days and nurse it.
If you want, leave the wound unsutured and care for it with what dries and constricts, because the eyelid is alleviated by the sealing of the wound and its aggregation; but suturing is better, therefore, according to the ancients, this is the way they used to treat it.
But on the patient, there should be vigilance, and it is good practice, and there is no reason for fear.
And another method of treatment is to apply myrtle leaf on the eyelid, and then lift the eyelid with three separated and connected incisions in this way:
But if it is not possible to make the incisions, take an awl with thread and insert it into the middle of the figure, then pass another eyelash near the lacrimal major, and the eyelash near the lacrimal minor, adjust them at their tips with equal length, and lift your hand with elevation of the same size as the drawing we have recommended.
Then adjust the edges of the wound with stitches and nurse it until it heals.
But if an abscess occurs at your incision or your wound, drain it with cautery and apply warm compresses.
In some cases, the eyelashes may turn into a cyst, so it is necessary for you to use what we said about incision; but stitching is more artificial.
Cyst removal with cannulas is as follows: And you turn the eyelid inside out and cut the figure that I have described; then, using your craftsmanship, make two cannulas or fine tubes whose length is equal to the eyelid's length and width narrower than the width of the incision. You have already made an incision at the ends of each division, where you have threads.
Apply a thin layer of what remains of the eyelid skin over each division and tighten the cannulas of each division with strong compression, leave it for several days because the incision will die off and become denuded and it will gradually be absorbed until it falls off by itself.
But if it is delayed, break the cannula with tweezers, and nurse the wound until it heals.
Therefore, once the incision has been sealed, the eyelid is raised, and the hairs do not penetrate.
And this is the shape of two cannulas that you will make as follows: It should have the length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter XII
On removing ingrown hairs in the eyelid with a needle when the hair is hard.
When hairs that are not natural, hard, rough, and ingrown pierce the eyelid, the operation is as follows: Take a thin needle and press it gently on the eyelash of cedarwood and lion, then adjust the ends of it with subtle movements to avoid any damage. The length of the hairs should be as long as a palm (about five inches).
And prepare another thin thread next to it in a short time and cut off the ends of that one if you wish.
And place the patient's head on your lap and position yourself facing the soles so that your work is clear, because it is a subtle and delicate operation.
And insert the needle into the root of the adjusted hair, which requires skill, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly until you extract it over the natural eyelash.
Pull the hair upwards and insert the instrument within, let the hairs be one or two or three, not more.
Pull your hand towards that which the hair is withdrawn and insert the instrument within the eyelid with the natural hairs.
If the instrument is inserted within the eyelid without withdrawing the hair, insert it at the sides with the blade you have made on that side, up to where the instrument is withdrawn from above.
Look at it with your eyes, because then you will insert the instrument and the blade, and cut each and every hair, leaving the nails for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and grows back over it in good flesh.
If the hair is too short, you adjust a long hair from the natural hairs, raise it with that, or wait until it grows long enough to be raised slightly, and then raise it.
Capital XIII.
On the care of cataract that appears above the eyelid.
When cataract appears in the eyelid and it contracts towards one side or another due to bad consolidation of plague or section or cauterization, it is called leprosy, and this cataract may be natural or accidental, caused by consolidation of plague or sections or cauterization, or resembling its poor healing.
The method of operation is to cut that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place a piece of cloth in between them, and tie them together until they are healed.
And it is not necessary to use treatment for the causes that dry it out, as if you do so, cataract returns worse than before and no time will be helpful.
Use in that of the causes that soften such as fenugreek, and wrap it with the water in which are crushed seeds of it, or gum guaiacol, which is liquefied with one of the oils, and immerse the cloth in it and cure with it.
The treasure of your treatment is that you perforate everything that is not yet consolidated according to the form that it was at the beginning.
And this operation that we have mentioned, is not just some correction of cataract that does not return the form of the place according to what it was before.
Capital XIV.
On the care of cataract that occurs in the lower eyelid.
This cataract that occurs in the lower eyelid, which is called cataract in truth; and it may be one of them natural or accidental.
Accidental is caused by plague or section or cauterization or others similar things.
The method of operation is to take a needle with double thread and poke it in the flesh, and make it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the skin to the upper sides with the needle and sew it with the needle, and incise it with a wide spatula. And if the figure of the eyelid returns as it should be, good; and if not, take the ray and place it in the slit figure, and turn the eyelid with that, and make two incisions along the lower edge of the lower eyelid.
And the two incisions of the slits should be from two corners of the incision that you made, and their meeting angle should be formed where they meet, so that when they come together, the figure is formed with them.
This figure is Greek letter: lambda.
Then cut away the flesh to the extent that it is the thickness of a lance from there, as far as the eyelid.
Then align the separated parts and sew them with woolen thread; then care for those with what we have said of the softening medicines and hot baths until it is healed.
And if you cauterize, pierce, or suture, then it is necessary that you make a straight incision on the skin of the eyelid as previously mentioned. Then separate with warm water between the two lips as we have said.
In the conclusion of this discourse on the treatment of cauterization, whether above or below, let it run in operation, as prepared according to the method of cauterization, and that form is in the shape of diverse dots.
And the skilled artificer always prepares an engine in every manner possible within his reach to restore the figure to its natural or almost natural form, and the patient according to the operation and tools in the greatest arrangements.
Chapter 15.
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in many men whose eyelid is fused above with the aqueous humor, and it is prohibited from easy movement and its natural functions, therefore it is necessary that you intervene on the outer edge of the eye below the eyelid, and lift it up or stretch it out with oil.
And apply a thin scalpel to the adhesion, which is not sharp enough for incisions, having a blunt tip so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remove the scalpel without damaging the aqueous humor.
Let your incision be such as to remove the adhesion with ease until the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
And place salt water in the eye, with which you wash it, or distill it in a vessel filled with soluble sulfur dissolved in water.
Then separate the eyelid and the eye with warm water, place woolen yarn soaked in olive oil on the eye, and on the third day use consolidating agents until it is healed.
Chapter 16.
On incision of a nail and removal of skin around the tear duct.
Know that the nail is of two types: one is nervous and similar to hard, dry, thin tissue; or it is not-nervous, similar to congealed white moisture, which, when touched, or if it is pressed out, can be removed with oil and will not be inserted into it.
And in both cases, they do not begin until the tear duct above covers the vision and prevents light and movement of the eye.
The method of working in the incision of it is that the patient tilts their head towards you, opens their eyes, raises the eyelid with your hand, and collects the nail with oil from a small container and extends it to the edges above. And take a needle and pierce through a cow's or ox's hair or hide, or similar tough material, double the tip of the needle little by little and insert it into the middle of the nail, penetrate it with the needle, and hold the nail; extend it to the edges above, and remove the hair along the length of the nail that touches the pupil. And so you continue in this way with the hair up to the end of it.
And apply a thin scalpel or small forceps to the root of the tear duct, and remove the natural skin of the tear duct so that by incision of it does not cause continuous tears.
And in some cases, the nail with only oil or grease can be extended or held, as we have said, and it should be cauterized with the lion's mouth scalpel, which is its shape:
And beware that the scalpel does not touch the corneal membrane and causes a tear, and that the pupil is perforated.
Then make the incision in the eye a little salt or diced onion and leave it for another day; then care for it with what is necessary until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle into it, nor can you apply oil, then this type of nail is cured with medicines, and healed in the same way as we have said and recommended in the division.
And if you want to incise it, then open the eye of the patient and take a thin lion scalpel with sharp point in this way: with sharpness. And if it is hardened and congealed and enters the root, then distill from your own onion, made of diced garlic or salted water, into the eye for another day.
And apply the operation to it repeatedly until everything is removed from it, unless a counter abscess appears in the eye, in which case you leave it and care for the abscess until it is healed.
Approach your operation again on that matter until it heals properly.
The secretion of the lacrimal cartridge, if noticed by a large nuisance, should be stopped with water; and incise that from one side, and do not deepen the incision to avoid the flow of tears.
Then distill in the lacrimal eye socket with sinus juice until it heals properly.
Kapitel XVII.
ber die Inzision von Zysten und der daraus hervorgehenden Hautanwuchs im Ohr.
In den Ohren von Menschen, die an der Augenlidkrankheit (Alcus) erkrankt sind, kann man eine rtliche Hautanwuchs auf der Nasenschleide finden, die sich langsam ausbreitet und die Pupille bedeckt oder nahe dazu kommt. Diese Vernderung hnelt einem Balusterrad mit festgepressten Augenlidspalpen.
Die Operation wird darauf erfolgen, dass der Patient sein Haupt auf deinem Tisch liegt und du die Ohrenffnung offenhltst und alle Randschleier abgezogen hast. Du kannst sie mit einer Kraftzange oder einem Zungenausheber abziehen. Es ist wichtig, dass du das Augenhorn nicht beschdigst whrend der Operation.
Die Inzision sollte solange erfolgen, bis die gesamte Hautanwuchs entfernt ist oder der Spaten, den wir in der Ngelinzision empfohlen haben, oder kleine Scheren eingesetzt werden knnen, um die Schleier abzuschneiden, wie es im folgenden Kapitel beschrieben wird.
Da die Inzision kompliziert ist und die gesamte Hautanwuchs noch nicht entfernt ist, sollten Sie das Ohr mit Salz fllen oder in Salzpulver trnken, das einem des Korrosiven Medikamente hnelt. Verweile auf dem Ohr, bis sichergestellt wird, dass es keine Sekundrinfektion gibt.
Wenn die Ursache fr Zysten noch nicht geklrt ist und es sich um eine Infektion handelt, gibt es den Verdacht auf eine Sekundrinfektion, dann soll der Patient das Ohr lassen und die Infektion behandeln, bevor Sie mit der Operation fortfahren. hnlich soll auch die Hautanwuchs, die bei dieser Art von Zysten auftreten kann, behandelt werden.
Es ist jedoch wichtig, dass der Patient die Heilung des Ohres natrlich oder unbeabsichtigt erfolgt, und Sie sollten nicht in irgendeiner Operation interagieren, bevor Sie sich sicher sind, dass das betroffene Organ den Eingriff berstehen kann.
Kapitel XVIII.
ber die Sammlung von Schleim im Ohr.
Der Schleim ist rosig gefrbt und schtzt das Ohr vor der Operation. Lassen Sie ihn mehrere Tage entweder langsam ausflieen oder mit einem Tuch abstreifen, bevor Sie die Operation beginnen.
Es ist also zu Beginn wichtig, sicherzustellen, dass das Ohr, in dem Schleim vorhanden ist, nicht von einer anderen Krankheit betroffen ist und die Schleimflssigkeit stark genug ist, um sie abzusammeln.
And you command the patient to place their head in your lap, and support those veins with an inch or two seconds depending on your discretion; let that inch be of double sublimation according to this form:
This translates to "and let that inch be gradually in one body according to this form:" The text seems to be a medical instruction manual, likely from the medieval period. In this particular sentence, it appears the author is instructing the person administering treatment (presumably a doctor or nurse) to support a patient's veins with an inch or two, and have that inch composed of "double sublimation" as per some specified form or method.
Then gather those veins carefully, using fine forceps or delicate instruments, and clean the blood from them little by little, until you see that the veins are filled with blood again and become swollen.
Be careful not to injure the vein at the end of the spatula; if your operation is performed during daylight, and you are firm in your actions that you only incise those veins.
And when you have completed [the procedure], then you distill the green or red vinegar over the vein to dissolve what has been filled with blood.
But if that is not possible for you to collect everything at that time, then you fill it all with what eases the pain from there, and let it rest for several days until the pain has subsided and been assured of being a safe abscess.
Then apply [the treatment] repeatedly in the same manner until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Chapter 19.
On reducing arteries to the nose.
When you cure arteries with cautery or sharp medicine as described in the narrative and it is not healed, then do not deceive [the patient] but instead make an incision on the abscess when it is mature, extract all the moisture that is in there, and let the bone be exposed until it is dry.
And therefore when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, you scrape it with an instrument that has this shape:
It is called a sharp spoon, and it should be made of iron. The handle of the spoon should be rounded like a corkscrew that has been punctured for fine puncturing (as shown in the following figure).
Place that over the corrupted part of the bone, and carefully turn it with your fingers, pressing gently until you know that the corruption is scraped off.
Let it [the spoon] be made several observations, and then restore the area with drying and strengthening agents.
If the area is consolidated and good flesh grows back, the body separates from the wound and remains for 40 days without being renewed or becoming an abscess, and no accident occurs there, then you know it has been healed.
And if not, do not deceive [the patient] but instead reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and in this way: It is that you cut through bone or with sharp medicine, and when the bone is exposed, you take three pieces of sinew as shown:
The piece of iron should be triangular in shape, and its shaft should be extended to the end like this:
Place that [the sinew] on the bone (the lacrimal bone), and extend your hand a little towards the patient's head, and turn your hand with the sinew until it penetrates the entire bone, and the patient will feel it as if air is coming out through there.
And then restore the area with drying and strengthening agents as you have been instructed.
When the flesh and area have hardened, you return the material that had flowed from the nostrils to the nose, so it will be lighter on the patient.
Chapter 20.
On reducing the prominence of the skull.
When the skull swells entirely without causing any harm or diminution, it is necessary that you make the patient lie down, and follow this procedure: place your hand on the skull without cutting and suction gently; then place a plaster over the skull made of opium, aloe, honey, and gum arabic, and strengthen the poultice over the skull with powder.
The method of powders is that you take fabrics from lion's wool, and each fabric should be folded into four layers; then grind them to make powder.
Then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that is needed. Then apply strong and firm pressure with the thick, tightly woven fabric; and alternately apply hot fomentations with suction without cutting, then remove the fomentations and allow the wound to heal for a day and a night.
However, if the ligament becomes softened in the meantime, then it must be tightened.
Then remove the ligament for a day and a night as previously stated.
If the wound has reduced, that is good; if not, then continue applying the plaster with powders and tightening and fomenting until it heals.
Chapter XXI.
On the incision of the eminence of the uveal tunica.
When there is a disruption in the uveal tunica and it becomes prominent and protrudes out of the eyelids like a grain of sand, and you want to incise it, then perform the operation as follows: You enter the needle into the edge of the uvea from the side below, and put another needle through the double filament of the lacrimal part, and make that penetrate, and leave the first needle in place according to its position; and then incise the location of the double filament and lift up the portion of the uvea around the needle, and tighten it.
And remove the needle and place a cotton swab soaked in oil over the wound, until the filament comes out with the grape.
Then take care of the wound with something that will comfort it until the wound is healed.
And after some days, place a circle of cloth around the entire wound and adjust it to hold the prominent part; then perforate it with a thin spatula that will penetrate into the wound, and run the humid fluid through the albuginea (white part) of the eye, and push down the eyelid and enter as quickly as possible.
Then tighten until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of eye ulcers (Alconati).
This disease called Alconati is not simply watery discharge from the eye, but something else.
However, the method of treating it is that you make the patient lie with their head straight on the pillow, and hold their head between your two hands until you see the pus appearing at the lower part of the eye, and it does not descend or weep, but stays there; and let the light in, and the patient sees as they did before.
And if it does not descend, know that it is watery discharge.
However, if it is not prepared to let the pus descend with what has been said, then make the patient lie between your hands and take a thin spatula and feather over the palpebral conjunctiva around the cornea at the corona (near the root), until the pus is expelled.
Then, when it is expelled, you distill the water in the eye with which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fennel and honey.
And take care of other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On the treatment of watery discharge from the eye.
We have already said what kinds of watery discharge there are and which one should be pierced according to the declaration given by the physician; then perform that one according to its health condition.
Then you must make the patient lie on their back with their head hanging down, allowing gravity to help drain the eye.
And place your hand close to the eyelid of the eye from which the watery discharge is coming, whether it is the left or right eye.
Then take your right hand if it is on the left side (of the body); or take your left hand if it is on the right side.
Then touch the extremity of the little finger near the crown (of the joint) for the thickness of the nail at the root from the smaller tear duct, and press it with force using your thumb.
Then enter the nail bed and feel that the little finger has been pierced due to your action.
You must measure the distance from the base of the little finger to the root which is from the iris to the tip, and this is the crown of the nail; for you will see the pupil with the image of the nail through the clarity of the corneal membrane.
Then press the little finger into the water and pull it down once again, and if the water rises immediately, then the patient will immediately have a view of what is under their nail.
Then wait for a little while; if the water has gone down, then you should repeat the action, but wait longer before pulling the finger away.
And when it is dry and the water does not go down, then you should extract the little finger easily, gently rotate your thumb around it, and dissolve a small amount of clear saline gem and use it to clean inside the nail; and afterwards cover the nail area with a cotton pad or stopper or infused linen soaked in rose oil and warm beeswax and glue over the nail.
But those of our time press on that compress made with beeswax.
And if your little finger is hard and does not enter the nail due to its toughness (since some men have hard nails), then it is necessary for you to take the instrument called an alberd, which has this shape:
Therefore, pierce that juncture (with the alberd), and do not damage your thumb in the process, and be careful to make a small hole near the base of the little finger.
Then insert the little finger as previously mentioned.
Make sure the patient's accommodation is prepared, with a comfortable bed placed in a dark room where they can rest on their back. Also, ensure that all movements are restricted.
Keep the patient in a stationary position for as long as necessary to allow their condition to stabilize, and do not turn their head to either the right or left side.
Keep them bound according to their condition for three days.
Then take them to that dark room and expose their wound, making them see the cause, and return their bindings on the seventh day.
It is not necessary to perform this procedure during the hours of prayer or immediately before the application of an infusion. Since it is necessary to drain the wound, you must do this because water can easily escape due to great and violent movement.
However, if an abscess forms, you must uncover the nail on the seventh day and treat it with a substance that causes the abscess to subside.
Then cover the affected area with a cloth and place it on the oral cavity so that its heat can be directed towards the affected area for several days, in a dark room.
Then gradually remove the cloth from the wound and discuss its causes with the patient.
You should know that, in some cases, a disciple is not allowed to see the procedure performed; in such cases, you must be bold and perform the operation without showing it to the patient.
We have learned that, in some cases, it is recommended by the author to make a fire under the yarrow plant (Achillea millefolium) before puncturing it with a needle and collecting the water that results from this process.
However, it is not well-known in our land whether anyone has perfected this method, nor is it found in any of the ancient books; it is possible that this is a new invention.
These are the shapes of the species of mandrake for one who does not know them:
They are made of earth or iron specifically, and their extended parts have this subtle triangular shape with the pointed end being its form.
Capitolo XXIV.
On the treatment of dead flesh in the nose.
When in the nose various dead fleshes grow, one of which is similar to a scorpion sting or polyps (small growths) on the feet; and this disease is called polyps because it resembles that foot represented. And of these [growths], cancerous, crusted, black flesh; and it is not dark-colored lion flesh.
Therefore, in the case of lion flesh that is not fraudulent or cancerous, you should treat the patient by seizing it between your hands and placing it under the sun, then cut off the nose where it grows, and pick at it with tweezers where the growths are. Then extract it from the front part and make an incision in what you have grasped with a sharp pointed spatula from one parting to where you know all the flesh has been removed; if any reason remains for which abscission is possible, then you pull out what remains with one of the subtle instruments with ease until there is no more cause. However, if it is a boil or abscess that has come to the surface, you pause it with pus; or if it is a malignant boil, you cover it and cauterize it until it is abscised and all cavities are left open.
Then pour vinegar or water into the nose at the incision site. However, if the nose is opened and moistened with moisture to the palate, then you know it has been healed.
However, if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, you know that inside there is dead flesh in the pus above the nasal bones, which has not been abscised.
Therefore, you should introduce a faithful probe with some thickness into the cavity where there is any thickening, and move it in and out, and pause between each nut to the size of a finger or a thumb, and examine the patient and introduce the end of the probe into the nose with the ray or other means possible.
And since you have done this, draw the odorant in towards the nasal canals until it reaches its goal, and be careful to place it on your palate because many observed actions like this make children at school laugh, and it is an easy cause for those who wish to do so.
Then pause the two extremities of the probe, one that extends over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and bring the instrument for cutting flesh with tweezers from the probe, and do this until you know that the flesh is with the probe's tweezers.
Then extract the probe and pause in the nose, near the drainage of pus, and do this for three days or more until the pus has eaten away all that remains of the fleshes.
And at the end of the cause, pause a lead tube in the nose for several days until it is healed.
However, if this treatment proves unsuccessful, use another method.
And this is the shape of the instrument for a purge-maker who distills oils and medications in the nose:
Make it of silver or earth, similar to a small, open lamp, like a small pitcher, and the metal should be similar.
And if you wish, make a closed tube like a cane, and the tip of the instrument for the purge-maker should be flat, open; to which you will hold when you pour oil or any substance or extracts that you want into it.
Capitolo XXV.
On teeth that have grown in the external parts of the nose.
Teeth that have grown in the external parts of the nose are observed and emphasized for several days until a molar is removed from its place.
And since it has been determined that you should incise it at the beginning of its appearance, and cut off all of it. Then pause over the site or cauterize or apply a burning medicine where it is located.
However, if its incision is delayed until it is emphasized, consider whether it is hardened, dark-colored, and has little feeling; in such a case, do not cut it with iron because it is an abscess crusted; as many observed actions like this bring great misfortune upon the one who performed them.
If the abscess is lion-colored and not dark, and sometimes it can be drained completely, then drain the patient and incise it without fear, heal the area with what drains out and bind it until it heals.
It appears that this text is a medical treatise and the numbers refer to chapters or sections within the treatise. So, "Capitol .xxvi." would mean Chapter 26. However, without more context about the document as a whole, it's hard to be certain.
The stitching of the nose, lips and earlobe when continuity is dissolved by ulcers or similar conditions.
Know that when the solution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, it is not advisable to perform that operation except in certain men.
Therefore, when you have reached the cause of that [ulcer], consider if it is a fresh ulcer with its own pus, and then you adjust the two lips of the ulcer with stitching, and place it over until it heals.
And if the lips of continuity solution are already separated and each is healed, you should carefully remove each part of its edge until there is no pus coming out. Then adjust the two lips with stitching and tighten them, and on top of them sprinkle dragon's blood powder (triturated), and place a patch of diaphyton ointment or another consolidating ointment on top of the powder, let it rest for two or three days, then remove the patch and replace it with another ointment and let it rest until the pus has been absorbed by itself, and heal it with gargle until it heals.
The method of stitching is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as we have recommended in abdominal surgery, or add the solution of continuity with pus as I have told you.
It appears that this text is a medical treatise and the numbers refer to chapters or sections within the treatise. So, "Capitol .xxvii." would mean Chapter 27. However, without more context about the document as a whole, it's hard to be certain.
On the extraction of the causes that occur in the two lips on the inside cuts.
Often one finds hard abscesses in the inner cuts of men's lips that resemble fatty masses of pus, and some are less severe and others are more serious.
Therefore, you should turn the lips and cuts on all sides of those hard masses, and fill the abscess area with clean triturated wax until the pus is restricted, and it should be washed with vinegar and healed with an astringent water until it heals.
It appears that this text is a medical treatise and the numbers refer to chapters or sections within the treatise. So, "Capitol .xxviii." would mean Chapter 28. However, without more context about the document as a whole, it's hard to be certain.
On incision of the flesh adjusted in the gums.
Large abscesses often form on the gum where the flesh is adjusted (which the ancients called albulus). Therefore, you should suspend it with a rope or hold it with forceps and incise it in the correct way, and let the pus flow or blood.
Then place a clean wax or other astringent powder or healing powder on the area.
If that flesh returns, then incise it again secondarily and cauterize it, because the cautery will not return.
It appears that this text is a medical treatise and the numbers refer to chapters or sections within the treatise. So, "Capitol .xxix." would mean Chapter 29. However, without more context about the document as a whole, it's hard to be certain.
On the reason for tooth loss with iron.
When the surface of the teeth in the inner cuts and those on top and between the gums are adjusted with sharp roughness, scratches, and sometimes they turn black and become yellowish or green before there is corruption of the gum and the teeth turn loose.
Therefore, you should keep the patient close to yourself and hold their head in your lap, extract the teeth where those scratches and causes appear as sand before there is any cause left, and remove the blackness and yellowish and other impurities until they are clean.
If that impurity is present at the beginning of the reason, it's good; but if not, you should repeat the reason on those same days until it reaches the final statement in what you want.
Know that teeth have many requirements of various shapes and forms depending on how your operation is prepared. Therefore, because the razor for removing the tooth from the inner cut is different than the rasp for smoothing between the teeth according to other forms, these forms of razors should be prepared as you will see soon.
It appears that this text is a medical treatise and the numbers refer to chapters or sections within the treatise. So, "Capitol .xxx." would mean Chapter 30. However, without more context about the document as a whole, it's hard to be certain.
On tooth extraction.
You should take care to cure the tooth of its pain with all diligence and delay in the entire extraction of it because it is not a good reason for the swelling of it when it is extracted, because there is sublime substance before it is excused in the extraction of it.
However, when the patient is satisfied to extract that tooth, you should be absolutely certain which tooth is causing the pain because swelling often deceives the patient and makes them think it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one, and the pain does not stop until the sick and painful tooth has been extracted, as we have already seen in the barber's operations.
Therefore, in order to identify the painful tooth and what you know about it, you must make an incision around the tooth where there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth and gum on all sides, and then apply heat using tweezers or fine forceps, starting small, gradually increasing until you achieve this.
Then apply strong, large tongs for good heat or structure, hold the patient's head between your hands so that he does not move, and carefully extract the tooth in a straight manner without breaking it and causing him additional pain.
If you haven't forgotten, take one of those instruments and place it under the tooth with ease and force the removal in such a way as was done at first.
But if the tooth is broken or corroded, you must wrap it in cloth and tighten it at the root with a thin wire to prevent it from being crushed during your compression with tongs.
It is necessary to be careful with incisions around the entire gum and preserve your strength so as not to break it further and leave it in pieces, and return to the patient for the greater evil that may be worse than the initial pain.
Be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their surgery and rashness during the extraction of teeth, as they do not administer what we have recommended; for many times they bring great evil upon sick people, which are difficult to crush, and all or some of its roots remain, or you extract it with bones from the mandible in such a way as many times has been witnessed.
Then clean the mouth with salt water before and after the extraction of the tooth.
If bleeding occurs due to this, such as in many cases, take some sage and sprinkle it on the wound, and if that does not stop the bleeding, cauterize it.
The shape of the fine forceps and tongs used to extract the tooth at first should be long in length, short in handle, and thick, so that they are not bent when using them.
And they should be of such a length that when you grasp them with narrow handles, they are not bent, but short in length.
And they should be made of Indian iron and correctly shaped with straight lengths, and on the ends of those, teeth should interlock and tighten by strong constraint, and in some cases the lengths of those should have a form like the beak of a bird called ciconia, which is called a hook, and are very strong.
Chapter XXXI.
On the extraction of teeth and the removal of broken bones from the jaws.
When you have to extract a tooth that is broken, you must wait at the site until it softens for one or two days; and then insert the ends of pliers or tongs shaped like the beak of a bird called ciconia or hook, the shape of the forceps:
The external parts of them are made thin like a blade or an onion.
If you do not obey this forceps or tongs, then you must be careful about the reason and cut through all the flesh and insert the tool called an osteotome (which is a small lever with the following shape):
It should have a short, thick handle that is not sharp to avoid being broken.
So if the incision is forgotten, that's fine; but if not, help yourself with these other tools whose shapes are as follows: The first tool has a triangular blade with some thickness.
The second tool has a triangular shape with a thin tip.
And now you have helped yourself with this tool that has two slopes with the following shape: And other tools that I will mention for dental procedures; because this tool that resembles a large claw is also used, and its shape is as follows:
with a curved or short triangular tip that has some thickness and is not sharp to avoid being broken.
And you should know that tools for teeth movement are similar to other instruments.
Wise and skillful artisans, however, find by themselves according to what this operation signifies and the various diseases; for there are diseases about which ancient practitioners did not say or pause over their own instruments, due to the forms of diverse species.
But if the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth is broken, or if there are fractures, then weigh a cure over it in its place with what is appropriate for this purpose using instruments and forceps that we have mentioned earlier in the extraction of incisions from teeth, and help yourself with the following procedure:
It should be done gradually, with some thickness, and held in the mouth to prevent it from escaping or going deeper until the bone is completely forgotten; then restore the area with appropriate medicines.
But if there is a small fracture in the bone, then cut that fracture and its blackness, and cure it until it heals.
Chapter 32.
On the care of teeth prominences over others.
When teeth are prominent and do not follow their natural shape, it is a problem, especially in women and the most venerable ones; therefore, you must consider: if a tooth is too close to another tooth, and it cannot be sutured or treated with liniment, then you should root that tooth; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then you should incise it with this instrument whose shape is as follows: like the snout of a pig, made from Indian iron with a sharp edge.
Your incision should be made in several days according to the hardness of the tooth, and it should not affect other teeth.
And if the prominent tooth requires grinding, then grind it with an Indian iron file whose shape is as follows:
It should be entirely made of Indian iron and the margin should be smooth; and it should have many small points like a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth should be ground down gradually in several days with ease, so that no other tooth is affected and damaged. Approximate that line there at the end, and cut it with another razor.
If part of the tongue is cut off and the edges are rounded, then you must smooth the wound where the sharpness of that piece remains and fill it to prevent the tongue from splitting or the word from being distorted.
Capital. XXXIII.
On the restoration of decayed teeth with gold or silver fillings.
If the teeth are broken and removed by impact or extraction, and the patient cannot chew food, and you have treated them with styptic medicines, but your treatment has not worked, then for those that are firmly fixed with gold and not silver, because silver turns green and deteriorates after a few days, while gold does not change over time.
And the fillings should be made in such subtlety and thickness according to the amount that can fit between the teeth; the shape of the filling is that you take the filling and place double of it between two healthy teeth, and allow it to grow with two twists (or more) between two damaged teeth, or if there is one or more, until it reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. Then place the tissue in the divided section where you began, and press gently with your hand until it is not damaged.
And your thread, with which you press the fillings, should have the sharpness of the teeth so that it does not come out.
Then cut off the excess filling with forceps or scissors and add it to each area with gestures, and bend them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, so that they do not harm the tongue. And sew that area tightly like a Roman.
But if it is loosened or broken, press it with another filling at all times.
This is the shape of the teeth and the configuration of two healthy teeth and two damaged teeth, as sometimes they are linked:
And when a tooth or teeth are removed and returned to their original position in their locations, and they grow again as we have recommended, and become strong.
And only those who are skilled and wise should do this.
And in some cases, cattle bone is suitable as a cause for teeth, and it is made into the shape of a tooth, and placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Capital. XXXIV.
On the incision of the ligament that is found in the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligament that is found at the base of the tongue sometimes or naturally occurs in some people, or it may be an accident caused by injury that has already healed.
The procedure is to open the mouth of the patient, their head resting on yours; lift their tongue and incise the ligament nerve according to the width to the extent that the tongue is freed from its root.
But if there is hardness or callousness, and it is a result of an injury that has healed, then you throw vinegar and cut through it according to the width, until you have incised the ligament and removed the callous tissue.
And ensure that no gaping fissure is made in the skin and that you cut through the arch and allow blood flow to emerge.
Then wash the traces of incision with vinegar or with warm water, and then hold the tongue clean; this is necessary for the patient to keep his tongue clean every night to prevent it from sticking together again.
If there is blood flow, place a vinegar-soaked cloth over the area; if it continues to bleed, then cauterize the area with a light cautery, which is suitable for this purpose. And apply other remedies for the other causes until it heals.
Chapter XXXV.
On the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Sometimes a small boil occurs on the tongue similar to a small blister that prevents the tongue from performing its natural function, and it is usually swollen within the mouth.
The procedure for this case is to open the patient's mouth in front of the sun and examine the boil.
And if you see that it is dark or black in color, hard, and the patient does not feel anything about it, do not touch what appears to be a cancer.
If it is whitish with humidity, you put onions in it and cauterize it with a sharp blade from all sides; if blood flows during your operation, stop the flow using this vinegar-soaked cloth.
Then return to your work until you have removed it with satisfaction, and clean it with warm water and salt; heal it with other remedies until it heals.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the extraction of boils on the ears and those that are on the gall bladder and other boils.
When inflammation occurs in the gall bladder, it is glands that resemble a boil and appear outside and are called the two ears; if you treat them with what has been said in the division and they do not heal, then consider whether the boil is hard, dark in color, and with little sensation. If so, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red in color and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron due to the flow of blood; leave it alone until it matures, and then either you break it open or let it burst on its own.
And if it is white in color, round and the root of it is thin, it should be incised.
The procedure for this is to determine whether the boil has rested with complete rest or has diminished in any way; then place the patient facing the sun, his head in your hands, and open his mouth wide. The servant holds the tongue of the patient from below with a noble instrument whose form is as follows:
It should be made of silver or iron and thin like a knife.
Therefore, when you press the tongue with it and show the boil to you, you catch it with your fingers and put an onion in its hole and pull it out from all sides as much as you can. Another thing that pulls some layer of skin is to incise it with the following instrument:
Another thing that pulls some layer of skin is to incise it with the following instrument: And it is similar to forceps, but the arms of it are curved so that the orifice of one arm is in the center of the other, and they are sharp with iron ends.
If this instrument is not available to you, incise it with the following spatula whose form is as follows: Sharp on one side, blunt on the other side.
And after you have incised the first boil, incise the other one according to this method of incision and apply warm water to clean it.
If blood flow occurs, apply decocction of scorzonera or mirra root and similar to the treatment of scorpion sting until the bleeding stops, and heal it until it heals.
Sometimes there are other boils on the gall bladder besides those two ears, and incise them according to what I have said about the incision of two boils.
I have treated a woman with a boil that was born in her gall bladder, which was dark in color, had little sensation, and had closed the gall bladder of her own accord, and the woman was breathing with difficulty and had stopped eating and drinking water, and she would have perished within a day or two if she had not been treated.
The boil had grown so much that it erupted through two openings.
Therefore, I cut it surgically and inserted an onion into one of the openings, pulled it out, and inserted another large piece, and then incised the other opening that could be felt from the first opening, and I held the mouth of it closed, compressed the tongue, and inserted an onion in the boil.
And then I made a large incision in it, but there was only a little blood flow. Therefore, the growth of that woman is absolutely abscess, and she should immediately begin to drink water, and apply pressure to food, so that it does not continue to increase due to that abscess for a long time, and an abscess occurs in its place, which will be healed until the previous one is prolonged.
Then boil the water and cauterize the growth of her, therefore be careful not to add anything more; and approach and do not know what God has prepared for it nearby.
This seems like a section heading or title, rather than a translation of a specific line from the text. It could be referring to chapter 37 in a medical treatise, but without more context, it is hard to determine its exact meaning.
On the incision of a bladder that is abscessed.
When the catarr of the bladder is abscessed and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is in the thicker and rounded part, it is called a "bubble".
However, when it is cured with the water mentioned in the division, and you do not trust your treatment, and sometimes an abscess has already cauterized itself and is subtle, then you must incise the one that is swollen round; and if it is along its length and bloody, of a dark or black color, and is not centimeter-sized, then you must be careful with the incision of it, as there is fear for the patient.
And when you see it according to the method I have described regarding its whiteness and length, then you should squeeze the patient and press their tongue with an instrument used to shape its form and place the onion in the new opening, then pull it down and incise it with one of two instruments mentioned in the incision of two moles.
And you must not incise it unless it is adjusted according to the natural term without addition, for if you incise more of it, you will damage its speech.
And before the incision, use what we have recommended in the incision of two moles, and cure it until it is healed.
However, if the patient is afraid of the incision, you must use an engine in the cauterization without fear, and the method of cautery in it is not other than with sharp water, and you should hold the head of the patient on your lap, press their tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned, and take from the water that was mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and fill a living cause with it, and stop it neither thick nor thin, and from that fill the concavity of the instrument whose shape is as follows:
Let the outer edge of the concavity in which the medicine is stopped be as deep as the concavity of a mortar bowl, and place the instrument with the medicine on the ulcer, and let the patient cough over their own side so that saliva or mucus from their mouth passes through the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not cause any harm to the growth of it and heal it.
And place your hand with the medicine, and press it on the ulcer for about an hour until you see it become darkened and calmed by the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take a piece of cotton and wrap it around the end of the ray, and immerse the cotton in the medicine, and insert the ray into the cotton in a tube until the cotton adheres to the tube, and do this as many times as necessary for the cauterization of the grape, and let it dry for about three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and clean the cauterization around the grape with cotton soaked in soap, wash it with warm water, and heal it outside with an embrocation, and internally with guargarisms until it is healed.
This type of treatment is more dangerous than incision and cauterization.
Sometimes the ulcer is cured with something that is more subtle than cauterization and incision, which is healed by subfumigation in this manner: take calm, hyssop, origan, rue, scicadus Arabicus, camomile, crushed and similar to those of herbs, and adjust all these causes or some of them in a pot, and immerse them in vinegar and boil; the pot should be well beaten with a suitable pestle, and in the middle of the pot there should be a hole, over which an instrument concave of iron, according to this method, is placed; it should be made of silver or iron.
Let the end be inserted into the mouth of the patient up to where the steam reaches the ulcer until it is somewhat obscured.
And repeat this treatment for several days until it dries up, and be careful not to do this cure at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses, as it would aggravate the abscess, and you should not do this, but rather the declaration of cauterized abscess.
However, if this instrument is not available to you, take a reed and make a hole in the end of it so that the mouth of the patient is closed, since the cork of oil prevents steam from burning the mouth.
This cure is good for health.
Chapter 38.
On removal of spines and what adheres in the throat and other causes.
Observed motes or spines adhering to the throat, or some other cause.
Therefore, you must extract whatever is visible from there, on which you focus your gaze, since you press the tongue with an instrument only for that purpose, so that it may be made clear what is in the throat.
And whatever is hidden in the throat that is not apparent, you must make the patient vomit beforehand when the food has been digested in the stomach, because the adhered cause will be forgotten by vomiting; or make the patient swallow a piece of nutmeg or radish or a dry piece of bread; or take a piece of sea sponge, dry it out well, and forcefully push it through the patient, since when it reaches the location where the spines are hidden, they will be expelled. Furthermore, take an eel and boil it well, then strain it; or take a sieve and put it over the pot, and press the contents through it.
If not those causes mentioned before are forgotten, then take an instrument made of lead in this way:
Let it be larger than a small one, and on its outer side shall have a concavity which you insert into its mouth easily.
Lift its head upward and ensure that the tip of the instrument touches the bone from the throat, so that it pierces through the bone or the spine, or that the physician with his hand.
But it is better that the patient themselves enter it (the intestine), since they know the place of the related cause and cover it up from below, and then pull their hand with the instrument upward, all this depending on the amount that has been prepared before forgetting it.
Chapter XXXIX.
On the extraction of bloodletting attached to the goitre.
When the goitre is treated with what has been said in the division of cure by medication and does not improve, consider then on the neck of the patient's goitre, since you have prepared the tongue with the instrument that you have recommended.
Therefore, if you see the bloodletting, extract it gently and carefully with a small spoon or an appropriate thin tool.
And if it is not possible for you to extract it, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the neck of the patient, and place your hand over the concavity of the cannula with an ignited iron, and do this as many times (until the bloodletting dies and comes out from the neck) and keep the patient away from water for the entire day.
And take a sponge full of water and open the mouth of it (the bloodletting) in that place, and wash the mouth with it; do not let any cause escape from there, and move the water one hour apart from another using your hand, as the bloodletting immediately senses the water.
But if not forgotten what has been recommended, then fumigate the patient with camphor or asafoetida through the instrument that you have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, so that it may fall.
And another method of operation in fumigation of that (bloodletting) is that you take an oil in which the coals are ignited and cover it with a lid at its middle where there is a hole, and compose the end of the instrument inside that hole; and place it above the fumigation; and make the patient hold their mouth over the end of the cannula, and close their mouth to prevent the fumigation from being forgotten before you know that the fumigation has reached the bloodletting, since the bloodletting immediately falls.
And if it does not fall, you should continue the fumigation many times and keep the patient from drinking water, eat salty foods and almonds, do not drink water, and in this way it is necessary that this treatment regimen be forgotten.
And this is the shape of the instrument with which goitre bloodletting is treated when it is visible, and it resembles forceps as often seen, except that there is some curve in it. which is placed on the goitre and whose end resembles a stork beak, which is lined with emery paper, so that when it captures any cause, it does not let it go.
Chapter XL.
In which the whole sermon is on the opening and cutting of abscesses.
Abscesses are many species, of many types, as can be seen in their recollection, of each one in this book.
They are diverse in perforation and cutting of them through two methods, one for the species of abscesses themselves; and by that which comes from the humors.
The second method is specifically for the places where bodily accidents occur, since an abscess in the head is different from an abscess in the anus; and an abscess in a meaty place is different from an abscess in a joint, and to each of them there is its own treatment by operation.
But some abscesses are such that they should not be perforated except at the ripening of health in them or at their completion.
So other abscesses that should be drained when they are hard and not yet ripe, such as abscesses that are near the joints, for an abscess found near a joint, its duration is prolonged until it ripens in the area surrounding it, and the pus spreads and corrupts the ligaments or nerves of the joint, causing contraction of the affected member; or the abscess is near a main organ, and if you delay its perforation for too long it may grow into the main organ; or it is near the anus, therefore do not drain an unripe one; and it is not necessary to drain a hard one, but rather the one that is near the anus, so that it does not protrude and be prolonged to the areas inside the anus, and a fistula may be formed, or it may be made in the area near it that is not healed. You must know when to perform the drainage of the abscess, and this is when it has ripened.
And you know that it is ripe when there is a decrease in pain and fever, and the swelling and pulse are reduced, and the head of the abscess becomes clear, and other symptoms.
And since you must drain it in the lowest place near the abscess, and allow the pus to flow out from the healing of the incision.
Drainage should be performed through the length of the flesh or body if abscesses are in the groin or feet, and in places where the ligaments, cords, nerves, or arteries are located; and finally, in all locations where there is a reflection; for in those that reflect, use drainage according to the member.
When the abscess is in fleshy tissue, it is better to drain it before its contents are confirmed as ripe, just as we have said; for if you drain it too early, the abscess cavity enlarges and the pus becomes more viscous and the edges of the abscess become hardened and the depth increases.
Sometimes an abscess should be drained according to the thickness of the tissue or body, or according to what the affected member requires.
You must perform a small drainage for small abscesses, and large and deep or multiple incisions according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And others are of abscesses where the cavity should be made concave and incised when this is done, it should be filled with bread and then closed again, such as those that occur in double or buboes.
And of those that are incised with a three-angled section, and those in which an incision is made like the figure of a myrtle leaf, such as abscesses of gout.
And of those in which round or crescent-shaped incisions are administered, and similar ones.
But those in which the contents are not contained like surface abscesses, it is necessary to drain them with a superficial incision or only a shallow one.
When the abscess is large and has collected a lot of pus, drain it but do not rush to extract all the pus at that time; having extracted part of it, allow the abscess to heal for another day, then extract a larger part, and continue monitoring the discharge until it subsides.
Furthermore, if the patient is a fragile person, old, or weak woman, or a small child, for their vital spirits are easily dissolved by the outflow of pus, and they may die from it, you should be careful when performing these procedures.
Take great care with this chapter, and when performing the drainage of these abscesses, be sure to clean the wounds carefully and consider whether the abscess wound is small or a shallow incision, in which case you can use some antiseptic; but if the abscess is large, and the holes made during drainage are deep, it is necessary to wait for each one until they all close.
And if a portion of the abscess cavity is excised or made concave in its circumference, it is necessary to fill it with old cotton or thread made from fabric, such as when you use bread or cheese, without moisture; keep it closed for three days, and then clean and care for it until the wound is healed.
But if bleeding occurs during the operation, administer warm water and wine on a cloth to soak up the blood flow, and let it rest for a while until the bleeding subsides.
But if the bleeding continues, it is necessary to administer treatment and care and apply powders that have been recommended in many places of this book and other texts.
But if it is winter and the location of the abscess is near nerves, it is necessary to cover powdered substances in oil and wine and let them rest on the affected area.
If it is summer and the location is fleshy, it is necessary to let the powdered substance soak in warm water or oil and wine, and keep it moist until the third day as we have said, and then clean and care for the abscess until it heals.
Here is the translation: "And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of universally occurring ulcers, but as I have already said about every ulcer in a separate manner, here follows the specific method for treating them individually by chapters."
Chapter 41.
Chapter 42. On the excision of ulcers that occur in the neck.
Small ulcers in the neck are of specific types that contain cysts lined with membranes; and these are of multiple types.
And from them [the affected areas] come blisters, and of those that contain moisture similar to lime. And from those [the blisters] come blisters with moisture similar to powder and resembling them; and from those [other blisters] are hard, like stones.
And in the section [of the body] and in the removal of those [blisters], there is no fear, as the extraction of those should not cause counteractive archery [complications].
The operation in the section [of the body] of those [blisters] is to use an instrument with a shape that comes close to this, which is called scissors, until you know what it contains.
But if what it contains is moisture, then cut it with the section [scissors] according to its length along the surface in this form:
Begin the section along line B to line G. Therefore, when the moisture is evacuated, scrape off that part which contains the moisture, and do not leave any cause of it, as too many observations return if any cause remains.
Then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; fill the wound with that and leave it until another day, as with this the corrosion will affect everything that remains of the skin.
Then repeat the application of Egyptian ointment on that wound secondly and thirdly if necessary, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of the skin; then care for the wound with ointment until it heals.
And if an abscess contains fatty nodes, then cut it according to this form: with the section having a crooked shape, and make an incision between the two lips of the section and cut it all around, and exert your force in extracting the membrane that contains it.
But if your archery [procedure] causes counteraction, then do what I first told you.
And do the same in the lapidated abscess with section and care as I have told you; but sectioning a lapidated abscess is easier, as it has less blood and less moisture.
And sometimes these abscesses are in the head in some men who have none of this moisture; the cause is that I made an incision on an abscess in an old woman's head as hard as stone, rough, white, which could not be crushed, and if anyone were to strike it, it would inflame [the area].
But in other accidental abscesses of the head, this is not applicable, such as abscesses that occur on children's heads and you should loosen their ears, but the section of all of these should be a surface incision.
And stop the perforation of those from the lowest part [of the body] to alleviate the pain in the lower parts.
Then care for those with what is appropriate for healing.
Chapter 42.
On the section of scrofulas that occur in the neck.
Many times these abscesses occur in the neck, ears, and throat; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck are usually those that arise between them, and the entire scrofula of these is their own membrane, as with nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recommended.
And the species of these scrofulas are nodes, as some of them are hard, some contain moisture, and those that are malignant which do not respond to care.
Therefore, in the one which you see with good position in the Touching, whose color is similar to that of a pigeon egg and is malignant throughout, and is not connected to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the archery [sinew], and is not protruding, it must be incised with a surface section from the upper part of the body to the lower part of the body, along line G to line B, cut it all around, and separate two lips of the scrofula with scissors or small scissors as necessary, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it gently.
And it is more cautious not to be incised the vein or nerve.
And let the spatula not be sharp, which does not adjust your hand with incision or disturb the patient, and which incises what is not necessary to incise; as if you were to incise a vein or archery [sinew] and forbid yourself from operating, the wound will become inflamed or irritated, and you should stop the wound with vitriol plaster or other powders that cause bleeding, tighten the wound, and leave it until the acuity of the abscess subsides and the wound becomes softened and turns into pus. When the blood is separated.
Therefore, return to your operation until you have finished.
And ask the patient if there is any cause of other small scrofulas, therefore incise those and clean those.
If the abscess is of the great vein in case of scrofula, then it should not be incised that scrofula from its root. Then press it firmly and let it fall by itself without causing harm.
And fill the wound with old lard which you have already smeared with Egyptian ointment, and treat it.
And if you incise the entire scrofula, then it is necessary that you sew the edges of the wound as soon as possible so that no unnecessary fluid accumulates.
But if you notice that there is excessive fluid due to the size of the scrofula, then it is necessary that you make an incision in the root of that, draw it out, provide stitches and treatment as prescribed.
And for scrofulas containing moisture, make a superficial perforation in the area where the maturation of the tumor is visible to you, and stop the perforation with a dressing made from the base of the body as we said before.
And provide perforation, with oil and similar substances, in order to dissolve what is rotten from the corruption. And when you notice that the wound has been cleaned, treat it with meat-based ointment until it is healed.
Chapter XLIII.
On the incision of the scrotum in case of an apostematic abscess (hydrocoele).
The ancients performed this incision on the scrotum, and I have never seen anyone in our land who has done it.
And this is the inscription of the teaching of those people.
But in men with hernia, the incision of the scrotum should be avoided, because it is not beneficial for the patient, since all the veins and the major vessels are located there.
But in those who have abscesses or hernia or two aurelhas (hydroceles) where the disease is not in the canal, it is necessary to make an incision of the scrotum to avoid the danger caused by strangulation.
Therefore, when it is desired to incise the scrotum, make an incision three or four circles from the circles of the scrotum, or a smaller incision along its width in the area between two circles according to the quantity, and the incision should be made in the tissue, not in the cartilage. This location is suitable for incision because it is devoid of flesh and the vessels of bleeding from it are hidden.
And if the doctor is poor, he should extend the string of the hydrocoele one inch and make an incision in the string to reach the canal, but avoid the vessels of blood if possible due to any reason.
And make an incision in the area of the canal as we have recommended; this refers to the section where the flaccid part comes out, which is the part that was detached and due to the abscess of the testicle.
Leave the wound open for a certain period of time.
Since the time has passed when perforation is feared, take two edges of the string of the wound and sew it only without the cartilage.
And provide medications that make the flesh heal until it is healed.
Albucasis says that the entire teaching which we have recommended is nothing but veins that some of these abscess patients have already drained the hydrocoele of the patient, and the patient has died, and his anus has been cut open, and others go to incise the epiglosso (epididymis) so that the patient breathes through the wound area for some respiration, and is saved from death.
Therefore, command that the wound remains open until the disease of the illness is consumed; and this is the disease for three days; and therefore, command that the wound be sewn up, and treat it until it is healed.
And what I have seen by my experience is that a servant took a knife and placed it in his scrotum and made an incision in one part of the trachea, and I was called to treat him, and I heard the death rattle as is the case with the dying, and I discovered the wound and stopped the bleeding that was coming out from the small wound.
Therefore, you were confessed that it had not incised a vein or guiding, and the wind came out of the wound, and I treated it until the wound was healed.
And do not harm the servant if there is no wound in the testicle, and another few days return to improve his condition.
Now tell you that in the incision of the scrotum there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
On the incision over an abscess that occurs in the scrotum outside, and is called hernia of the scrotum.
The abscess called hernia of the scrotum is a large abscess according to the color of the body and it occurs in women.
And it is of two kinds, either natural or accidental.
And in the natural, there is no need for treatment.
The accident (mishap) occurs in two ways, one of which resembles fatty nodules, and the other resembles an abscess caused by the knotting of an artery, and in that case, there is fear. And it is necessary to make a presumption (diagnosis) with caution only in the case of small ones. You should examine that and investigate it as described, and if it appears similar to fatty nodules, not suspended from any of the veins, then you should incise it in a similar manner as with other nodes, and extract it with water containing soap; but if not, you should carefully explore its entire nature, and place care over the area with something that is suitable for treatment until it heals.
Chapter forty-five.
On the cutting of types of nodes.
Of nodes, there are many species, and I have already said all their species in the division (classification).
And it is necessary to distinguish between a node and an abscess as if there were doubt.
Therefore I say that an abscess is heat and fever and violent pain until the ebullition of excess subsides; and it is a complete rotting that now stops the fever, the pain, and the heat.
But a node does not contain heat or fever or pain; it contains a cystic lion that is in the sack itself (cavity).
And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a boil and is made in the same way as a vesicle (blister), whether large or small, and they are according to two species, for they may be fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of moisture are multiple, as I said in the division.
Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of a node, you should expose it and examine it at its beginning with a probe that is called "intromes", according to the shape that will come as in the chapter that is close to this (one).
And this is the method of examination for abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this probe and insert it in the most humid place that you find in the abscess, and you rotate your fingers a little at a time until you know that the probe has penetrated the capsule.
And then place your hand at the end according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and then extract the probe and consider what comes out as evidence of it.
And if the running moisture (pus) is forgotten, no matter what color it is, you should incise it with a superficial cut as I have said in other abscesses.
And if from the evidence of the probe there is no moisture, then you know that it is fatty.
Dry it over it with the incision having the shape of a cross according to this form: As you have been taught, hang it up and remove the capsule from all sides with ease, and preserve the skin or sack (cavity) over it if possible, and extract the pus from that with the node.
But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract it healthy, and you should watch for any signs that come from it, and then you should extract it in pieces until there remains no cause.
For if there remains a cause, whether little or much, the node will return again according to its nature (character).
And if you see that a small part remains, then fill the wound with some sharp and corrosive powders (antiseptics) and strengthen the wound, and place care over it that is suitable for abscess cauterization, and treat the other with another treatment until it heals.
And if it is a large node, you should cut both lips of it (incise it) and treat it with something that encloses (heals).
But if the pulsating vein is opposite to it or not, you should catch (ligate) and fill the area with zinc tristat that is vitriol and let it stand for two days or three until the wound can be closed and stop the flow of blood; and then return to incise what has been broken from the node.
Chapter forty-six.
On the shapes of the probes necessary for cutting and perforating.
Of these, the shapes of the probes for incision are threefold: there are large ones, medium-sized ones, and small ones.
The shape of the large probe is as follows:
The shape of the small probe is as follows:
Let them be made of iron, of wood, or cut at the ends well, for a good fit in the abscesses (boils).
These are the shapes of experienced ones, and they are called albered, and one of them is called berid.
And it consists of three ingredients, of which one is large, the other medium-sized, and the third small.
The method of a great experienced one, prepare as follows:
The method of a medium-sized experienced one, prepare as follows:
The method of an inexperienced one, prepare as follows:
It is necessary that they be applied to abscesses, ulcers, fistulas, and boils because among those are caused by bones or other reasons.
Make them round, large, and lion-shaped, like large needles with which the edges are sewn, and they should be made of lead, iron, or silver, And the best are those made of lead.
And the experienced ones with black feathers place them on the cavities of the fistulas, which are reflected back to the source by their lightness and the reflected images.
And it consists of three ingredients: some are long, others medium-sized, and others short, depending on the size of the fistula and its tightness.
Recipe of a great experienced one with lead:
Recipe of a medium-sized experienced one with lead:
Recipe of a small experienced one with lead:
The recipes for the onions are of many ingredients, some of which are simple with a single curve, and there are three types: large, small, and medium-sized.
And among them are wild onions, and they come in three varieties.
And of the wild onions, some have two curves, and there are three types.
And among them are onions with three curves, and there are three varieties.
All of these are necessary for their use in the procedure.
Recipe for a small simple onion:
Recipe for a large onion with two curves: Recipe for a medium-sized onion with two curves: Recipe for a small onion with two curves:
Recipe for a large onion with three curves:
Recipe for a medium-sized onion with three curves:
And these are the recipes for scalpels with which they are cut and scraped open abscesses and boils, and there are three types: large, medium-sized, and small.
Recipe for a large scalpel:
Recipe for a medium-sized scalpel:
Recipe for a small scalpel:
The incisions made with these are sharp and the other incisions are not, and they should not be done haphazardly but rather with care to avoid cutting a vein or nerve during the scraping of the abscess, and for this purpose, the patient will heal quickly and achieve a small amount of peace through the cauterization of the boil.
These are the recipes for plasters, and they come in three types: large, medium-sized, and small, as you can see.
They should be made from lead and resemble glass with which alcohol is also made.
In the incision made with a pointed instrument hidden and along its edges, proceed to divide it both inside and out as desired, just like when you are sewing.
The shapes of needles, which should be hidden during the piercing of boils and not be felt by the patient, come in three types: large, medium-sized, and small. And these are the recipes for them:
The shapes of bellows used to extract the blood flow, and they come in three varieties: large, medium-sized, and small. The recipes are as follows:
The text states: "They are made of citrus, round with some length, and they are subtle." (In modern English)
It states: "You should make incisions with great, medium and small ventous bandages, in such a way that through them blood flow is quickened when necessary, and at the start, not medicine." (In modern English)
However, do not use them to drain blood in any part of the body, but only in fleshy parts, such as in the armpits of the thighs and chest, and underarms, breasts, stomach, loins, and similar to these, the fleshy areas humid. (In modern English)
And some (bandages) are made of those small tools resembling fish scalpels in this manner; through which blood is drained when it is done by phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or an artery. (In modern English)
And some bandages are made round in this manner:
Chapter xlvi. (In modern English)
Treatment of male breasts, which resemble female ones. (In modern English)
Some bandages should be inflated to the breasts of certain men, and they must rest as if beginning to become hairy, and inflate the breasts, and make them resemble female breasts, and we leave them attached, but separated. (In modern English)
To the one who has that (inflated breasts), it is necessary to make an incision with a lunar section as follows: from line B to line G, and remove all the growth, apply a plaster of carnation-colored medicine, sew together the two lips of the wound, and treat it until it heals. (In modern English)
But if the breast descends towards the groins and is softened like in women, then it should be cut into two parts above, with two lunar-shaped incisions, of which each one should be contained within the other so that the major line contains the minor line as follows: from line B to line G. And remove the cyst located between the two lips of the wound, clean the area, and administer what has been mentioned about stitching and powders until it heals. (In modern English)
And if you do not complete the incision that is necessary to be made due to the patient's distress and blood flow, then you must plaster the wound with a soft cushion submerged in corrosive ointment and leave it until it dissolves the tissue that is rotten, and then treat it until it heals. (In modern English)
Chapter xlvi. (In modern English)
On the perforation of abscesses that come from below the navel. (In modern English)
The abscesses that come from below the navel are of the species of scrofula, hard, which contain a pus sac. (In modern English)
And some of those that contain humidity; and those that contain humidity should be incised with a lunar section as follows: from line G to line B. And when all the pus is evacuated from the abscess, you must cover it with soft gauze and leave it for another day. (In modern English)
And the gauze should be left on and treated with appropriate ointment until it heals. (In modern English)
And if the abscess of the species of lymph nodes is or scrofula, then you should cut it as follows, as has been said in the section on scrofula. (In modern English)
But if the wound is extended in such a way that it exudes pus, then administer cautery as has been said before. (In modern English)
Chapter xlix. (In modern English)
On incision of abscesses that occur by arteries or veins. (In modern English)
When an artery is ruptured and the pus sac that is on top of it is consolidated, then multiple bandages occur as abscesses. And the signs by which it can be recognized that inflammation and abscess are from an artery or vein: for when the abscess is from an artery, it is usually long in the front part of the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel a stridor. (In modern English)
The one who is swollen due to a vein returns (or goes) to the manifestation of the body.
If incision on this abscess is a mistake, and more so in the areas without hairs (such as the armpits, genitals, neck, and other parts of the body); it is severe, therefore its cure must be avoided, and if it is in the external parts or at the head, it should be prevented.
However, on the one who is swollen due to inflammation of the artery's orifice, cut in the long incision along the spine; and then open the incision with scissors, and then cut the artery, and free it from the layers until it is exposed.
Then place an awl on it and make the awl penetrate through the other layer, and compress the artery with double force at two locationswhich causes the pulse to cease in the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
Then prick the location between the ligaments with a lancet and let all the blood that is in it flow out, until the abscess dissolves.
Then administer medicine that generates heat until the ligaments dissolve, and then heal it with suitable medication until it is healed.
If the abscess is due to incision of a vein, then you must have your hand on the abscess and with your other hand press the surrounding area, and then insert the lancet into the same area that you are holding; and let the thread double through it until you extract the blood from the other layer, and tie the abscess with a strong ligament as I have told you in the uva4 ligament of two parts at both ends of the thread.
If you fear that the thread will be extracted, then insert the needle into the whole abscess first, and tighten your four fingers around it.
Cut the abscess in half through its middle until all that is inside it comes out, then you cut away the excess surrounding tissue and leave what remains attached.
Place a plaster over the place where you have immersed it in wine and oil, and then administer the medication that is made with heat and moisture until it is healed.
The first capital (case) of an abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Similarly, an abscess can occur in the artery and vein, as well as in nerves when it occurs due to trauma or excessive labor, etc.
It is usually found in the locations of joints or ankles, or in any location where the joints are harmful.
The abscess is severe, and it resembles the color of the rest of the body, and it is in the larger of these locations when it is constricted with violence, causing the patient to feel like they are in a stupor.
The abscess is not aggregated in the front of the body, and therefore the surrounding tissue is left intact, and it is harmful in all parts and does not go to the sides or back.
Therefore, of those who are in the joints, it is not necessary to be wrapped with iron, because a strong blow will lead to contraction.
However, the surrounding tissue can be pierced with a lancet in the head or forehead. If the abscess is small, then cut it open with scissors and remove it by incision.
If it is large, then hang it with hooks and excise it, and then close the wound with sutures, and heal it until it is healed.
Case 11.
The twelfth case (capitulum) of an abscess that occurs in the belly due to a hernia.
It is necessary to press and examine the bellies of those and other parts of the body of those whom they are called "funguals" due to similarity with fungi, whose root is subtle, but its head is large; and already the lips of these are turned over, and it is small, and it is greatly enlarged.
I have already seen one, and in his belly there were two growths that resembled mushrooms, but there was no difference between the white ones, of small size.
And the lips of these were turned over and split open, and moisture flowed from it all the time.
Therefore, you should incise them and remove one weighing 18 ounces. And the other that weighed 6 ounces.
And the operation in the incision of theirs is that you consider if the patient is moist and the color of their wound is white, moist, and of subtle nature; then you shall incise it with a lance, and there should be cautery in your presence in the fire, because many observed veins should be expelled without blood; and if blood comes out, cauterize that.
If the patient is weak and afraid, do not incise with iron; but take a leaden file recently made, and press it against that wound, using the method I have mentioned; leave it for two days.
Then adjust the tightness of the leaden thread; thus, you should press the large piece of lead against it until it is detached and falls off by itself without labor.
But if it is of large size, there should be some cause for fear and fear in the incision of it, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
However, it may be possible for you to incise the thickness of it, and then cauterize that so that it does not return.
Then heal that until the wound is healed.
And beware that you do not incise a wound that is of black color, of little sensation, of regular appearance, because that is an abscess.
And remember the crab coming near to this.
Chapter LII.
On the treatment of the eminence of the navel.
The eminence of the navel is made for many causes; either by fissures of the abdomen that which is above the stomach and from there the tissue or intestine comes out as it does in other ruptures; or by blood that flows from a vein or an artery, as mentioned earlier, or by constricted windiness in it.
But if it is due to the rupture of the abdomen and discharge of tissue, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it is less painful, and it may appear in various positions. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then place that in position with the method I have mentioned, but with much greater diversity; and when you press that with your fingers as I said, it becomes hidden, and it tends to return; and forceful heat is there, and it must be intensely bathed and vigorously treated.
But if due to moisture, it is less painful and does not become hidden when pressed with the hand, nor does it become constricted or compressed.
And if due to blood, the abscess will appear with these signs, darkening in a descending manner.
But if due to dead flesh, the abscess is severe, large and hard, and it is packed according to a certain amount.
But if due to windiness, the touch of it is less painful.
And the operation there is that you consider if the eminence of the navel is due to blood from an artery, a vein, or windiness; in such a case, you must be prohibited from treating it, because there is fear and fear as I have taught you in the chapter on abscesses due to an artery and a vein.
And if the eminence of the navel is due to the intestine or tissue, you must command the patient to lie on their side and remain extended; then apply pressure in the entire circle around the navel, and command them to stay facing between your hands and to press firmly or gently in the circle of the navel over the area which you have marked with the probe; and stretch out the thickness of the abscess at the sides upwards with a large incision; and tie it in the circuit with strong thread or cord and the method of tying is decent.
Then cut the middle of the abscess extended over the ligament and insert the said instrument there to reach the intestine; and if you have not found or guarded it with the ligament, then you must extract all the contents and push the intestine back into the abdomen.
And if you have found the tissue, you take it with a large incision; and cut off its excesses from there.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, you must circle that and return to your operation; then take two needles and put them into the strong cords and insert the needles into the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a crisscross manner, as I have mentioned, and strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the area where the skin may stretch out and fall off by itself; or incise that when it has become thinner and may be pulled, and then heal that with what is necessary for the ointment until it is healed.
If the eminence of the navel is due to dead flesh in it or moisture, you must close the abscess as I have said and extract the blood or moisture, which you leave there, and then heal that with what is necessary and consolidate the area.
Chapter LIII.
On the treatment of crabs.
I have said in the division, of the species of crab and in what manner is the treatment of it with medicines, and that it is dangerous in it to cure it with iron because it should not be ulcerated; and I have said that crabs are generated from filthiness and caution in their treatment.
The ancient ones said that sometimes a cancer is in a place where it is possible to eradicate it, such as the skull which is located in the breasts or in the chest and resembles those of the limbs designated for extracting all of it, especially when it begins small.
But when it becomes old and large, one must not be too eager to attack it, for I cannot heal of it nor have I seen another who has, nor that it has been achieved by anyone.
And the operation in that place is when it is designated as such, that you precede and allow the patient to rest and purge black bile several times, and apply cautery to it, if there is a clear indication of inflammation.
Then prepare the patient with the preparation in which the operation is located, and forewarn him about the cutting tools that are required; and ensure that all sides are concave with a good sewing kit, before any reason for the pain remains. Allow the blood to flow, and do not incise it lightly, press the places, and wipe the thick blood with your hand or an instrument that you can use of the available instruments.
But if it is against your will to incise thick blood from a vein or an artery, then cauterize that immediately until the flow of blood stops, and take care of it with other care until it heals.
Chapter 47.
On the treatment of edema.
We have already recommended, in the division, of the types of edema caused by water, and the signs of each type, on the treatment of it with medicines.
And the type that is treated with iron is only the one type of edema caused by jaundice, and it should not be approached with iron for the types of tympanites or hypostatic edema, as that is deadly.
And when you have treated this type of tympanitic edema with medicines and it does not improve, consider that if the patient has already become debilitated or is suffering from another type of edema such as in the throat or abdomen like those, then be careful not to treat it with iron, as there is fear over that.
If you see the patient in good condition and he has no other disease than edema alone, and is not a child or an old person, then the method of operation for him is to lift him up with your hands and make him lie on his back, expose his abdomen with your hand, direct the water from the part below the navel towards the opening outside, and take a spoon-shaped spatula as follows:
and is sharp on both ends like a spoon, but is of some short length, so that in the operation with it, you do not enter the intestine, and hurt him.
And consider whether the production of edema is from the intestines, as then you must be at least three fingers below the navel on the right side above the pubis.
But if the production of edema is due to liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side below the navel by three fingers.
And if the production of edema is due to spleen disease, then your incision should be on the right side.
And it is necessary that your incision be above the ribs where you want the patient to lie so that fluids do not accumulate at that location frequently.
Then perforate the entire skin with the instrument and enter into that incision, lift your hand with the spatula between the skin and the abdominal cavity and scoop out that fluid; and if a thumb's width or more is present.
Then pierce the abdominal cavity up to where the spatula reaches the location of fluid. And take out that fluid and insert an instrument of this shape: and is similar to a silver cannula; it is made of silver or ivory or latten leather, at the lower end of it there is a small incision, and on the sides of it are three incisions: two on one side and one on the other side; and the extremity of it is cut off in the manner of a quill, like this:
And at the upper end of it is a band, so that when the instrument reaches the water, you immediately disconnect it from the instrument, evacuating the water in the best possible quantity, for if you evacuate more than necessary at that time, the patient will likely die due to resolution of his animal spirit, or the purgative effect which is approaching death.
But evacuate according to the strength of the fluid and according to what the signs of the patient's pulse and his condition indicate to you.
Then remove the instrument and retain the water that causes it, as it should be immediately stopped by the skin that closes the incision which you are recommended to pierce in that manner.
And repeat the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates it, and remove a small amount of water, do this for several days out of fear, and be careful not to leave too much water but only a little.
If you fear for the patient and let out a large amount of water from them, then cure that one with burial in hot sand and stir it up with a stick, and wait by the sun for a long time; and cure that one with drying medications until they are healed.
Burn on the stomach, and the spleen and pouch near the removal of water, according to what I have reported in what came before.
Chapter 15.
On the treatment of children who are born with unopened urinary locations.
Sometimes one of the children is born from the mother's womb and the head of its mixture is not perforated (or it is too narrow or not in its place).
Therefore, it is necessary to perform perforation on him immediately after birth with a thin probe according to this method:
And tie a small leaden peg in place with thread, and leave it for three days or four.
And when he wants to urinate, remove the plug and return it afterward.
If you do not remove the lead, there is a possibility that the urine will not be able to reach this opening.
But one with a narrow perforation should be treated with a leaden peg, as mentioned earlier, for several days until it is widened.
However, those in whom the perforation is not in its proper place, it must be led out (since one of them, the one that was born with a perforated anus, cannot urinate at the partition within, until he raises his anus with his hand to the partition above; and this is not for generation, because semen cannot reach the mother according to proper procedure, and it is a serious illness).
The method of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, and you grab the head of the anus with your left hand and pull it out violently, and cut the tip of the head of the anus at its perineum with a sharp probe, as when cutting a feather or any part, so that the meconium of him resembles the head of the anus and falls into the proper place as needed.
Be careful in your blood flow operation, because such things often happen; and pause when you find that the blood is flowing, and cure the wound until it heals.
Chapter 61.
Swelling that occurs on the foreskin at the head of the penis, caused by inflammation, discoloration, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Swellings that happen in this area on the penis are inflammations.
And of these swellings, one is malignant and the other is not.
The non-malignant swelling should be suspended with fine thread and cut into it until it is completely removed; place your hand over the affected area with warm Egyptian oil, and apply that for a while until it is healed.
And if the swelling is malignant, of a dark color, then it is necessary to administer cautery near its incision and to treat it.
However, if the swelling is on the uncircumcised foreskin of the penis and one part of the swelling is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, it is necessary to remove the inner swelling first until it consolidates; then treat the outer swelling, because when you treat the outer swelling at the same time, there is no guarantee that it will not be injured.
And also swelling and discoloration occur in the genitals and foreskin, so it is necessary to evacuate everything that has been spoiled or is about to be corrupted or already corrupted; place a line made of honey, which has been coated with flour made from milled barley and ground walnuts and crumbled almonds.
And treat that area with the other treatment until it is healed.
But if there is a discharge of blood, administer the following method of cautery:
because cautery is useful in two ways at the same time: for stopping blood flow and for treating an ulcer when it is spoiled.
And if the head of the penis is rotten and destroyed completely at that time, it is necessary to insert a lead tube into the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not happen except in those cases where the foreskin is healthy, and circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to ulcer or abscess), it is necessary to excise with a blunt probe until the pus is resolved and the head of the penis is completely freed from all sides.
And if it is difficult to desire that area, it is necessary that you excise the foreskin and head of the penis with any cause, because the foreskin, when it is thin, is easily perforated due to its delicacy.
And separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a thin blade that has been softened in warm water to prevent it from adhering again.
And let it be treated with strong wine until it is consolidated.
Chapter 71.
On the purification of children and the treatment of those who have undergone circumcision.
Circumcision is not a continuous cure like other diseases: however, since it is our operation and our will, and the loss of that part in children is necessary, it is essential to assign the best possible operation and way for their salvation.
Therefore, the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they did not use it in their laws, and it was only adopted later through experimentation, which caused most craftsmen and barbers to use a new knife and torches; they used oil and an incision made with the nail.
And I have already prohibited all these methods and not found a better method of circumcision with scissors, oil, and the nail, because many times the skin is damaged more than necessary, because the skin of the foreskin has two layers, and one layer remains behind, and it is easily punctured again and certain pain occurs. And the method of circumcision that is performed by a scalpel and is manual, used by shoemakers, is not guaranteed to make an incision at the tip of the male organ, because it easily injures the tissue within it.
In the operation of the nail, beware that you observe the iron and corrupt your operation. The baby's cloaca is short by nature, and it often expands in such a manner that there is no need for modification, and I have seen this.
But the modification with forceps and sutures made of thread, the goodness, I have discovered through experience, for forceps are proportionally incised, therefore the sharpness that is above is similar to the sharpness that is below; and so when you press your hand proportionately with two sharps, and make an incision in accordance with a comparison at a certain time; and it causes compression of the suture thread with a shape containing the cloaca of the entire area, with which there is no chance of error.
The method of the first operation is that you make the child lie down more, especially if it is one who understands a little, and do not do anything but put the forceps in the child's anus only, and let it rest for another day.
Then make him happy in all the manner that is possible for you, according to what he understands. Then make him remain among your hands prepared, and not be scared; and hide the forceps in your hand or under your foot, so that the child does not see it nor any of the other tools.
Then enter your hand into the anus and inflate the cloaca, and pull it in so that the head of the anus is outside, and then modify what has been added to it due to constipation.
The shape of the forceps used for modification, this is its shape:
One should not be sharp on both ends and the other should be sharp, with the handle of the claw not exceeding their length, and the length of the two blades equal to the length of two handles.
But the error in modification is that too much and excessive force is exerted on the cloaca internally, or a part of it should not be incised.
Therefore, you must extend the cloaca from your side with your nail before the incision and make the incision equally.
And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with forceps and make the incision.
But if it has been three days and the swelling remains at the anus without incision, then you let it go in so that the swelling is cauterized and excoriate it with ease, and make the incision as you are prepared.
Take care not to cut the head of the anus, for that will not help.
And therefore, cure it with what the plague is consolidated by the powders that you have recommended in the treatise on powders.
If the cloaca is incised too much and the edges are observed above, that will not help.
But cure it with what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LVIII.
On the treatment of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by oppression caused by stones or congealed blood, or by poisons or foreign bodies, and similar to those mentioned in the division of treatments.
And if it is not resolved as mentioned earlier and the cause is very serious in the patient, then it is necessary to administer extraction with an instrument called syringe, the shape of which is: It should be made of silver and be slightly concave, similar to a goose quill cannula with the thinness of a long ray about the size of a palm and a half, at the end of which there should be a narrow tube.
The method of expelling urine through the instrument is to take the forceps and insert it into the wool or cotton with good lubrication; then place the forceps' arms in the area behind the syringe, and incise with forceps if any cause requires the cotton, but insert it into the cannula with vigor. And then advance the syringe little by little and with a bead and oil of hog.
Wash the patient over the bed (or couch), wrap the bladder of him and the penis in wet oil (or liniment), olive oil and egg yolk.
Insert the probe gently into the urethra until it reaches the bladder; fold the penis over at its root and push the probe in there; then push the probe into the bladder and let it pass through to the patient's bottom, ensuring that the probe is not turned aside from its course, but goes straight into the bladder.
Then stretch the patient's foreskin gently with a small amount of wool, because the urine dries the wool.
Then remove that and use the linen for healing the urine, and use a probe, do not stop until the bladder is evacuated and the patient finds relief.
Chapter LIX.
On the quality of clysterization of the bladder with a syringe and similar instruments, which are suitable for this purpose.
When the bladder has an ulceration or abscess, or blood is congealed in it, or there is a hard stone, and you want to distill waters and medicines in it, then do so with an instrument called clampcedra, and this is its shape:
but if it is blocked outside, it is closed. And in that case there are three breaks: two on one side, as can sometimes happen.
At the beginning, there should be a depression where you place what is to be injected, according to its quantity, without addition, until when any cause is drawn out by the humors, it is drawn, and when it is expelled, with water it is drawn, and when it is long, as happens in battles at sea with a clampcedra which contains naphtha.
To prevent moisture in the bladder, insert the tip of a cloth into the moisture, and pull with the water that is pushed from above, since the moisture is drawn into the concavity of the cloth.
Here is the continuation of the sentence to translate:
The shape of the thin clyster that bladder is clysterized, and this is its shape:
Make the catheter out of silver or copper, with the tip resembling a small feather and the canal curving inside.
Take the bladder in motion and stop it where you want to clysterize the moisture in the bladder, then tie that moisture between two strong ligatures with double thread, and heat that moisture over fire.
Then insert the tip of the clyster into the anus.
Then hold your hand over the bladder with the moisture and structure so that the patient feels when the moisture has reached the bladder.
If the bladder is not present, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; perforate the entire circumference with a strong needle, and then insert the needle strongly in those holes so that it rotates; and add water to the circle as you do with an ointment container, stopping when you reach the moisture you want, oil and waters.
Then tie it in the instrument and do as you did with the bladder, and press your hand inward until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
On the extraction of stones.
We have already mentioned in the division the species of stones and their cure with medications, and the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and stones generated in the bladder, as well as the signs of that.
We have mentioned the stone operation with the hand and sectioning (incision).
The stone generated in the bladder specifically is that which is lodged in the bladder.
And they are explaining it with clear and brief exposure.
Therefore, it is said that stones generated in the bladder mostly occur in children; and the signs of this are that the urine that is expelled from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in sand; and the patient scratches his genitals, and often passes blood, and he is dressed; and with this he pushes out the feces.
And the healing of children from this is generally achieved before they reach the age of 13; and it is difficult to cure in the elderly. In young people it is more likely to occur among them.
The larger the stone and the easier its cure; if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we approach the cure of that, it is necessary at the beginning of that to clean the patient with a cautery which extracts all the wound that is in their intestines; for that wound sometimes prevents the emergence of the stone, you must investigate its location.
Then place the patient with their feet and ensure they are flat on their back so that the stone descends to the opening of the bladder or sometimes jumps from its location.
Then have that person's bladder area prepared and the patient's legs spread apart to make the entire bladder area decline towards the sides.
Then pierce it and completely empty it.
If you feel the stone in the area, then cut into it immediately.
And if you do not feel the entire stone with your touch, it is necessary that you anoint it with oil on your left hand, if the patient is a child, or with flour if they are older, and insert it into their anus. Then pierce the stone that is inside. And turn it bit by bit into the neck of the bladder.
Then press on it with your hand and expel it outward through the sides, away from the location where you made the incision.
Command the minister to press on the bladder with their hand; command another minister to extend their right hand over the thighs and with their left hand raise the lower part of the back, in the area where the incision was made.
Then insert an instrument like this: Cut the space between the anus and the thighs, not in the middle, towards the left side; make the incision over that stone and your hand should be in the anus, making a transverse incision so that the incision outside is wide and narrow inside according to the amount of stone that can be removed at all possible, but not too much, forcibly compressing your hand in the anus, which presses the stone, and this should be done without difficulty.
You know that from a stone there is some part that has angles and edges, which makes it difficult to extract it.
From that (stone), there is something similar to a lion's head, round and easily extracted.
If it's the part with angles and edges, align it in the crack.
If it's not like that (round and easily extracted), then you must find a way to deal with it, or you should grip it properly, the end of which should be similar to a file against the stone, and do not lose hold of it; or introduce a thin curved instrument into it.
But if you cannot deal with it, then widen the crack a little, and if you see blood flow, cauterize that with triturated vitriol.
But if the stone is more than one, first press your hand into the bladder opening and slide inside it; then insert a small instrument close to that; and proceed similarly if there are multiple stones.
If the stone is large, ignorance is that you insert it with a large incision, because one of two things happens to the patient: either death or continuous urine distillation, due to which the location is not completely solidified.
But administer the expulsion from inside before it's forgotten, or use forceps to break the stone inside and extract it in pieces.
Once you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloeswood and dragon's blood juice, and cauterize it. Place a piece of cloth dipped in oil and vinegar, or in rose oil and warm water, over it, to ensure that the pus is cauterized and can drain.
And place the patient on their side, and do not loosen the bindings for three days.
And when it has been loosened, bind the area with warm water and oil, and nurse it with antiseptic and diaphoretic remedies until it is healed.
But if there is pus in the wound that has become cauterized and corrosive, like when blood is frozen in the bladder (and this is known as urine retention), then insert your instrument into the wound and drain the blood, for if it remains, it causes bladder inflammation and putrefaction.
And wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and with any antidote appropriate for it, using remedies suitable for its healing until it is healed.
And during all the healing process, you must check and adjust the medications that have been applied to the area.
If the stone is small and located in the penis meat, and there is also urine retention, treat it with the remedy recommended before achieving a section, as prolonged use of this treatment is accused of causing a section; and I have already mentioned this, and it's that you take a perforator with an iron handle, which has the following shape:
with a triangular tip, sharp, set in a rod or tube.
And grasp the scissors and use it to cut the penis away from the stone, so that it does not return to the bladder.
And insert the iron rod into the penis, perforating it easily until the perforator reaches the stone. And rotate the perforator with your hand in the small stone gradually, and you will perform the perforation of it until the other side penetrates through; because the urine will soon be released.
And press your hand over the broken part of the stone from the side of the penis, because it is crushed and forgotten with urine; and the patient is healed.
But if this treatment is not suitable for some reason that prevents it, then grab a pair of scissors below the stone, and another pair above the stone. And cut through the penis at the location between two veins. And remove it. And loosen the bandage and remove the blood clot that has formed in the wound.
And there is no need for a pair of scissors below the stone, only to prevent it from returning to the bladder; and the other bandage above is not necessary, because when the scissors are loosened near the edge of the stone, the wound heals again.
And because of this, when you loosen the bandage above, you must raise the wound edges, or you must return to your task, and the wound will heal again as I said.
Chapter LXI.
On the extraction of stones in women.
Stones in women are rarely produced.
If a stone is found in any of those [areas], then the cure becomes difficult and is forbidden by many methods.
The one who is most affected by it is a woman, especially if she is old.
And the second is that you will not find a woman who knows how to discern whether she should show herself to the doctor if she is chaste or one of those women who have husbands.
The third is that you will not find a woman skilled in this art, especially the operation with the knife.
The fourth is that the location for cutting on a stone in women is long from the location of the stone, therefore it requires deep incision, and therein lies fear.
If necessity compels you to do so, then it is necessary that you take a woman who is skilled in this, and she must be experienced.
If you are deprived of that one, then you should seek a skilled and discreet woman, or present an experienced matron knowledgeable in the affairs of women, or a woman who has partially mastered this art.
So present her and command her to do everything that you will tell her, from the examination of the stone to the beginning; this is because she must observe whether the woman is a virgin, in which case it is necessary for her to insert her finger into her vagina and search for the stone.
Therefore, if you find her, let her go without her finger, and then command her to incise it.
But if she is not a virgin, then command the matron to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and search for the stone, with her left hand on the bladder and good understanding of it.
Therefore, if you find her, it is necessary to gradually guide the catheter from the bladder opening towards the part where its virtue reaches the spot and brings about the recognition of the stone.
Then you should incise the spot of the matron's hand and recognize the stone from any side it is located and center the stone in that area, but the finger should not be withdrawn from the catheterized stone.
And the incision should be small at first; then insert the blade into that incision, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the incision according to its size, as you know the stone will be extracted from that location.
And know that the types of stones are pebbles; some are small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and have many sides.
Therefore, you should know how many types there are in order to identify what you want to indicate.
If you see blood flow, adjust in the location of the catheter and leave it for an hour until the bleeding stops, and then return to your operation until the stone is extracted.
And prepare the instruments that I have mentioned for the removal of stones in men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
If you see blood flow and know that the expulsion of blood is due to the bowel that is incised, then stop powder on that spot and close it with plaster and stricture dressing, but do not repeat this; leave the stone and do not extract it, for a strong blow may kill the patient. And take care of the wound.
When the flow of blood has subsided after several days and the spot has dried up, then return to your operation until the stone is extracted.
Chapter LXII.
On incision for strangulated hernia.
A strangulated hernia is not something else but an accumulation of moisture in the white belt that lies beneath the abdominal muscles and contains the bladder, and it is called a sac.
And some times it is in the small intestine which nature prepares for itself in the part of the bladder, until it is cut and becomes another bladder; and that is the white belt containing the bladder, but it is not really so.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which occurs in the genitals, because this material accumulates there, and sometimes it happens due to a blow struck on the genitals.
This humidity has moving colors, for the color of it is either turning to yellow or blood-red, purple, black and slimy, or white and watery, and it is that which is most harmful.
The signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is: for if it is in the white area that we have mentioned, then the abscess descends, turning red around at the base in such a way as a figure of an hourglass, and the genital area appears, for the humidity contains it all.
And if the humidity is in the groin area, then the abscess descends at the hour and from this it is estimated that it is another water.
And if the humidity is between the groin and the white area, cut it from below at the centimeter mark.
To know the color of the humidity, you should express the color of the humidity in the abscess after it has been cut open, and according to what is found inside the abscess, judge what is inside it.
Therefore when we come to the cure of it with iron, it is necessary that we command the patient to be bled if that is possible for you, and sometimes empty the body of it.
Then lay something on top of his back for some reason a little higher, and place many cloths under him.
Then set yourself to the left side of him, and command the servant to follow on his right side, who will extend his arm from one end to the other from the groin area to the division of the navel of the belly.
And then take a broad spatula and cut the groin area from the middle point towards the pubis.
Make the incision in a straight line, evenly spaced from the line where the pubic hair should be, until it reaches the white area encompassing.
Excise that, observe, and keep yourself for this so that you do not injure it; and your excision with which you have excised it by the division should appear suspended in the hourglass shape and subtly scrutinize the excision according to the quantity as possible.
And then pierce the swollen white area with a wide puncture and drain all the water.
And then separate the labia majora and labia minora of the incision with stitches, and extend the white area to the divisions above; and do not touch the groin area, and pierce the white area in such a way as is possible for you. Pierce it completely or in pieces, and especially its thin side, for if you do not scrutinize the incision of it carefully, it is not assured that the water will not return.
If the water proceeds from outside the cavity at the time of your operation, when you have completed the incision of the white area, return it inside, and then sew the two labia majora and labia minora of the groin area with sutures, and care for it in this way as for other wounds until it is healed.
If you find the water corrupted by another illness, it is necessary that you remove the vessels that are the supports, and drain the water, and care for it as we said before.
But if the water accumulates in two divisions it is known that they are hernias; therefore incise that division as you have done in the other evenly; and if it seems to be an operation to you, then do it.
And then you abstain from blood, and enter into the incisions with wool immersed in oil or unscented oil; and place another wool that you have immersed in wine and oil over it, and expand it over two groins and the navel area; and place above cloths folded and powdered, and lie them over it according to this pattern:
And then press two cloths and fill them with carmine-colored wool according to this pattern; and the extremities that are pressed by hand or wet wool should be secured with structure in the sleeve of the shirts, and one of the extremities will take hold of the buttock towards the back, and the second will take hold at the division of the pubis, and two extremities on two thighs below and two others on two legs above, and the entire structure should be adjusted in the sleeve of the shirts.
Sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cautery in place of incision with iron; and you take a subtle surgical cautery and make an incision in the groin area, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white area containing the water is uncovered, and then you take another cautery according to this pattern: and is shaped like the Greek letter "".
Approach and pierce that blister, and burn it until all its moisture is expelled.
Then remove the blister with tweezers, excise it, and cauterize it with a fine burning tool; incise as deep as you can until all is excised; be careful not to let the fire touch the surrounding flesh.
Know that this operation is slow and safe with little bleeding, and better than an operation with incision.
But if you encounter an abscess at the time of incision or cauterization, or bleeding, then you must treat the cause that prevents you from doing so, with treatment as needed according to what has been said above.
But if the patient is weak and does not expect a second operation due to its horribleness, then perform perforation as recommended; and it is when certain that you, according to what has been said about the meaning, that the hernia is harmless.
Then you must position the patient over some raised cushion, pierce the abscess in the lowest part of it with a lancet and let it drain, then stop the draining by pressing on the area for as long as the length of the body.
And make the incision wide enough for all the water to flow out.
Then press on the area and hold it closed to keep in the remaining water. And care for it until the wound is healed.
But if there is obstruction of the water in that moment when you perforate it: and this is not done except because the white pus in the orifices of the wound causes obstruction and prevents the discharge of the water, then you must put a medicine or tool into the wound with which the water is removed from the abscess, whose shape is specified; or adjust in the opening of the wound a small cup.
Know that the water returns and is retained for about two months or more; when it has been retained, then it should be perforated according to the aforementioned method, as the patient will thus pass his days.
Chapter LXIII.
On incision for fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Know that in the incision of this hernia there is great risk of peril in the larger preparations; for which I recommend dismissal and being saved by the better option.
And I remember the operation on that and the characteristics of abscesses.
Therefore, say that abscesses arise in bodies composed of genitals and are caused by various reasons: either by acute aggressive fluid accumulation in the genitals, which is poured into them, or by trauma.
The color of the abscess depends on the body's color, and it is not observed in pain, and it is a severe abscess.
A flat abscess is leprous, whose color is dark, and it does not have an opening.
Some swellings are caused by the constriction of the arteries, and by inflammation of them as a result of which their memory is recalled, or by inflammation of veins.
But that which is due to inflammation of the arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when it is pressed with your fingers, and it does not need to be touched.
But that which is due to inflammation of the vein is not dispersed by any cause, you must press it with your fingers.
And it is possible that incision may be performed on this type of tissue and on others; and you should incise the ligaments of the genitals, and hold open the wound above, and remove the white pus, and release the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, and tie them, and incise the suspensory ligament that you release from all parts of the wounds of the flesh.
Therefore, if the wound has already been consolidated, then you must extract the pus and incise it.
And if there is adhesion for some reason of the abscess or between vessels, then you must release all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
But if it is the natural growth of flesh in the location of the adhesion that is behind, then you must incise all of it and extract the pus as previously stated.
Therefore, when your operation is complete, you should fill the wound with wool soaked in oil and wine, and care for it with other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter LXIV.
On the treatment of hernia that is due to a rupture.
Vitz is an abscess enveloped by some covering similar to a scrotum with the softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult exercise and walking for the patient.
And in the treatment of this illness, there is fear due to the reason which was previously recalled.
However, it is necessary to perform the operation according to what was done earlier.
Say that it is necessary to position the patient over a raised cushion; and then spread the suspensory ligaments of the testicles at the sides; and then take hold of the ligaments of the genitals with your fingers near the base of the scrotum, and have another servant extend them forcefully.
Approach and make an incision with a sharp spade across the right side of the vessels, until the vessels are exposed.
Peel off completely from all sides as you said in the extraction of arrowheads that are in the temples.
Then insert into it a double-edged needle, and let it be inserted at the first place where you find blood, and then withdraw it in the second place. Approach and make an incision in the middle location with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and extract what has been added from the foul and rotten humors.
Approach and treat the wound with other remedies for the wounds that are intended to heal, in order to prevent the vessels from becoming infected by one of the two genera, because it is not bad for this.
However, if blood is found in all the vessels, it is necessary that the testicles be removed or that the testicles become blocked by the vessels, so as to deprive them of all nutrition through the incision of the vessels and to make them shrivel up, or be blocked for no benefit to those.
Chapter LXV.
On the treatment of internal hernia.
The onset of this hernia occurs due to a separation that extends along the cephace (diaphragm) over the abdomen from the angles of the stomach's mirror, so that the intestines of that breakage extend to one of the intestinal sacs.
This rupture can be either of the cephace or outside it, and these two types occur for various reasons: blows, falls, shocks, loud noises, or due to elevation from some serious cause, or similar circumstances.
The sign of this (rupture), when it is due to extension of the diaphragm, is that it occurs gradually over a long period, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess that forms within the hernia near the preon (anus) because the diaphragm presses the intestine.
The sign of this (rupture), when it is due to separation of the diaphragm, is that at first it causes intense pain suddenly; and an abscess appears different from the nearby proper anus, and that is precisely due to the intestine; and the body of it extends beyond the edges of the diaphragm.
Sometimes, the intestine is forgotten outside, and this internal hernia is called zirbal hernia.
Sometimes it is made with ventosity (introducing air), and sometimes it runs in the intestine fissure and is retained there, and this is a grave danger for the patient, and sometimes it causes painful swelling and especially when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of the species (types) of this disease, fear arises, so it is necessary to avoid hunting (surgery) in that area.
The method of the operation for that (procedure) is to command the patient to push the intestine with their hand towards the inner parts of its cavity, if it returns, then lift up their hips and place a cushion under them, and raise their legs.
Then stretch the cord which is the cord of the testicles towards the inner parts, and make an incision through the entire cord; then insert your fingers into both labia of the section as much as necessary to cut the section with them.
And if the section, according to what is possible for you, can be forgotten (lost).
Then excise those areas which are the root of the spermatic cord, until the hard white core of each side is exposed.
Then you insert your finger into the testicle, between the white core and where the cord is located, and separate it from the tissue surrounding it in the area behind the testicle.
Then take hold of the spermatic cord at the front of each side, and with your left hand pull out the white core, lifting it to the incision site; and order the assistant to stretch out the testicle and dissolve the adhesion behind it using a suitable solution.
And look for the cause of the hernia that is not covered by the hard white cord. But if you find any cause, then remove it from the abdomen.
Then make an incision in the area behind the spermatic cord, following the section from which blood and pus will flow as we have previously recommended.
Then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound and wait for it to dry; and administer the stitch that we have recommended (and sometimes the white core is cauterized, as previously mentioned to prevent bleeding from flowing, which can happen frequently); leave the stitch until it falls out on its own.
But if the wound heals slowly, then apply hot water poultice and wait for it to dry before removing it as previously instructed.
And care for the wound with other methods of wound care until it heals.
Chapter 66.
On scrotal hernias.
In this type of hernia, there is no need for surgery with iron instruments.
The ancients believed that the hernia caused by fluid was treated in this way as we have previously recommended in the case of water-filled hernias; which is to tie vessels around the section with ease, and then squeeze them gently in the surrounding area where the abscess is located, until the vessels burst.
Care for the wound as previously instructed until it heals.
Chapter 67.
Of the dislocation that occurs in ankles.
Sometimes, a fracture occurs in the ankles as we have said, and here is what should be done.
And do not give the genitals any cause for hernias in the genitals; and if it happens, that is little; and return it to its place at all times.
However, if the time passes and the hernia does not return to its place by itself, a slit should be made in the scrotum before the hernia can pass into the scrotum; this happens due to the extension of the scrotum which is located in the ankles as we have said, causing the scrotum to stretch out and become soft, and then it should be closed and sutured.
And its treatment is with a cautery as previously mentioned.
Sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner: and the patient bites on his two hands between yours, and then the area of the wound caused by the abscesses is dried out by cutting off circulation to that area using a ligation as wide as three fingers' width.
Then tightly bind the white scrotum under the codpiece until it is exposed.
Then grab the penis and place it over the area in question of the scrotum, and press on the abdomen at the same time.
Then sew up the two areas of concern on the tip of the penis with stitches.
Then extract the tip of the penis and do not open the scrotum completely, nor should the hernia bulge out, nor any other cause as you know in treating intestinal hernia.
And treat the wound by curing the ulcers, and when the intestines are exposed, clean it and restore the wound until it is healed; because the scrotum contracts and the bulging area of the hernia is not closed.
Cauterization is better in this case, as it is closer to health.
Chapter LXVIII.
On softening of the scrotum of the testicles.
Sometimes the scrotum of the testicles in some men is softened due to this reason, because the tissues between it are softened and its care should be taken.
Therefore it is necessary for the one who treats it to make the patient lie down on his back and incise the entire scrotum, which is softened over the natural scrotum; and then sew up two lips with stitches.
And if you wish, sew in the beginning the excess of the softened scrotum with three or four stitches and make a firm stitch.
Then incise between the stitches; and treat any other wounds until they heal and the intestines return to their place.
Chapter LXIX.
On castration.
Know that castration is forbidden by our law, but since I remember it in this book, its remembrance is necessary only in two cases: the first is when the doctor needs to know about it if he is interrogated on the matter; and the second case is because we sometimes need castration of other animals for our benefit, such as horses, cattle, pigs, and similar animals.
And so I say that castration is done in two ways: either by strangulation or by incision with a cut.
When castration is done by strangulation, the method of operation is that we should restrain the animal in hot water until its genitals become soft and lined up hanging downwards. Then grab them with your hand until they are resolved and do not appear again.
In a castration done by incision and cut, you must have the animal and press the scrotum of the testicles with your left hand.
Then lift the scrotum and incise over each hernia with one cut until two hernias protrude.
Then incise those which you will remove. Do not leave any cause on those parts of the scrotum, but only the thin part which is over the veins.
This method of castration done by strangulation is better because strangulation lightly reduces any cause for the testicles in the animal to desire coitus.
Treat the wound until it is healed.
The hundred and twenty-first capital.
Title: On the Treatment of Hermaphroditism.
In males, hermaphroditism occurs in two ways: the first is when it appears in a person with an undeveloped scrotum containing both testicles, where there is a structure like a female vagina covered by skin.
And some cases of this condition, the urine is found in the scrotum.
In women, there is another special case: it is that the vagina is like two male testicles in size, with a little less than half of their total length, similar to male genitalia and two testicles.
The treatment is of three types: two for men and one for a special case in women. It is necessary to incise the affected tissue and close it tightly to prevent the infection from spreading, and when you treat that area, also take care of other wounds.
In the second male case where there is urine in the scrotum, neither treatment nor operation should be performed on it.
Title: The Twenty-first Capital.
Treatment of ingrown nails and thickened skin due to female causes.
An ingrown toenail that is pressed in due to natural causes should be trimmed and cared for regularly; and in some cases, it may become enlarged in some women so much that it spreads like in men and enters the vagina.
After that, you must remove the excess ingrown nail with your hand or scissors.
And do not cut too deeply, especially around the root of the nail, to prevent bleeding.
Then take care of that area until it is healed.
Born flesh is flesh that grows inside the mother's womb until it is born and swollen lees are formed outside the vagina resembling caul (and for this reason some doctors call it "cauda") - so it is necessary to incise and care for it in the same way as ingrown nails, and heal it until it is healed.
Title: The Twenty-second Capital.
Treatment of scrofula (scrofula is a type of tuberculosis affecting the lymph nodes).
Scrofula is when the vagina is not perforated or narrowed. It can be natural or accidental.
Accidental is caused by disease that has occurred before, and it can be due to the growth of excessive tissue or by subtle or thick cysts.
It can be caused in the root of the uterus, in the costa (ribs) of the womb, in the upper or lower abscesses of the body, and you must avoid sexual intercourse, pregnancy, and childbirth, as well as prohibit menstruation.
The detection of this condition is performed by the midwife, if obstruction is visible, it should be palpated with fingers; but if it is not visible, you must look for it using the touch or the ray (a tool used for internal examination).
If obstruction is due to subtle cysts and is near the two labiae (lips of the vagina), you should probe it and break it open.
And you must place your fingers on both lips of the vagina, and then gently feel for any abnormalities.
The woman should lie on her back with her legs spread apart and her knees bent. Then gently stretch the labiae apart, using force if necessary, until the subtle cyst is broken, and the obstruction is alleviated.
Then take cotton, dip it in oil, and place it over the affected area to keep it moist. Frequently apply warmth with a cloth and man (hot water bottle) for a day to prevent the incision from healing too quickly.
If the cyst is large and thick, it is necessary to make an incision with a lance or a myrtle leaf.
If the obstruction is caused by a tumor, then suspend it with a string, and cut into it.
And are the medications which stop blood flow without biting, such as opium, dragon's blood, and henna, bound in oil of alum.
Then administer a wide leaden cannula to prevent the wound from healing too easily.
Hold it for several days and apply heat to it.
Let it heal with the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
Sometimes it happens in the major birth of other meats, and then it is necessary to cut according to this method. If it is an abscess of crabs (hydrocele), the abscess of crabs, which is in the major one, should not be opposed to iron in any way.
Chapter LXXIII.
On the cure of hemorrhoids, and of tail and red piles that happen in the conchus of women.
Hemorrhoids are recognized as the openings of large veins, from which a continual flow of blood proceeds; and when hemorrhoids are old and have turned into ulcers.
I have already said in the division the species of those and the signs of those, and I will say the same about those that receive treatment and those that do not.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and ulcers in the womb and do not appear to the senses, then no cure with iron should be applied.
But those which are in the orifices of the womb on which the sensation is obtained, are those that should be treated.
And it is necessary that you place the woman in a hot bath and apply heat on them with linen cloths or sharp fabric, and cut into those places with scissors.
And apply powder on those places to stop the flow of blood from one of the non-biting powders such as opium and similar ones.
And bind her feet for an hour, and then place that in cold water.
If the flow of blood persists, then prepare a decoction of cumin and coriander seeds and gallnuts and similar things.
And take barley flour mixed with honey, wine, and vinegar, and make a plaster with water on the buttocks of him.
If the blood is separated, it is good; and if not, cause adhesion with two bellows, and to the nipples without scarification.
And take wool and dip it in the juice of colandre or the juice of arnagloza or the juice of guarravier and wine, and apply it to the place; and treat the place with gargles until it is healed.
Treat that until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
On the perforation of accidental hernia in the womb.
Various types of abscesses happen in the womb, such as tumors, abscesses of crabs (hydrocele), ulcers, ruptures, and fistulas hemorrhoids, growths, and other abscesses. I have already said about these diseases and the species of those and the signs of those, and their treatments in the division.
It is necessary that I say in this treatise about abscess cautery which occurs in the womb when it comes from one of the abscesses that have been healed, and if you want to know what method is used for its operation with iron.
Therefore, consider if the pain of the abscess in its beginning is sharp with beating and trembling and fever, and sometimes it becomes inflamed and if you can feel that, then do not perform a perforation on it, but treat it with water that helps with maturation until the symptoms subside.
Then you must make the woman lie down on a bench with two legs; recline her on her buttocks and place her feet at the widest part of her pelvis, spread her thighs, and place her hands on the sides of her neck, each one in its appropriate position.
And follow the midwife in the correct direction and administer the tool to open the orifice of the womb, the shape of which will come in those cases that it will be necessary.
And when you want to administer this tool, you must place yourself on the right side of the womb of the woman, and what enters the womb from the instrument should not be more than her womb and the hand of the patient. But if the instrument is larger than her womb, then it is necessary that you place powder on the texture of her womb so that the introduction of any instrument into her womb is forbidden.
And it is necessary that you wait for the fluid to run out of the instrument from above and that the person administering the tool rotate it until it is opened the orifice of the womb.
And when the perforation appears, it is touched with the hand and squeezed, then it is necessary that you close it with a probe made of linen.
And when the blood is drained, then you should stop at the wound and plug it with a cork dipped in red oil or any other oily substance with some thickness; and plug the incision on the mother's prepuce with a wooden plug.
Then you should press down hard on the mother's vulva and soak a clean wool in water with ground mallow.
Then allow the wound to be treated with a decoction for about two days, since it is necessary that it heals completely.
Sometimes the mother's vulva and wound are washed with water, honey, and milk; and also with water in which is ground up radish or long-rooted asterisk, and then return to the treatment.
If the wound is deep inside the mother's vagina, then you must be forbidden from treating it with iron, having recourse to the care that we have mentioned earlier.
Chapter LXXV.
To teach midwives how to treat ectopic pregnancies when they occur unnaturally, according to the figure.
It is necessary that the midwife first recognize the figure of natural childbirth by certain signs, and when you see the woman exerting herself at delivery and desiring to smell the air, and she is relieved by whatever is on top of her during delivery, and hastily delivers the afterbirth, then you should know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and it is the afterbirth above its head, and the second one either on top of or suspended or hanging from the navel.
Therefore, when you see these signs, it is necessary that the woman's abdomen be pressed so that the afterbirth comes out easily, because if it descends onto its head, it will give birth to the second one; and it should be cleaned with good cleaning methods.
But if it is another kind of birth that is unnatural and not acceptable, because when the afterbirth comes out on its feet and the body follows its head and its feet, and one hand is on it, or at the foot (i.e.,) or it is coming out with its head and one hand, or on the abdomen, and it is forcefully turned over its neck, resembling those unacceptable figures.
It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these matters, and to avoid mistakes and disappointments.
And now we shall show all the figures of these, and explain what technique is used in each figure, and what it means and signifies.
When the fetus comes out on its head through natural expulsion and it is difficult to deliver, and the woman is exhausted and weakened by it, then perform this technique or what women have, and evaporate the membranes of the placenta with fenugreek oil and moist oils.
And the midwife should insert her small sponge between her teeth and split the afterbirth, or cut it with her nail up to where the moisture inside it comes out. And press the woman's abdomen until the fetus is delivered.
But if it does not come out, then the woman should be washed with egg white and fenugreek mucilage with a spatula.
And command it to be washed, wash it with warm water and soap, and make it vomit on its own; then open its mouth and nose with one hand, because the fetus will soon be forgotten.
And if the two hands of the fetus are forgotten at the beginning, then you must reduce them gently little by little. But if it does not obey the instrument, then the woman should be placed on a chair and her legs raised up, and the chair pushed against the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall forward from the impact.
And if the hands are not turned inside out and the fetus dies, then you should cut them and remove the rotten part of the fetus or take hold of its body with a cloth and remove it with equal force, because it will soon be forgotten.
When the fetus comes out on its feet, then you must press them upwards, and turn it into a small ball, and grab hold of it, and pull it gently.
But if it is inside the vagina, then you should command it to come out, and make it vomit on its own, because it will soon be forgotten if God wills it.
And if it is not forgotten by what we have recommended, then you should gently return the fetus into the vagina until you stop according to the figure of natural delivery, because it will soon be forgotten with a slight movement.
And if it is forbidden to do everything that has been recommended, then take alum and soluble gum, grind them well in the mortar, and apply a line of this mixture on the woman's cervix, below her belly. Then immerse that cervix in hot water until the hips relax.
When the birth passage becomes softened, then perform subfumigation of myrtle and pause it (the woman). After one hour of subfumigation, then you shall immerse it (the woman) in a pan, and make her strain and extend the mouth of it (the perineum), lift it out, and press the lower part of the vagina gently against the lower belly to expel it quickly.
Thus, you shall do this (the delivery) longitudinally on one of her hands. If you can reduce the arm (of the fetus), do so; if not, lift the woman and have her bear down.
If she cannot bear down, lay her on the mattress and strike her hips with violent force, and administer to her the liniments that I and recommend for lubrication.
When the labor has begun, you shall make an incision on a pan, and study the reduction of the arm; gently draw the fetus according to its natural position, and have her strain and press on herself until it is expelled.
Thus, you shall place the fetus on her back with her arms spread wide and the opening of her pelvis at her mother's waist. The midwife must hold the fetus by its feet and gently turn it little by little until it comes out easily.
And when it (the fetus) is delivered and turned, pause over the cervix of it with the oil and lubricant that has been recommended.
Then command her to push little by little, and when she has done so, make an incision on a pan and command her to incline to the right side, and also command her to press; and have her strain with effort. The fetus is prepared on the left side.
If the afterbirth comes out from the mother in this manner, consider it; then make an incision on the second nipple with your nail until it is drained of its moisture.
If the fetus is hanging from the face and neck of it, then make an incision on its navel to prevent it from being retained and dying.
Then gently push the fetus into the vagina until it comes out as far as possible, and command the woman to press herself several times; it will be expelled easily if God wills it.
The birth of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are born at intervals, and sometimes there are three or four, but this is rare and suspicious; however, it has natural causes, not supernatural.
And count the number of placentas, even if they are multiply, as one; separate them by cutting the ligament at the navel of each one; some placenta may be expelled easily naturally, and others may be expelled easily unnaturally, as has been recommended.
And if they are difficult to deliver and reach the stage that has been mentioned regarding abnormal positions, then treat them as recommended in the above sections.
If the midwife is subtle and makes what helps ease, speed, and subtlety, and is slow, and is skilled in every figure as prepared by the art of healing.
Remember that it forms in the womb from embryos and aborts (miscarries).
Sometimes a woman experiences one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten and even more pregnancies in her lifetime, but it must be confirmed that a woman has aborted or miscarried six, while another has all ten, which was caused by the measurements of the wise.
And it is necessary to know in the science of midwifery that a strong loin has a similar appearance to gout, and therefore it is useful for this purpose.
Chapter 66.
On the extraction of a dead birth.
When you treat a stillbirth with the remedy that I have mentioned in the division of medicine, and it has not yet been extruded (from the womb), then you must consider whether the woman is of good virtue and not one of those afflicted by any of the circumstances in which death is feared.
Then the woman should be laid on her left side on the bed, with her head turned inward and her hips raised.
And the midwife should hold one of her legs or tie them together on the bed to prevent the body from extending during the extraction of the stillbirth.
Then you should moisten the mouth of the mother with olive oil and the mucilage of althea and fenugreek and seeds of both.
Then you should anoint the midwife's hands with those oils and mucilages, and then insert her hand into the mother with ease, and then find the location where the fingers can enter the stillbirth.
And then consider if the patient's head is ready for what is to be done there; and then you fix the nails in the heels of him, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or leave the beard, or in the collarbone of him, or in the places proper of the ribs, or leave the hypochondria.
But if the treatment is for his feet, then in the pit of the arch or in the middle of the ribs.
It is necessary that the nail be held with the right hand, and bend its curvature in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and enter the hand easily and fix the nail in one of those places which have been mentioned, until it reaches the desired effect.
And place and fix another nail or the third one if necessary, in the vicinity of him, to attract it within and not extend it according to its length alone.
Let it be good all around, so that the symptoms of him are alleviated thus as is done in tooth extraction for its removal.
It is necessary in him that which is between them that the extension be softened; and if any part of him is retained, it is necessary that the midwife anoint some of her fingers with oil and carefully enter those areas and rotate those that are retained.
Therefore, if the birth is forgotten, the nails are to be pierced into the place that is deeper; and do this until everything has been expelled.
But if the hand is outside the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to its constriction, then a cloth must be wrapped around it; and extract it until everything has been expelled, and incise it or in the joint of the hand or the wrist.
And so you should do the same with the other hand and both feet.
But if the head of him is large or there is constriction in his symptoms, or if water has been adjusted to him in the head, then enter between the fingers sponges with thorns and open the head and extract the water, or dissect it with an instrument named "alundat", whose form will come among the forms of the other instruments in the chapter that is related to this.
And do the same if it is a large head by nature: and then it is necessary to dissect it with an instrument such as scissors, or take it with an alundat as has been said; and extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is extended and constricted at the neck, then it should be cut through until the humidity that is in the feet is drained.
But if it is not complicated and there is no excessive swelling, then you should cut the head as soon as possible.
And if the abdomen is exposed or is edematous, it is necessary that you pierce it until you drain the humidity that is in it.
But if it is on his feet, the pull of him is light and the direction of him to the mouth of the mother is light.
But if it is constricted in the abdomen and feet, you must extract him with a cloth that you will have wrapped around your hand, and you should cut the abdomen and feet until the water that is in them runs out.
But if the other members are separated and the head returns, the midwife must enter her left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is blocked, she must enter her right hand into her vagina, seek the head with it, and draw it with the fingers towards the mouth of the mother, and place a nail or two nails in it, and draw it out with them.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted due to an ulcerated cautery, it is necessary that it not be torn; but rather you should administer a liquid ointment. Apply plasters; and follow the patient in warm waters that soften and moisten.
If it is on his side, if possible, pierce it: and administer what has been said in the case of a live birth.
And if that is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and extracted.
It is necessary that no cause remains within the second one.
And when you have completed all your work, then administer what has been said about the healing of the cauterized ulcers that have occurred in the mother.
If there is bleeding, then you should stop it with styptic waters and administer the other cure.
And I have seen a woman in the womb who was dead, and immediately above that fire another one was observed burning, and it is the birth of another. It happened to him far in advance that he had an ulcer at his navel; and it swelled until the fire erupted, and then began to leak pus.
I was called to his care, and I treated him for a long time, but the wound was not healed.
Then I applied some strong adhesive plasters over him, and extracted a bone from him, and after several days, another bone came out; and I was very surprised, as there should not be bones in the womb.
And then you consider that they are from the dead bones.
Then you think about the disease, and extract from it small bones that exist in its female positions, and live in such a manner for a long time, correct it by a small amount of arm.
And you should not be surprised if it seems strange, because in that is knowledge and assistance for what the doctor uses his hand to administer as treatment.
Of the shapes of instruments that are necessary to extract it.
Shape of a trepan with which the mother is opened:
This is the shape of a strap-like strengthener in which the tendons are bound, to which binding there are two advantages at the ends of two cords. However, this advantage should be more subtle than a tourniquet, and it should be made of either silk or wood.
And each rod should be two fingers wide and the edges of both rods should be one finger wide, and the length of each is one palm and a half; and in the middle of two rods are two adjustments of that meteorological rod, which have already been fastened, whose length is the width of one palm and slightly more, and the width of each is two fingers, or slightly more.
And these two adjustments are interfaces in the mouth of the mother for opening it with those when you turn the prescribed advantages.
Another form resembling that one, more subtle and lighter:
Make a splint from wood or ivory that resembles forceps. However, at the end of it, add such extensions as are sometimes necessary, and the length of these extensions should be one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the mother, do this: place a woman lying on her back with her feet hanging off the edge, open what is between her thighs. Then place your hand on the instrument similar to forceps, adjusting the amount as you examine the mouth of the uterus so that it fits snugly without causing any harm.
The method of turning which the ancients called:
The method of pushing, which is called impelling:
The method of amisidation, which is called the big head:
And it resembles forceps at the end, as sometimes necessary, and occasionally it is made long like forceps according to this form, as sometimes necessary, at the end of which are teeth similar to teeth on a saw that are inserted and crushed. The method of premature amisidation (or small amisidation):
The method of the uncia with a spine:
The method of the uncia with two spines:
The method of the spatula with two ends for separating the head:
The method of two flat spatulas:
All these instruments are practiced, and when more are prepared, their types should be multiplied, as it is easier for the artificer to work and according to the number of people involved.
And do not delay in preparing these instruments, because their necessity is not excused.
On the extraction of the afterbirth (or second child).
When the afterbirth is retained, you must command the woman to push it out, and have her strain as needed, and then place your hand on its opening and on its nose, and if that does not work, that's fine.
And if that does not work, you must take a cloth and perforate it with a probe and place it against the opening of the uterus, as needed, gently and roughly, and anemone and camomile and Arabic senna and cassia wood and sweet-smelling herbs. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water during the waves, and place that one on fire.
Then insert a hollow tube made of cane into the mother's mouth, and hold it so that the steam goes to the concavity of the uterus.
And make that vomit in this way as we have said, and the second one is ignored with speed.
But if the healing remains close and is not expelled, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or mastic of althea, and enter it into the womb and seek for the second one, and when you have found it, take it out a little at a time, but if it is attached to the cervix, then insert her hand as we have recommended, and when you find the second one, extract it bit by bit, so that the womb does not contract violently. It is important to bind both the right and left ribs comfortably.
And if the mouth of the uterus is narrowed, we have already recommended healing by vomiting and steam treatment with herbs.
But if it has not been expelled with all the causes we have recommended, then guard against forcing it out through abstraction, but rather let what comes out of it to the mouth of the uterus be taken care of by a woman, and anoint it with ointment and tetrapharmacon; because it will make it swell for about 3-4 days and dissolve and expel it.
But when it becomes swollen, it is raised to the head and stomach, and the patient suffers from it; and then they must be administered sub-fumigation and appropriate remedies for that.
But one of the ancients has already been mentioned, the sub-fumigation of nasal tortoise and dried figs.
Make an instrument with which a woman is sub-fumigated to stop the retention of menstruation and the second one:
The wound may be treated with glass or silver.
And let the thin extremity be placed on the cinders and the thick extremity above the fire, and the subfumigation should be applied to the arms of the fire.
And let that which is consumed by the subfumigation be removed, and apply another.
Treatment for an unperforated child's anus.
When a newborn infant is born with an unperforated anus, treat it gently and apply oil. Then the midwife must pierce the said cyst with a sharp instrument, and if it is not possible, pierce it with a sharp probe, ensuring not to touch the liver.
Then cover it with a piece of wool soaked in wine and oil, and treat it internally when necessary.
If there is concern about oiling it, then let it rest for several days with a tube inserted, and stop it when the child wishes to defecate.
And now oiling of the anus occurs for consolidation of a boil or abscess, so it must be incised, and let it be treated with what we have said about treatment and lead.
Treatment for the fistulae that follow.
The fistulae that occur following a delivery, with a purulent and thick discharge, are to be treated near the anus or in the space of one of the divisions.
And it is a fistula or boil.
And if the boil is old and turns into a foul-smelling white or subtle purulent discharge, and sometimes these fistulae penetrate.
And these that penetrate are recognized by what is expelled from them through discharge and by fevers; and sometimes the patient uses an evacuation method, and it is beneficial to expel worms from them.
And sometimes these fistulae penetrate into the bladder or into the muscle of the vagina, and they penetrate into the joint of the hip and into the neck of the uterus.
And what is known about a fistula penetrating into the anus or not penetrating, is that you place your finger in the anus, and try to probe gently with a metal rod or iron in the fistula, but be careful not to hurt it.
But if there is danger in it, then insert the probe gently into the fistula with lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or the hair in your finger.
If you do not feel it and do not perceive any cause of evacuation, worms or fever as mentioned before, then understand that it is not penetrating, and seek treatment for it accordingly.
When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the muscle of the vagina, its signification is undoubtedly that it is urine from there and prohibition against using any medication at that location until the area is consolidated.
But if it penetrates into the joint of the hip or bone and there is pain in the surrounding area, its signification is that the probe enters the bone if there is no danger in doing so in the bone, and the pain is in the surrounding area of the delivery; and that pus often results from it; and that medicine does not work, nor is it consolidated by taking medicine orally.
And in all these penetrating fistulae is not a cure, and the treatment of them is the labor and futility of foolish doctors over which they remain fixed.
But in the non-penetrating one that is not old, cure with iron is hoped for as I will recommend to you, and what I have already proven.
And it is that the patient lies between your legs with his back raised and you raise his legs upwards, the thighs should be inclined towards his belly, and then insert a probe of lead or iron into the fistula if there is no danger in doing so, until you feel the tip of the probe.
And if the patient feels pain around his waist, then it is necessary for you to insert your finger into the anus.
And if you feel the probe already penetrating by itself in your finger, or if you feel something hard between your finger and that cyst or tissue, then you know for sure that it is penetrating; and do not work on that one because it is not a cure as we have said.
But some people say that it is healed in some men sooner or later.
And the medicine for which healing is hoped in that location is that you ignite cautery of appropriate thickness according to the size of the fistula, as I have said before, and introduce it into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; then apply it two or three times until you know that all the tissues surrounding the fistulas that resemble the feathers of a bird's quill have been cauterized.
And treat that with calves wrapped in bandages until all the tissues surrounding it heal, and treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate tissue, and if it heals, then it is good; but if not, it will not be cured at another time by other treatment.
If the affected area is within, but does not penetrate into the anus, and there is a tentative opening covered with skin or cyst-like structure and sometimes a fistula on the surface of the coccyx, then dry the coccyx from the beginning of the fistula. You will see it dries along with the tentative area, and cut the tentative area to reach the place where the tip of the tentative penetrates, and through the tentative it is freed and catheterized.
Then, clean the fistulous tissues resembling a bird's quill pen and ensure that no cause remains in them.
But if blood flow occasionally arises between you and your action when dissecting those tissues, then use millet and a gentle instrument for cauterizing with fire or sharp medicine, because cauterization with fire is suitable in two ways: it coagulates the tissues properly, and it helps drain the abscess by drying up the humors.
And then treat the area covered with bandages or dressings penetrating up to the elbow, and then treat the wound using tough meat poultices and let them heal and consolidate.
And such medications are astringent and drying, when applied the wound is restored and healed, and there will be no recurrence.
But if the fistula has penetrated into the rectum and is extended to the surface of the body, then introduce your finger into the anus and investigate it.
Therefore, if you find the tentative tissue and it is covered with skin or flesh, and is nearly ready for penetration, then do not operate immediately but rather by faith and hope.
The cause is to administer it in one of three ways: or cauterize that as mentioned before; or cut it out so that you can achieve the cavity's concavity which allows you to enter easily and treat it directly, without causing any injury to the bladder, and avoid cutting too deeply because you may injure the intestines incidentally upon the patient without their consent; and then treat it with water as mentioned before for quick healing; or stretch out that covering and clean the pus that has formed inwardly close to the anus, either with a sharp instrument such as a tentative or another pointed tool, and then clean those fistulous tissues in the section where you can do so by pressure; and finally, force yourself to heal the entire wound through cutting and if the orifice is not consolidated, the fistula remains open at the anus and it becomes easier for the patient. At times the fistula ends in this manner: when you insert the tentative into the fistula near the anus around the surface of the body with the coccyx and at the edge of the anus, then take a perforated tentative like a prepared core needle according to the following method:
and penetrate the envelope of the five fields or around those fields, then insert the tentative into the fistula until it achieves the concavity of the area.
But if you are penetrating at the edge of the anus deep inside, then you extract the thread from that hole and insert your finger into the anus; extract the tip of the thread and adjust its two ends, tighten each one, let it sit for a day or two, and when the thread becomes embedded in the flesh more, tighten it to such an extent that those tissues between the two ends of the thread which are caught are cut.
And then treat the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, make it penetrate using any method you prepare, but not in the rectum because that is not for you to do as it may injure the bladder; and make it so that it heals.
The method of the spiny spatula to cut the fistula is such that its curve is sharp on one side and concave on the other, so that it does not injure anything unnecessary as sometimes happens.
Sewing of hemorrhoids where blood flows in their incision.
Hemorrhoids are of two kinds, either they are like charcoal within the anus or they are as fatty growths. And they are small or large, and blood flows from them constantly and is one type, or they are many and are outside the anus, and at its ends.
However, those outside the anus are in months of little moisture, which produce clear water or a small amount of continuous blood, and their color is according to the body.
And the treatment of that which is within the rectum is to command the patient to sit and to squeeze it until the rectum relaxes, and the hemorrhoids appear before you. Then you grab it with tweezers or whatever tools you have available and make an incision on it with your nail.
But if tweezers are not available due to the humidity and softness of those hemorrhoids, then take them with rough cloth or a net or woolen thread, extract them using your finger nails, and then incise them and sprinkle some caudal powders around the incision as an alternative to cauterization; or cauterize them according to what is mentioned in the chapter on cauterization. And approach the care of each one separately until they are healed.
If the anus does not obstruct evacuation, then cauterize the patient with a small bite and wash it with water that is in the stomach and gently stimulate evacuation when the patient strains.
But if the hemorrhoids are external from the anus, find their cause and press them with your nail or oil, insert them, and approach their care with water as we have said until they are healed.
The person who you have inserted (the hemorrhoids), must receive suturing in the following manner: take a faithful envelope and insert it through the needle and bring out the hemorrhoids at the incisions above, and make the needle penetrate into the other part, and enclose both external parts of the envelope in the upper part beyond the needle, and hold them tightly; and tighten the hemorrhoid with strong stitching, knot the envelope, and pull out the needle.
Do this to all (the hemorrhoids), but leave one and do not sew it, so that the excess blood can drain from it.
Place a cushion on the anus soaked in rose oil or wax, and place it on top of the patient and tell them to rest. Leave it inside until it is resolved. When it is healed, care for them with enemas or another treatment until they are cured.
Since they are ancient and not worth the medicine in that case, you must lance them with the spatula or your nail until they become moist and stop their escape from above, which prevents consolidation; and approach their care until they are consolidated.
You must remove them with a very sharp blade as soon as possible, and let the first one become dry and scab over; and approach their care until they are healed.
Know that almesamir is key and not to notice redness on the body similar to a clavicle, it appears in all parts of the body, especially around the thighs and groin area, and if you experience pain because of it, it should be treated immediately.
Therefore, it should be incised what is around the clavicle and held with forceps or oil, and be removed from its root; and approach its care.
And if you wish, cauterize those that were mentioned in the previous chapter.
However, verruca is a small, rough, round protrusion on the surface of the body, and it usually appears in many children.
Its treatment is to stretch and incise it or press it with a plier or cloth until it goes back inside. If you wish, cauterize it as we have said, with fire or an acute medicine.
However, formica is a small, furrowed or large, rough protrusion on the surface of the body, when you press it, it becomes inflamed like a flea bite, and it appears around the body.
Its treatment is to take a pen-like or pen-shaped cannula, strong, and place it over the formica until it is surrounded by the circle of the cannula from both sides; then rotate your hand with the cannula around the circumference of the formica, and press it in the skin, and remove the formica from its root.
If you wish, do this with an iron or copper cannula in the following way:
The area above the cannula should be brought to subtlety, closed and wrapped so that the knowledge of it is obscured and the rotation of it is avoided.
And if you wish to cauterize the formica as described in the cauterization of athlete's foot in the chapter on cauteries.
Regarding the tools that are administered for cauterization.
Sometimes cauterization is performed with silver or lead or copper melted or hammered; and sometimes it is performed with small and large tools depending on those that are administered, for the one administered in the care of small children should be small; and for those whose anus is friable or painful, the cauterizations of those should be small.
The form of large and small cauterization:
The head of the cannula from above, where the bag is tied, should be wide in the following way; and it should be distinguished where the bag is tied in this way as sometimes.
The end of it below, which is inserted into the anus, should be closed (uncovered) not to leak, narrowing it towards subtlety; and in one of the sides there are two cuts, and in the other side a cut, and the width of the cut should be according to the thickness of the rays, and the wider one should be smaller.
The bag in which the medications of animal bladder or sheep's wool are placed, and its purpose is a palm size.
It should be pierced with many holes as it is rolled up, and if the space between the holes is not wide enough to accommodate the finger.
Then insert a strong needle into those holes and draw it out, or pass the needle through them; adjust the bag around it. When the bag is placed inside, it should be tight at the top of the cannula between two distinct points with firm pressure, and then cannulate each hole: However, the quality of cannulation is that you fill the bag with the medicine, which should be heated according to the tolerance of the patient; be careful that it is not too hot nor too cold.
Then the patient should be laid on his back, and raise his knees on top of him and place a cushion under them or a pillow; then anoint the outside of the cautery with oil, ointment of hog's lard or mucilage of fenugreek or similar substances; then gently insert it into the rectum, and the attendant should take the bag and squeeze it forcefully and repeatedly until all that is in the cannula is expelled into the intestine; then remove the cannula and the patient raises his knees to the wall.
And if the medicine is insufficient for this purpose, make more of it; and if it remains in there for an entire night, it is less effective.
However, if you cannulate the intestine in cases of abdominal pain and its cause is unknown, then continue to cannulate until it heals.
And if there is diarrhea or abscess in the rectum, then use a thin and sharp cannula, as the children's cannulas are called.
Treatment of sores.
I have already stated in the division of the treatment of sores what is appropriate for the free, and I say the treatment of that with more detail and with medicines according to the requirement.
Therefore, I say that sores are diverse depending on what causes the sores and according to the place where the sores occur.
And the causes that often cause sores are such as cuts from stones, incisions of space or sword, strikes with a lance, fist, javelin, or similar weapons.
However, the sores that are in the places of the body are such as a sore on the head, neck, foot, abdomen, chest, and similar places on other parts of the body.
And I recommend the treatment of some sores based on this reasoning and rule for other sores.
And I will begin with the simple sores of the head, since the composite sores will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say that when a simple sore occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, consider if it was caused by a stone or similar object and the wound has been sewn only and is large and you fear that the patient may develop an abscess, then you should make an incision and drain the skull immediately, and do not delay; and remove the pus according to the strength of the blood if there is no other reason prohibiting draining, especially if the blood coming out of the sore is little.
And make the incision on the opposite side of the affected area; and care for the patient to avoid infection, vomiting, and heavy meals.
However, if there is any reason for minimal food intake, then reduce the food and avoid meat and wine.
Stop over the sore if an abscess occurs, soak it in rose oil or vinegar that is strengthened.
If you are certain of an abscess (apostema), then pause over the wound. If it is recent and still has its own pus and air has not yet changed the powder I recommend, apply small amounts.
If the air has already changed (the pus), then pause over some soothing ointment until it is healed.
If the wound is large or an incision of space and does not fit properly, and the lips are not closed well, then adjust them with suture according to what I recommend for their suturing.
If the wound has already exposed the bone and flesh and is not blocked but only held by a small suspending device, then incise it and heal the wound with medicines and restore the flesh to its place with caudle, and command the patient to avoid foods that cause gout: capons and similar meats, until it heals.
And if gangrene occurs in the flesh and does not stick to the bone, then you should incise everything that is putrid and remove it, and heal the wound.
If in these wounds it is an artery or vein from which blood flow may occur and has not been cut by medicines, then you should search for the artery. And if you find one that has not been incised, you should incise it with a spatula or tie it; and if necessity requires that what I have said does not help, then you should cauterize until the blood is released.
If these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; in this case, you should sprinkle that powder on them because it will solidify before the air changes them.
And the method of the powder is this: Recipe oil from sesame seeds, dragon's blood sap, and burnt charcoal; mix all three together and sieve it, then fill the wound with the mixture, tightly bind it with a good bandage until it adheres, and let it coagulate with blood.
And press it down with pulvis and let it rest until it is healed, but do not remove the bandage as long as it is not an abscess because the medicine has not yet reached it.
And sometimes you can only use cauterization when sesame oil and dragon's blood sap are not available.
And now you should perform this method of operation on large wounds when it is necessary to pause over them and tighten them, and only on fresh wounds with their own pus, as the air has not yet altered them.
If the air has already altered them, especially in summer, then you should not place this powder in that position, but rather heal them with what I have said before, as you pause over them with various soothing ointments or powder made from barley flour and water until they become pustules; and heal them with other remedies until they are healed.
But if it is a bone fracture in the wound that is small, you should extract it with forceps.
I will tell the cure for skull fractures where poison has occurred.
Of wounds in the neck.
But if the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment and it is similar to simple wounds on the head.
But if the nerve in the neck is incised or an artery, you should not perform surgery on it unless it is a nerve, in which case you must avoid treatment with strong cauterizing agents like sulfur and similar substances because they harm nerves and constrict them. And do not place any cause of irritation on the wound because the substance of nerves is tender and its continuity is with the brain, which is the base of all members.
And if it is cured with light medicines like warm water baths, occasionally infused in rose oil or not, and when washed with sweet water and other remedies as described above, and moist soothing ointments.
But if the wound is large, you should administer suture or close the lips of it, and heal it with powder until it is healed.
But if the wound has depth or occurs in the lower part of the pus-filled cavity, you should perforate it in the most depressed area.
But if the wound has already incised an artery and blood flow is obtained, you should separate it or tie it, or cauterize it if necessity requires it.
But if the vertebrae of the spinal column have been dislocated or completely separated, and the veins of the neck are safe, you should adjust the lips of the spine using sutures along the spine of the spinal column without touching it; equalize it with a straightening instrument and reduce it to its natural shape, then strengthen it with proper binding and keep it still for several days; and heal it with soothing ointments that provide stipticitat and stimulation until it heals.
If the wound has already penetrated into the bone, then perforate it, and if there are fragments of bones, extract all those you can; leave what is not accessible inside to allow the wound to heal, separate it, and ease the bleeding from it.
And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle that recommended powder over it. But if the wound has formed a fistula (abnormal opening or passage), then cure it with what will come to mind from its description in its respective chapter.
If the wound is from a lance or sword, and sometimes of great depth, then consider whether the patient has wind from the wound when he complains of it; know that the wound is fatal.
And if the wound is not deep and recent with bleeding, then pause in it with powder of the first hour, but avoid pressing too much so that the blood is not retained in the depth of the wound and returns to the heart and weakens the patient, but rather pause with an attractive powder, and remove it two times a day.
And if the wound is not covered with an ointment, then pause in the orifice of the wound with an old cottonswab to drain any fluids; make the patient sleep on the wound so that any blood clots properly.
But if three days have passed from the wound and no spasm or tremor of the heart, nor bad breath, nor any other unfavorable signs occur, then know that the wound is healed; and therefore treat it with heat and other healing remedies until it is completely cured.
But if the healing is excused and it remains open all the time, then know that a fistula has been made; cure it according to its description.
And if the wound is from a sword or dagger cut and simple in the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with suture if large or powder if small.
But if it has already penetrated into the bone and the sharp objects are still embedded, then twist the wound to extract those sharp objects, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, leave them in to allow the wound to heal, as extracting them is eased.
And for other accidental wounds occurring on other parts of the body, the remedy in treatment is similar to that mentioned earlier.
Wounds of the abdomen.
The condition that occurs in the abdomen can be large, small or medium.
A small disruption is difficult to treat by other means, and you should know that its reduction is even more difficult, if not promptly inserted into their place, for it will swell and thicken, making insertion of them difficult.
Therefore, the best condition is medium, for in that case, reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is in the two cases mentioned earlier.
Know that stitching the abdomen is done according to four methods, but two of them are common and necessary in stitches for other wounds on the body.
The remaining two stitching methods are specific to other wounds, but especially applicable in the stitching of the abdomen.
And I recommend to you each one with exposure and explanation.
So say that when the wound is small and a cause of the intestine has occurred due to it, and it is difficult to reduce it, this is in one of two methods: either because of the small disruption as mentioned earlier, or when the intestine has become inflamed due to the cold air.
Therefore, when this is the case, it is necessary that you heat the affected area so that you immerse a wet sponge or cloth in hot water alone, or you take them in hot water, cyperus, spike, and wrap them around the intestine to resolve the inflammation.
And sometimes you will find one in which there is stiffness, and it is better to use heat along with water in resolving the inflammation.
And when the inflammation is resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which salt and malva are boiled, as this eases the insertion of it with little cause.
But if insertion of the intestine is excused from this treatment, then you should make an incision with a small instrument and extract mucus.
And the initial treatment is better, when it is appropriate that there is not incision, and it is not necessary to incise for lack of resources.
Of the instrument, see its shape:
One part of the tool is curved and sharp, the other part not curved but blunt, with a thin tip, but not as sharp as a spatula, it should be slightly rounded.
And since the wound is spreading and the intestine is protruding, it is necessary to reduce it in its natural form, in its proper place, if possible on that spot, as it is better.
When the wound is wide and located in a lower part of the abdomen, the patient should lie on their back and raise their legs as much as their head; if it is located above the abdomen, then the patient's head and chest should be lowered as much as possible.
Similarly, if the wound is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, always pay attention and consider this so that the side where the wound is located is raised more than the other.
It is necessary to provide this for large wounds and moderate wounds as well.
For small wounds, apply what is ready-at-hand and make sure that the person providing care is among your most skilled assistants; they should hold the wound entirely with their hand and adjust the edges, and open the incision from one end to another where suturing may be needed.
This is the common suturing method: take a needle (or count needles according to the size of the wound); and press it from the edge of the wound on the little finger, tighten the needle once, ensuring you do not pierce both edges of the skin, with both ends of the thread outside the incision, until you make it penetrate through that part; then you have added two ends of the thread and two ends of the suture, making four orders.
Then tighten the thread with double stitches around the needle, and occasionally on both sides together, and sew the edges and wound with appropriate closure; then insert the index finger into the wound and introduce another needle there, and insert it as you did with the first needle; do not stop suturing until all the contraction of the wound has been completed.
Sewing needles should be neither too thick nor too thin, for thin needles penetrate the flesh lightly; and thick ones are difficult to introduce into the skin, so they must be moderate in thickness and sharpness.
It is necessary that the needle should not be inserted into the same edges of the skin too much, so that the flesh is not lightly penetrated and the wound heals before its consolidation.
Do not prolong the suture so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
Press the tips of the needles so as not to hurt the patient during their sleep; place a powder made from crushed charcoal on the suture around the entire wound, which will hold the tips of the needles in place; leave it until you know that the wound has healed.
And this method of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, as it requires only one or two needles for the suturing process.
However, the second method of suturing is common: place four parts (the edges and two ends of the skin) in one stitch with a needle that is covered in thread of moderate thickness and sharpness.
Then, when the needle penetrates these four parts, retract it from that side of the wound where you started, so that the thread pulls up the purulent material from the deeper part of the wound, so that the suture is tight like a sewn cloth with which fabrics are strengthened.
Stop between each stitch at the thickness of the little finger.
This type of suturing is known to men.
I sewed the wound that had occurred in a man's abdomen, who had been pierced by a sword, and the wound was larger than one palm; it was surrounded by hernias around two palms from the hernia of the same side and was located in the middle of the limb; and so I reduced it after the hernia had stayed outside the wound for 24 hours.
The wound healed in the space of 15 days or more, and I cured him, and he recovered; and so he lived for many years, and was converted to my way of life.
And the other doctors had judged that he would not be cured; but by miracle, for I did not cure him with lard, as there was no lard nor any medicine in that place, but I pressed a hot iron on the wound twice a day and washed it diligently with honey water until healed.
However, I will tell you two types of suturing according to the Gospel narrative.
And begin by suturing the skin, and insert the needle from the outside edge to the inside edge.
And since the needle penetrates the skin and goes through it according to the correct method and the length of the entire body, leave the tip of the thread in the place where you inserted the needle; then make the other end of the needle penetrate from the inside edge of the wound to the outside edge on the other side of the thumb.
And since you have made the incision, make the incision again in that same location at the edge of the muscle from outside to inside; remove the exterior layer and make the needle penetrate the other side of the incision from inside to outside.
Make the incision pass through the exterior layer (of the muscle) that is at that location, and make the needle pierce the opposite side of the incision from inside to outside.
Then begin to sew that edge (of the incision) with the one from the opposite side, and withdraw the needle that pierces it, and return it to its place in the same suture, and sew the exterior layer of the muscle on that side with that thread.
Do this step and the next one until you sew everything that is outside as shown in that example.
The total of this suturing method is that you sew with the skin suture, which is used for sewing the fur, in such a way that you sew the muscle one side at a time starting from the edge of the incision, and then turn to the other side until it is complete.
The second type of suturing method specifically called "Gualia" and this one is about the thigh and is recommended for that purpose, is that you sew it as follows: first, gather all the parts to the corresponding side according to nature; then apply the opposite edges to each other, and this is done in accordance with what I have advised.
You must insert the needle at your side of the incision on the outside, and make it penetrate to the inside at that point, and take two edges of the muscle; then turn the needle around and make it penetrate from outside to inside in two places on the muscle.
Then turn each of them, and make each one penetrate from the inside to the outside at two places on the muscle in directions opposite to that.
This method of suturing is better than the common light suture, and it is the one that precedes memory.
This is the thigh suture (Gualia)
And others say that the abdomen suture is corrected with two needles, so you insert each one with a cord in this way, starting from the entrance of one needle and making it penetrate to the other side as the ones who sew the hearts do.
And you should know that when a rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, the suture of it is more difficult than those in other parts of the abdomen.
The remedy for one wound is a judgment for other wounds.
This is because when you obtain the wound before the air alters it, and reduce the hernia and sew it correctly, then pause over the emollient powder.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then pause over that ointment that is present among you before it hardens and the threads penetrate, and allow the muscle and skin to consolidate; and care for it in this way as with the treatment of other wounds until it heals.
But if you are not present with the medicines, pause over it immediately, since it begins to get infected, soften, and change color twice a day, in this way as you have learned, until it heals, because you do not need another medicine for simple wounds in most cases.
But if you fear that the wound communicates to the main limbs, it is necessary that you immerse woolen yarn in infused oil or raw oil, and apply it in the area between the joints and leave it for a while.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in your hernias, since it often spreads, then cauterize that one with black sterilized vinegar, especially when pus has formed in the hernia and an exit is made penetrating into its cavity.
And you should know that one with a large hernia heals more slowly than those in thin hernias.
It is difficult to heal because the hernia called "gegunu" does not receive wound healing from any location; and this is due to the great number of veins that are in it, and its large size, and the subtlety of its tissue, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the wound is skin, and you obtain it recently, reduce it according to your judgment, as you reduce hernias similarly.
But if it has passed and turned black or green, then you should tighten it with a thread on the spot that is discolored, to bring out blood flow, since in skin there are veins and arteries.
And then insert a new suture where the old one was, and leave two ends of the thread hanging on the side opposite to the wound, so that you relieve the attraction of it, since you must pull the skin and release the flow from the wound.
Recall of the plagues that occur in the intestine.
When a small disruption occurs in the intestine and it is possible to restore [it], in some cases, there was a man who had been plagued in his abdomen by being pierced with a lance and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and made a fistula, and because of this treatment and pus accumulation.
Therefore I continue with the treatment because it was not assured in healing, but rather to cauterize that within which fire heals and the place is consolidated.
And I see that the place is already consolidated, so I approach the patient regarding the misfortune that has occurred in his abdomen; and no one should come for this misfortune and disturb his diet and drinking, and he must rest in bed and exercise at his leisure.
And some experienced people say that when a small wound occurs in the intestine, it is necessary to tie it in this way: and you take large bread crumbs; and adjust the two edges of the wound and place one from these, which has an open mouth, over the two edges of the wound; therefore, when you press on them and tighten its mouth, remove the head of it, because it adheres and is not resolved.
And place another bread crumb near the first, and do not stop making breadcrumbs according to the size of the entire wound.
And return that [the bread crumb] and suture the wound, and let those heads remain attached in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not happen to the patient any harm.
And it is possible that the intestine may be sutured with a fine thread made from an animal's intestine, as it is sharper; and you take the end of these intestinal threads, make them clean, tie the end to the thread, wrap it, pass the thread through needles, sew the intestine with it, and reduce the disruption.
And this method of suturing with breadcrumbs is not only by trust and hope.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially in one of the delicate intestines, then it is not mending but rather cauterizing, and it is not healing of it completely.
On the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
Know that every wound and pustule when it becomes old and chronic, becomes an ulcer, and is not consolidated and releases pus continuously without being drained, in any member, universally it is named a fistula and we call it an abscess.
And fistula, according to truth, is hardened knot, lasting, white, without pain and with concavity as the concavity of an abscess; and therefore it is called an enlarged abscess, that is, a pimple.
And in some men it is moist, which releases pus; and in a short time the moisture is drained in certain hours. And sometimes this moisture becomes thick, rarefied, and fine.
I have shown all those causes, their symptoms and the treatment of them in the division.
And it is necessary that I tell you about the treatment of fistulas, which are performed by surgical means with the hand.
And you should know that fistulas occur in all members of the body, because some are those that reach the large veins and arteries, or nerves, or sphincters, or intestines, or bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the spine, or one of the joints composed by joint composition such as the hand and foot; and these are those that bring to the proximity of the main member and similar places.
Therefore, these fistulas of this type are among the difficult-to-heal diseases and do not receive treatment, and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
And if one of these fistulas has such a depth that it does not reach those places mentioned above and you hope for healing and believe in its treatment and want to understand it, then take the attempt to remove or iron it, and if the fistula follows a straight line, and you search for it with it.
But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a fine probe, because lead has the lightness of its body curved according to the twisting.
And if the fistula has horrible discharge, it is not possible for you to attempt healing on it.
Then clean the fissures with a mixture of wine and oil, because the moisture that you use to clean one will affect the others and cause them to run.
Approach it very carefully, because you must know if here you have a bone or nerve, and whether the fistula is long or short, or it is a fistula with horrible discharge that covers everything with its entire strength, with the patient's distress, and the discovery of the pain should be your compression on the area, and similar to the meaning and causes of an abscess.
And when you have stood over all those causes with certainty, then you should proceed to treatment: and it is that you consider whether the fistula is shallow near a joint, far from a joint, near a nerve, an artery, a vein, or one of those places which are known to you.
Then you dry up the fistula according to what has been said about its origin, and remove anything that is in that drainage and rotten flesh, and anything that has been born in the sores of the skin or tissue, and heal it within where it is healed.
But if the fistula is deep and long, according to rectitude, it is necessary for you to incise it as far as possible, and then clean it of all its corrupt flesh; and apply hot poultices covered in medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula that you have prepared with iron.
And do that with some frequent observations until the hot medicine burns everything rotten in the cavity of the fistula due to corruption.
And then restore it with fresh dressing that generates healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by that, then you cauterize it according to what you have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is a bone and you must certify it, then you should investigate it and dry it up according to what you have recommended, unless you prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as mentioned earlier.
But if the bone is exposed and has any corruption and blackness, you should cut it until the corruption is entirely stopped; and then heal it with anything that generates flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed and continues to ooze pus as before, then you should know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; and therefore you must explore further and examine and clean the area carefully with the last available strength, and then restore it.
And if it is healed, that is good; and if not, then you should know that the corruption is deep within the body, which has not been reached, and in that case, there is no point in continuing treatment.
And if the corrupt bone is small, or it is possible for you to remove it, then you should remove it using fine forceps that are appropriate for this purpose.
And if there is pus in the bones, you should carefully extract all of them, without any cause that weakens your strength.
But if any cause of moisture opposes you, and the incision does not fear or make an error, then you should cut the leaking membranes or flesh if it is present, and free the bones.
But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at your time, you should pause over the wound until the wound heals, and leave it filled with flesh and membranes around those bones, and keep the wound from consolidating, and restrict the incision that you have made during your operation.
Having said that, if you fear, pause over the wound submerged in a strong solution of oil, or the wound submerged in Egyptian balm, or one of the green poultices, because when the membranes are softened, the bones are separated from their adhesion, and the attraction is relieved.
If it is a large bone, such as the bone of thigh or hip, or resembles those, and what is corrupt is only its surface, then scrape that with resin only behind until the blackness and corruption is removed, and then restore the wound.
If the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, it is necessary to cut that part entirely and remove the corrupt area, and then heal it until it is solidified.
I recommend to you that you bind the patient's thigh with a bandage and support for the operation.
A young man around 30 years old experienced pain in his thigh, and from within the parts inside the body, matter had reached the thigh, and that matter was pus-like and greatly so, and it was not caused by something external.
And so the time passed due to the error of doctors until the abscess had burst, and the matter was discharged, and its healing was stopped until the abscess became a fistula, and feces were present in the openings which all contained pus and the moisture of the body.
And so the patient was treated by many doctors for two years, but they were not wise, but skilled, until I was summoned.
And I saw the fistula and the matter that flowed from those openings due to a large wound, and the man's body was already completely healed, and his complexion was yellowish.
And so I inserted a probe into one of the openings and reached the bone.
And then I examined and probed all the openings, and found that they all led to the same area of the fistula.
And so I took a knife and cut into one of the openings until I exposed a bone fragment, which was decayed and rotten and discolored; it had already been corrupted for some time, and a part of the fistula had penetrated into the muscle.
And so I cut away what was exposed and prepared from the bone that had been exposed.
And I thought it was not in the bone but the corruption that had burst and been cut away, and I had already drained it.
And then I applied medication to heal the wound for a long time, but it was not healed.
And so I examined again and found more decay on the bone after the initial examination, and continued corruption in the bone.
I cut away what appeared of that corruption, and then I was determined to heal it and restore it, but it was not restored.
And so I continued to examine and cut away the bone little by little in detail, and finally performed its restoration, but it was not restored until I cut through about an inch of it, and the marrow came out with it, and then I restored it with medication, and it healed slightly and improved.
There was no need for further examination or cutting of the bone in the operation except for the looseness of the flesh around it and the lack of tolerance and fear of death in the patient, since he suffered from excessive syncope and bad fainting spells constantly due to an overabundance of evacuation.
Therefore, it heals through complete healing, and there is no need for a replacement of the hard bone in its place; the position of the bone should be corrected within his body and its virtue restored; and it should be maintained in its proper position and not subjected to any counteraction or harm in walking or any other cause.
But if there is a broken bone in the body, it must be treated as follows: you should grab it firmly at its end and command someone to hold it extended; then you bind it with linen that is thicker than the first linen bandage; and apply it above the skin that is left behind, and stretch the end of it so that the skin is pulled away, and you will expose the skin over the area where you want to cut, and you should cut only the skin without cutting into the flesh.
You should place a splint or table under the bone properly, as you are not prohibited from cutting through the rotten flesh with the saw when you do that.
The cutting should be done little by little over the rotten area, as if it is in the hollow of the rotten bone and not visible to touch, and perhaps the cut may need to be made again.
And if the bone is rotten but not protruding, one continuous division occurs with the other, and the corruption may be at the same level or in a different part of it, then you should expose all the skin; and place a splint under it, and cut that first division where the corruption continues to the next cutting.
The cutting should be done according to the location of the corruption, as stated before.
If the corruption is at a joint, cut that joint where it is corrupt, and saw the bone where it continues to the other part.
If the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, it is not logical but a trick.
If corruption is in the chest or foot, it is difficult; however, you should investigate the corruption in whatever way appears to you, and cut it open, clean it according to each disposition that is possible for you, and correct every instrument correctly, when it does not work against your veins or nerves.
Know what the saws and blades are for cutting these bones, according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of them, and their thickness, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; therefore, it is necessary that you prepare all types of operation instruments suitable for that operation.
Know that this operation means something to you regarding the type of instrument required; when you are skilled and long-lived in the methods of this art, and experienced with the methods of diseases, since then you will have already known what is appropriate for the instruments for every disease.
And you are forming at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you will use as simple ones, with which you will proceed according to your discretion, which you will test on others. Form a saw:
Form of another saw:
Large surgical instrument form:
Form of a large knife: The head of this knife should be in the shape of a star-headed nail and its points shaped like the spikes on an awl.
It is not fitting unless the heads of the joints are crushed when they are corrupt, or the opening is wide.
Form of smaller scissors:
Form of rat-toothed scissors:
The other saw should be made appropriately shaped with a convex arch and the sharpness of its blade and the teeth of its blade should be well-made. Form of a bandage:
Form of concave-shaped scissors:
Form of thin scissors:
Form of curved-tipped scissors:
Form of small scissors resembling tweezers:
Shape of small saw-like instruments that are used for cutting bones:
Shape of another saw-like instrument; this one resembling a ray, and the end of it is like a saw, and it is used in various places along the bones:
Shape of a ray that is suitable for scraping the perforated bone:
And the end of it is triangle-shaped and very sharp.
And it is made of Indian steel, and it is like all the causes that we have mentioned of scrapers, saws, and saw-like instruments.
For the incision of bones and for their joints.
The incisions can be caused by an intrinsic or extrinsic reason, or as a result of not treating the corruption with appropriate medicine, or when the corruption continues to spread and the member is not affected by any other cause. In such cases, it is necessary to make an incision in the member as far as the corruption reaches, so that the patient escapes from the pain or the more serious damage to the member through death or illness.
And the sign of that which occurs is that the member becomes black before it is cauterized, or if pus is present, it should be brought near to the blackness until it spreads into the member and affects the entire body; and thus you must make an incision of that.
And similarly, if the corruption is caused by poisonous substances such as scorpion venom, viper or rattlesnake and similar ones.
And if the corruption or poison is at the end of the finger, then you should make an incision on the finger and not give space to the corruption for it to enter into the hand.
And similarly, if you access the palm of the hand, then you should make an incision at the base of the thumb, and not give space to the corruption until it reaches the base of the arm.
And if the arm becomes infected, then you should make an incision along the arm to the elbow at the joint.
And if the corruption spreads beyond the joint and sometimes reaches the elbow, then in such cases it is the death of the patient; and administering another treatment at this point is of little use or value.
And similarly, if corruption spreads to the foot and the toe becomes infected, you should make an incision into one of the toes.
And if there is swelling on the sole of the foot, then you should make an incision on the entire foot. However, if pus fills the heel, then you should make an incision along the calf to the heel joint.
If corruption has occurred on the anus, it is not a cure but rather dismissal, and let the patient die.
The method of cutting off or severing the limb is that you stretch the ligament on the side away from where you want to cut, and then stretch another ligament at the location; the minister extends one ligament on the sides away, and the ministera extends another ligament above; and separate the flesh that is between two ligaments far enough for a spatula to be inserted until all the flesh is exposed; then it is to be cut off or severed.
It should be placed cloth on all sides of the wound so that it does not touch the affected area and come to the patient with the injury wrapped in a sterile dressing and cauterized.
If bleeding occurs when you are working, then you cauterize the area carefully, or place some stopping powder on it; and then return to your medication until it is complete.
Then bind the affected limb with cloth as appropriate, and cure it until it heals.
And I recommend that you apply this remedy to a man in his foot, which I also recommend, which is a black spot on the foot due to burn-like scalding caused by fire.
And that corruption first occurs in the same location where the entire foot is affected.
Then that man should prepare himself by putting more of the cure on the affected limb with the intensity of pain and scalding of it, and cut off that foot at the joint, and heal.
Long periods of time will occur due to this treatment in the location indicated by the hand.
Then it comes to me and I perform the removal of that superfluity with what you place on the hand of the medicines, and cleanse the body of it; and the superfluity is not returned but begins in the other location instead.
And he asked me to amputate the hand of him and I did not want to do that because I feared the return of that superfluity, and moreover, fearing death, I decided to amputate the hand of him because the nature of his illness was dangerous.
And after he lost consciousness, it returned to his land and I received word that the man had prepared and amputated his entire hand and healed.
I have not added this narrative except to serve as a guide for dealing with this illness and to indicate the meaning and manner in which it should be treated.
For cure of the bladder and quality of cleansing with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in any fleshy limbs and the space of the abscess is prolonged until there is collection of pus, then it is broken and perforated, and the pus is expelled from it, and the hole remains as if it were a vessel, and the covering that is above it like thin cloth, and no further corruption occurs, and it does not press on bones or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not called a fistula.
But if the space is prolonged until corruption spreads to any limb, then it is called a fistula and not otherwise.
The cure is that the covering is cut open all around as it is rolled up, and especially when it is thinned and made like cloth, and ensure that it does not stick to the location due to its corruption.
But if you hope that the covering sticks and that further corruption has not occurred, and the covering is thin, then you cure it with clysterium.
You consider the sinus and if it is large and the odor is fetid, you cure it with clysterium made of Egyptian medicine which is of oil, vinegar, and spices ground into portions, placed in a vessel, and cooked over fire until the medicine becomes soft and boils to a specific temperature.
Then you take from it what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and you cure the sinus with that solution, and strengthen the openings of it, and leave the medicine in it for a period of two hours.
Then extract that with care and do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the smell has subsided.
And sometimes it is cleansed with water of ashes when that medicine is not available to you; and you take the ashes from vinegar, and put it in water; and then strain it and cleanse the sinus with that until you are sure that the sinus has healed.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or water of ashes, then cleanse it with water and honey mixed with ground spices, and cleanse it with vinegar and honey mixed, for the nature of honey is that it cleanses and purifies, and vinegar makes the sinus stick together, especially when there is an excess of hardness and dryness in the vinegar.
And when you do this several times and are sure that the sinus has healed, then cleanse it with what makes the flesh grow in it.
And take thickening agents such as diaphanicon and dissolve it in the given oil or vinegar and stiptic; or cleanse the intestine with certain medicines and other laxatives that I have written about in the treatise on laxatives.
And if the opening of the sinus is narrow where the clisterium tube cannot be inserted, then you must gradually widen it with a small iron, and pause whenever it is filled with Egyptian oil or basilicon laxative until it is widened.
When the opening is wide, you should stretch the lips of it and sew them up with that amount that the clisterium can pass through without addition.
When the opening of the sinus where the arm passes is elevated to the armpit, you should dry it in the area where the pus collects so that the arm can run inside below, because when the arm is contracted in the sinus, flesh is generated there.
If it is not possible for you to dry the sinus inside the bone as desired, then make an incision in the member preparing it with the appropriate preparation so that the arm can easily pass through, and ensure that there is no obstacle to the passage of the arm.
But the one that is on the opening of the sinus, which you should rinse at all times to remove what is attached to the arm. And so that you may know if what comes from the arm is too much or little, or digested, or not digested.
And you should also consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is abscessed.
And when your medication is prolonged in this way, and you see the matter that has been deposited on the opening of the sinus adhering or becoming attached, you should remove or separate it after three days, and when you separate the wound, you change the cloth for another one and renew the laxative.
But if the sinus has a long distance between it and space, you should not despair of its adherence, because healing is approaching, because some people have a slow generation of flesh in their wounds, and the opposite happens in others.
If the sinus is not digested in the arm for several days, you should know that the sinus is not adhering; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and prolonged, you must adjust it with drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are wet in their substance and in their virtue, they will dry like laxatives such as diaphanicon when they are added excessively.
And the last thing that is cured is to take diaphanicon laxatives and dissolve them in olive oil, and add an old anti-inflammatory substance to it, and place it there and use it.
And you do the same action in that case when there is no arm, using diaphanicon laxatives and honey which becomes thickened, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe and crush them together, and sprinkle everything and grind it over the honey while it is near the fire, and line the result with a cloth and press it onto the sinus; and line the honey that you have thickened with it until it becomes thick, and grind it on a cloth and press it.
And sometimes it is administered long-term Aristolochia and its root and celestial (and this celestial) and rye flour and centaury, and use of these simple drugs or adjust them, grind those and sift and powderize over the honey that has been recommended; hold onto it.
And if the sinus persists and is not cured by this treatment, you should know that the corruption is in the proximate part of it (the affected area), and it begins to affect the bones or other hard parts or joints; then you should cure it with fistula treatment, as was said above.
Of the treatment for paronychia (an infection of the skin around the nail) and scraping the nails, adding an incision to the finger and section (removal of a part).
Paronychia is an abscess that begins at the nail of the finger or toe and spreads to other parts, and if it persists for a long time and its treatment is expensive, it becomes an abscessed abscess or corrupted, and pus enters the nailbed which corrodes the root of the nail, and it corrupts entirely, and its corruption moves into the bone that gives off a fetid odor, and the extremity of the finger or toe becomes gangrenous and its color changes to black.
Therefore, when you have the patient with what has been said in the division and it does not respond to your treatment, then you must incise with iron the excess that remains of the nail and approximate cauterize the wound close to it, because cauterization is helpful in such cases.
However, if the bone is healthy and the nail is sound, and the addictions of the nail press the flesh in the joints inside, it begins to hurt and then ulcerate, then you must stop pressing the subcutaneous vein at the angle where the nail is piercing the flesh, and apply pressure on it to push it up and incise the affected flesh with ease, and place medicines corrosive ointments on top of it until it is completely removed; then cure it with poultices until it is healed.
However, if the corruption has already penetrated the bone, then you must incise the bone and extract it, for there is no healing of a corrupted bone in any amount of time.
And if the corrosion and corruption spread in the affected area, you must incise it in one of the nodes according to the remembered location, and cure it until it is healed.
However, if the nail is struck with percussion or traction and causes intense pain, then at the beginning you should anesthetize the patient, and remove the nail by scraping it horizontally across the tip in a straight line, taking care that the incision does not penetrate the flesh below the nail, for this will cause excessive growth of new tissue in the affected area; and cure the affected area with something that relieves pain.
However, the affected part, which is found in many men, is all flesh, or it is in the bone, or it is in the nail.
And some of them are born from the joints, or their origin is in certain nodes of the affected areas. However, one born from the nodes of the finger is not ill, but one that originates from the joints is very sick.
And of those born as flesh, the incision should be light, and you should make the incision according to its location with a long blade.
However, treatment of one that originates from the joint is difficult; therefore, be careful to avoid an abscess forming there.
However, in one born from the nodes of the affected area, you must incise at first the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone; then use an appropriate saw and cure it until it is healed.
However, consolidation that occurs in the affected area between its motes (small bony outgrowths) for various reasons or due to the nature of the man who has it, or due to consolidation of a wound or burn, or similar, therefore you must remove the consolidation until the affected area returns to its natural form.
And place between their swellings of the infiltrated areas with warm oil so that they are not easily consolidated, and separate them or place a thin sheet of lead between them until it is consolidated as required.
Similarly, if there is consolidation in certain parts of the palm, then you must remove the consolidation as prepared and appropriate for the shape of the member.
Of incisions, they are varicose veins.
Varicose veins are varicosed, large veins filled with mucus-like substances that appear in the joints of the body, and the most common occurrence is in the legs, especially in travelers, laborers and those who carry heavy loads.
Therefore, you must administer purgatives of black bile for several days with strong emesis, and draw blood from the patient from the basilic vein.
The treatment of them with iron is according to two methods: one is that it is incised and the black blood is extracted, and the other method is that the vein is raised and all of it is removed.
The section of him (or her) is made according to this method: first, wrap the leg with warm water until the thick blood has been resolved, which is a foul substance from the leg, and then tightly compress the patient's leg above the knee with a bandage, near the division just below the thigh, and apply dry heat to a vein, or to two, or three veins with a wide incision, and raise black blood with your thumb from the division just below the leg upwards and downwards until the desired amount and frequency has been drained, and that which will remove the affliction of the patient.
Then tie it up and instruct him to avoid foods causing black bile production.
Repeat the cure through phlebotomy when the veins are full and you notice this in the patient.
But the elevation (of the hernia) is done according to this method: if there are inflammations in it, immerse the patient's leg in warm water and wrap it with warm water until it swells and the veins become congested; or if exercise is practiced, if bathing is not at your disposal, keep the member warm until it is heated.
Then cut the cord in the direction of the vein along its length or towards the rear (of the hernia), or at the lower end you should do it on the penis or the scrotum.
Then open the cord with scissors and expose the vein from all sides until you feel it, and be aware that when you see blackness spreading, this is a sign of death approaching.
And since you've found the white one (the healthy cord), cut the cord.
Then place the iron rod under it until it is raised and expelled from the cord, and suspend it with a hook of gold or silver.
And then cut another incision alongside the first one for three fingers, and expose the cord above the vein until it appears.
Then lift it up and incise the lower incision towards the scrotum, extracting it and lifting it out through the second incision, then extract it from the incision above that one.
Do this until the entire cord is extracted from the upper incision or any of the incisions, until it is completely drained; then close the incision.
If it is not easy for you to extract and lift it, insert a strong double-edged needle and tie it off, or introduce the iron rod behind it and rotate your hand in all directions until it is expelled. Keep in mind that it should not be incised; for if it is broken, it will make it difficult to elevate the hernia and bring harm to the patient through this injury.
When the entire cord is completely expelled, place it on a piece of wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil (or plain oil), and treat that area until it heals.
If the wound is contracted due to a twisting in which it is enclosed at the division, and this is not straight as we have said, then you must cut through all sides of the twist and the points of enclosure of it, and suspend it with scissors until it is lifted completely.
Keep in mind to not incise the vein during your incision and not harm it, for it will be difficult for you to elevate the hernia; serve your caution in that matter.
The shape of the incision for the cut wound:
It should not be made as with the hook nor of sharp extremity so that it does not harm the vein; and it is of a large flexibility, for if it were thin, it would incise the vein through its thinness; having too much thickness in this way, as we have said.
Extraction of the leg vein.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot lands such as Egypt in Arabic lands and in Indian lands with dry and scant vegetation, where there is no herb or grass.
Strongly pulsating veins are generated in other parts of the body other than the legs.
The process is due to putrefaction that comes from the cord, such as the venom of snakes and worms, scorpions, and worms breeding between the cord and the flesh.
The sign of the onset of the event is from this vein that appears in the inflammation of the thigh; and apply heat to the location; and start the vein flowing from the site of this swelling, which seems reasonable from its base (plant).
And when the extremity appears, it is necessary that you cover over it a lead weight of which its weight should be equal to two drachms. Immerse it in it and leave the lead suspended from the bed.
And keep watch for some time until any symptoms appear outside, cover it with lead and nail it down. If it continues without improvement, then you should make an incision in it and cover the remaining part; do not incise that one until it has come out, because if you incise it, it becomes contracted, enters into the flesh, causes an abscess, pustule at the site and a bad ulcer.
Since it must be treated gently and slowly extracted until it comes out completely without leaving any cause in the body.
And from this vein, it has issued in some men of about the length of five palms and ten fingers, and I have already heard that one of twenty palms has been extracted.
And if it is incised at the time of treatment, insert a probe into the wound and penetrate deeply with a long probe through the body until all matter has been evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the site for several days with medicines; then take care of it as in the cure of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes heals slowly, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it causes many painful discharges; and it has been seen to come out from each discharge as a branch.
And therefore, treat it as we have said in the previous section and with what has been said above.
From the section about worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine sickness.
This disease is called bovine sickness in some places because it often affects cattle and has few worms that are born between the skin and the flesh, which move up and down, and are revealed by the sensation of the limbs until the skin bursts and comes out.
And its generation is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, such as worms, snakes, leeches, and tapeworms in the stomach.
And it is feared for its malice because when it moves in the body and rises to the head, it reaches the brain, at which point it causes strong vomiting, enters and destroys the brain, and this happens many times.
And therefore when you want to treat and extract it, do not proceed unless you have observed its movement and appearance in the patient's body, and then it is necessary to strengthen what is above it and below it with great effort and constriction, and apply heat to it and extract it.
And if it is attached to the flesh and not swollen, you should pause with a heated cautery at the site until it dies; the greatest fear is corruption of it which corrupts the location as we have said above.
If you see it approaching the head near the brain, strengthen around the forehead with strong compression, apply heat to it and extract it; it is necessary for the patient to use purification of his body with medicines evacuating corrupt humors, and be careful of foods generating putrefaction.
From the section about jaundice (yellow fever).
This disease is called jaundice in our land, and it is pain that occurs in some limbs, and it is swollen from one limb to another.
And I have seen that as I advised you. I was summoned to a sick woman in a village, and I discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the brachial vein of the arm, and after it had been opened for an hour, I saw the inflammation swell up like a worm moving towards the place, but more slowly than usual, as if it were living silver running from one place to another.
And then it disappeared from the pain in that area and settled in the muscle, and I pressed it for an hour at this point.
Approach correct in the other body until you reach the other arm.
Approach correct in my turn so that I may rotate the entire body according to what I see, and it was very marvelous to me of the transformation of him and of the speed of member to member. I had already seen before him in the highest heels according to that method, but I have seen others who say that pain is being transformed from member to member. But I did not see it as with the heels thus in a woman.
And I did not think it was because the woman was old, in whose body and veins were exposed, and in this case it appeared to me as wind being transformed.
And it is necessary that it does not appear in those who are delicate and have bodies with veins made soft.
And when you wish to cure it and the patient feels that pain, do not appear in the heels as we have said, but rather be strong on it and gently and dry over it until the constriction of wind is exited, and cauterize the location.
But if you do not see it in the feet, then you cure it with expulsion of the body and what drives out wind, and sing to it with pills made from rue and pills of serapion and similar ones.
Of removal of thorns.
Thorns are varied according to their species, and according to the places in the body where they occur, because their diversity is that some of them have large points, small ones, concave ones, dull ones, which are solid; and from those with three angles, and of those to which tongues belong; and from those to which splinters belong.
And the signs of the servant are when you catch a thorn that passes through the bone and exits from the cavity located above the brain, because it often causes violent vomiting, dizziness, heat in the feet, inflammation and burning of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile, a weak word is separated and destroyed, and saliva is released from the mouth, white fluid comes out of the wound location similar to powder, and it looks like moisture of the flesh.
And therefore if you see these signs, then do not cure or extract the thorn, unless it is necessary.
But the signs of the thorn when caught in the heart, which is near the left breast, and feels hard-knitted, not empty; and strong movement of the thorn is like that of the pulse, and bleeding from the wound is black, and feverish sweat, and fainting; and therefore know that death descends on him completely.
The signs when the thorn has pierced the lung are mainly sputum from the wound and swelling of vessels near the neck, and the color of the patient changes, and breathes out a large spirit, and asks for fresh air.
If the thorn catches the scrotum that is on the feet, and pain occurs near the small ribs, it is usually accompanied by great pain and heavy breathing, but not all members of the muscles are affected.
If the thorn catches the stomach, then it is usually accompanied by some indigestion.
If the thorn catches the abdomen and is embedded in it, then there may be a wound or tear of the tissue or hernia that has been disrupted, and there is no hope in extracting the thorn from it.
If the thorn catches the bladder and exits through urine, and it causes some injury outside of it, then there is great pain on the patient, and you know that it is fatal.
Members such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, and joints of the spine, cervical vertebra, pelvis, hip, and similar members are saved according to the greater dispositions when the thorn does not puncture a vein or artery and is not venomous.
And I recommend to you what I have seen about these thorns, because it means for your treatment.
The reason is that in a man a thorn entered the lacrimal duct of his foot in the root of his nose, and I extracted it from him from the other side, putting gray earwax on it, and he was cured, and there was no damage to his foot.
Extract another arrow from a Jew's thigh where it entered him in the groin area of his scrotum, pull back the eyelid, and the arrow is hidden and not immediately visible, but only a small tip remains adhered to his flesh, and it was a large sharp arrow of Turkish arrows with a lion head without feathers.
Send for another arrow from the Jew's thigh, but do not harm him accidentally.
Extract another arrow from a Christian man who was shot in the armpit, and it was an Arabic arrow with feathers; locate the entry point of the arrow and make an incision over it, then submerge the arrowhead in the wound and carefully remove it. The Christian is healed.
Extract another arrow that was shot into a man's stomach. I feared he would die from it, but after thirty days had passed and his condition did not change due to any cause related to his illness, I made an incision over the arrow and carefully removed it. The patient recovered without any harm.
I saw a man in whom an arrow was shot into his back, and the wound became infected. After seven years, I cauterized the arrowhead at its base.
I saw a woman who was shot in the stomach, and the wound became infected inside her. After many days had passed, her condition did not improve, and she did not experience any problems in her natural functions.
I saw another man who was shot in the face, and the wound became infected, but when I cauterized the arrowhead, there was no excessive pain, only similar symptoms.
Extract the arrow from the man of the king who was shot in the middle of his nose and had started to decline slightly on the right side, but the arrowhead was completely hidden.
I was summoned to treat him within three days of his injury from the arrow.
Then I found the wound of the arrow to be narrow; I gently probed it with a fine instrument and did not feel anything; but I felt a prick on the right side, so I hoped that this prick was due to the tip of the arrow.
I expanded the area around the wound with an absorbent and healing substance, believing that the spot would become inflamed to reveal the location of the arrow, so that it could be cut off.
I did not harm the area with any accidental injury, believing that the arrow had reached this spot; I continued applying the absorbent substance to it for many days and did not cause any further problems; however, the wound became infected during this time, and the patient recovered from his illness after several days during which he felt the arrow in his nose and informed me of its location.
Then I covered the wound with a strong corrosive medicine for several days until it opened up, and with the probe I found the tip of the arrow, which was adhered to the shaft.
I placed the corrosive medicine on the wound to open it up until I saw clearly the tip of the arrow, and then I waited for several months for the wound to heal.
After the wound was opened up, I was able to enter it with forceps and remove the arrow without causing any problems, as will be described in more detail at the end of this passage. I carefully removed the arrow with various tools until one day I managed to grasp it with descending forceps, according to their shape, and finally extracted it. I then restored the wound.
Some physicians believed that the nasal cartilage could not be restored, but I did restore it, and the wound healed completely, and the patient suffered no harm in any way.
I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows, according to which you will understand and deduce what I have not said, because the parts of this art and the difficulties encountered in it are not understandable through narrative or easily read in books.
The skilled craftsman learns more from a little than the multitude, and what is present teaches us about what is absent. Novel operations and new instruments are necessary to overcome unusual difficulties in the art when they arise.
Therefore, I say that arrows are not forgotten in the members into which they have been shot except by two means: either by attraction to the place they entered; or by the opposite force of the other side.
The arrow that was shot into the place where it entered, or the arrow coming from fleshly parts and shot outwards and forgotten.
If it does not occur immediately after the shot, then you must leave it for some days until the surrounding flesh softens and the attraction is reduced and its exit becomes possible.
Similarly, if it has been shot into bone and does not occur immediately, then you must wait for some days and move it with attraction and movement every day, and eventually it will be forgotten.
If it does not occur immediately after some days, then you must perforate around the arrow in all directions with a very thin instrument until the wound is expanded by the arrow, and then extract it.
But if the splinter is hidden deep within the body and cannot be felt, then you should probe it carefully, and if you can feel it, you should draw it out with appropriate tools.
If you cannot access it due to the swelling and length of the wound, and if it is not bone, nerve or vein there, then you should make an incision over the wound to widen it so that the splinter can be extracted.
If it is covered by scabs that need to be removed, then you should remove the tissue surrounding it in all directions using any tool that may be useful; and if you cannot access it due to the obstruction of the scabs and twisting of those areas, then you should try to break the scabs and twist them until you can gain access.
When extracting the splinter from any location, you should use twisting and forceps on all sides to make it yield; and with delicate precision, avoid breaking the splinter and make the removal as easy as possible for you.
If you cannot perform the procedure at that time, then leave it for several days until the surrounding tissues have softened and become easier to manipulate, and then reattempt the procedure when it is more manageable. If blood flow is hindered, you should administer what has been mentioned in the cure section.
And be careful not to cut the vein or nerve, or tendon, and administer appropriate tools for the removal of the splinter; do it with ease, calmness, patience, and firmness as I have recommended and as you are able.
And thus you should counteract the splinter so that the patient is relieved as much as possible in the manner described for treating the splinter in this case, as it will be more beneficial. But if that is not feasible for you, then administer what is within your abilities according to the figures.
However, if the splinters are protruding from opposite sides, or have already damaged adjacent parts on the outside, or cause swelling in the area above the cervix and sometimes painfully prominent; then you should cut the affected area; and make the incision according to the size that the forceps can grasp; and draw it out, as it will be easily removed.
But if it is lodged in the bone, you should twist the ramrod against the splinter until it penetrates the bone, widen the area around it, and carefully extract it.
And if it does not come out within several days, you should reattempt the procedure.
If the splinter's shaft is in the wound, you should push it out.
But if the shaft is hidden and you wish to apply pressure, you should insert the probe into it, if it is hard, use a concave instrument to fit into the concavity of the splinter and push it out with the probe.
But if the splinter is concave, you should push it out with a strong instrument inserted into it, as the splinter will be relieved by this.
And if the splinter is embedded, you should curve all of the surrounding tissue around it, if possible, and take care of that area with what is appropriate.
If the splinter is located in the foot, abdomen, bladder, ribs, or chest and can be reached with your probe, and it is possible to incise around it, then you should make an incision around it, taking care not to cut any veins or nerves; extract it, and stitch up the wound if necessary, and take care of it until it heals.
The shape of forceps for removing splinters:
They should have tips shaped like bird beaks, made with saw-like edges that grip the splinter without letting go.
Some are made small, large, few or many, depending on the size and shape of the splinter and the width of the wound and its obstruction.
Thus, as if the intestine inside is to be relieved in the concave sac and compressed with that.
When a vein must be cut open for phlebotomy (bloodletting) purposes.
The veins to be bled for phlebotomy are those of which it is customary to bleed every thirty days. In the head, there are sixteen such veins. Thus, there are two pulsating veins which are near the ears, called "auriculares"; two herbs that appear in both temples, and two veins appearing in the eyes, called "lacrimales" (tear ducts); a vein in the middle of the forehead, and one at the end of the nose; two jugular veins, and two veins on the upper lip; two veins on the lower lip, which are called "angelic"; and two veins behind the tongue. The veins that are bled in the arms are five; Of those five, one is the cephalic, and it is the left latissimus vein, which people call "the vein of the head," and it is shallow, a middle vein, composed of one branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; this one they call "the vein of the whole body," and the basilica is the vein that is tapped in the dominant cubital vein, and it is called "cubital," and people call it "vein of the abdomen" in common speech; the brachial, which is found near the elbow, and is the one that is bled, and it appears above the elbow prominently; the cephalic vein, which is between the two aforementioned ones; and the median cubital, which is found between the two aforementioned pulses, and it has two branches.
And in the foot and calf there are three veins: one of these is the one that follows the curve of the inner border of the latissimus vein; the second is saphenous, and its location is below the calf of the dominant cubital vein; the sciatic vein, and its location is below the calf of the latissimus vein; and in the calf there are other veins similar to these.
The help of the veins near the ears is for ancient catarrhs, migraines, headaches and old ulcers of the head.
The quality of bleeding those veins is as I recommend to you: it is to shave the patient's head, and to fry the patient's head in the occiput in the location of both veins covered with a large, thick cloth; hold the patient's neck with a bandage that allows both veins to appear in two places at the base of the skull; and have that done by you, and if you feel the pulse of those veins with your fingers, try it here.
Then you take the surgical lancet, which is pointed, and insert it below the vein into the caudal bone up to where phlebotomy occurs at the bone. And you lift your hand with the vein and bone to the incision sites above, and make an incision on the vein with the pointed lancet. And let the length of the incision be approximately two fingers, or around that, and draw out the blood as much as you want.
Hold the pulse firmly and leave it until it is healed.
And it has been previously mentioned at the beginning of the book the incision and cauterization of these.
But of the two arteries that are in the temples, the help of phlebotomy is for ancient migraines, chronic headaches, and recurrent otalgias (ear infections).
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is as I recommend to you: tighten the patient's neck and bring it forward until both veins appear to your sight, and feel their pulse with your fingers; then try it here.
Approach you lift the bandage over the vein at the groins as indicated, and introduce the lancet obliquely below, then lift the vein upward; incise it thus as you have done in the other two veins; and make the blood flow according to your necessity's quantity.
Approach you loosen the patient's coartation (or bandage), and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then press firmly on that spot and knead it gently above with strong pressure, and leave it there until it is healed.
And now we have prepared the recall of their (the veins) names and the incision, and we begin with the beginning of the treatise.
And therefore, the benefit of frontal vein lancing is similar to that of the temporal vein for ancient facial diseases such as migraines, headaches, and fetid ulcers.
And the quality of lancing depends on what I recommend to you; it is that the patient holds their neck with a bandage until the vein appears, and then take the instrument which is called the trepan or drill, whose form is as follows:
Place the point of the drill on the prominent part of the vein and strike it obliquely or by some other means in the manner specified, and let the blood flow according to the amount you desire; then release the perforation of the patient and hold it until it is healed.
Sometimes it is opened with a lat lancet (or large lancet), but not necessarily that the lancing should be of sharp extremity like other lancets, it should be of broad extremity, and lance it transversely, because the bone is close and strong, and the lancet would easily break in it if it is thin.
The benefit of the two veins that are in the eyelids due to scabies (or crustiness) in the eyelids caused by headaches and inflammation, and facial diseases.
And the quality of lancing is that the patient holds their neck with a bandage, and then lance those veins, and you stand over the head of the patient.
Make the lancing transverse to the longitude slightly and do a few shallow lancetings because in that location there is not much flesh, and if the lancet is thin, its tip is easily broken.
Let the blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and press on those areas, and hold them for a moment, and then release them.
However, the lancing of the nasal vein is useful for acute fever and violent sodas (or sneezing), and facial diseases such as migraines, headaches, and inflammations that occur in the face, especially when it is old.
And the quality of lancing is that the patient holds their neck and you hold your left hand near their nose, and take a thin, long lancet and place it in the middle of the nostril according to right angle, because the vein does not appear by touch there, and the blood begins to flow immediately.
You must finish the lancing little by little and let the blood flow according to your necessity, and hold it for a moment, because it is easily restored.
However, the benefit of lancing the two guiding veins leads to the constriction of the alae (or wings) and the beginning of leprosy and various diseases, as well as impetigo and corrosive ulcers such as herpetiformis.
And the quality of lancing those veins is that the patient holds each one in their neck gently; and the artist stands over the head of the patient, and the patient lies on a chair.
And lance the long vein with a wide, shallow lancet little by little; and extract the blood according to a measured amount or according to what you see is necessary at that moment; and make it look like the other vein.
And release the bandage and gently constrict both veins with moderate pressure to avoid causing discomfort to the patient, and leave them for a few days as the wound heals.
The benefit of lancing the alar veins is associated with small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corrosion of the gums, bad ulcers, and fissures, as well as ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
And the quality of lancing those veins is that you ask the patient to sit down in front of you, hold their neck with a bandage, and then roll back their lips and observe the two veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each one is by the darkness of both, and it is more evident because there are small black veins around them; and then incise each one with an oblique incision.
However, if you have doubts, and do not know which one is the greater of those, then you should incise the more obvious one and of the pustule that is present.
And make them look like the two veins that are in the lips above.
More than two veins that are now joined together support the faucomy of the cephalic in precautions that are in the gullet, to treat illnesses of the uvula, and mouth illnesses.
And the quality of faucomy in that case is such that it follows the patient's mouth, lifts the tongue out of the way, and looks at one side of a vein and the other side of the vein, and the color of each is darkening to black.
Then faucomy each one; be careful not to press your hand in faucomy of those, because they are arteries afterwards.
And your veins that are faucomy in the neck are those that run through all men, and the faucomy of theirs is done according to two methods, or they are filled with mirtilat or olive oil in thinning; or they are sealed with a cautery knife and called alnessil, and this is its form:
The latzes of it should be thus, and it is necessary to open the convex veins full of blood that appear thick, and at those that contain coarse clotted blood.
And this faucomy is smaller and has a thinner end, and it requires faucomy of thin veins that contain thin blood from lemons.
Moreover, the aid of faucomy of the basilica vein is useful, which is one of three veins: because it drains the blood from illnesses that are in the gullet and neck, and of what seizes the legs and abdomen.
It is necessary for the faucomer, when faucomy of that (vein), to keep it and be cautious with it, because there is an artery afterwards, and if he makes a mistake and adjusts in the puncture of the faucomy, he will cut the artery and cause bleeding, so it is not advisable to faucomize that with a penetrating faucomy, but rather cut it with alnessil.
And if the basilica does not appear through a clear manifestation, then it is necessary that you seek another one or find one of its branches; or faucomize in the place of the end of the arm, because that is evident; and seal that with alnessil as we have said.
Moreover, if you wish to faucomize the vein in the middle of the arm, then it is necessary in front of its narrowing where you know the location between the wrists, and place your hand over it with a cloth; and place your finger on it and cut the vein with concave secession using alnessil as we have said; and be careful to avoid percussion in the area of the artery.
And when you feel it, as if it is tightening, apply pressure at the location that you have pointed out with a cloth, then that inflation is inflation of the artery, and therefore avoid that area.
And if you see blood flowing from the faucomy as if it is urine of a child and the blood is thin red, then you know that it is arterial blood; and you should press your finger and hold it for a long time; and remove your finger, and if the blood is cut off, which often happens, then you should tighten the arm and leave it.
And watch the patient for discharge from it, and be cautious not to shake it for several days until it is healed.
Moreover, if the blood does not stop flowing, and sometimes you do not have medicine available at that time, then you should cut the artery if it appears; because its end is constricted, and the blood stops; or take scissors and cut it, and pick up one cloth and tighten it over the location of the vein with narrowing between the palm and fingers until the next day.
And if the blood stops flowing, that is good; otherwise, you should treat it with whatever remedy follows the reminder of the location of the powders that stop bleeding.
The stopping of blood from it is difficult in many situations due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of the hand slipping on the arm.
Moreover, faucomy of the dark vein is useful for draining blood from the subclavian part of the head and the lower part of the body; because it is composed of branches of the basilica and branches of the cephalic, as we have said.
And the phlebotomist must be cautious when performing a phlebotomy on that individual, since it is a nerve; and if you adjust during the phlebotomy and bruise the nerve, it will cause numbness, healing will be difficult, and recovery will not be complete. This nerve can sometimes be felt with care; however, it may be hidden in some individuals and subtle, not being visible. In such cases, the phlebotomy must be performed without that nerve, and you must avoid the nerve with your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then make the vein incision longitudinally (along its length).
The benefit of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it drains blood from the head and alleviates headaches in patients.
It is appropriate in this case that if you wish to phlebotomize the olive vein or the myrtle vein, since it is safe from all veins, as there are neither arteries nor nerves nearby.
However, a small abscess may occur in some individuals if it is not phlebotomized in the initial percussion, but this abscess will not be noticed until later.
The first of these is that you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except in the conservation of health and with hope for its benefits and caution for the avoidance of diseases, and that it should be performed on one of the veins that are in the arm: cephalic, basilic, or median cubital; and it should be performed at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in the morning and autumn, and in winter near meals when signs of congestion appear.
It should be performed phlebotomy on the third day or the first day after three hours have passed since eating.
Phlebotomy that is administered, but when it provides convenience and necessity or at night or during the day, in every hour and at any time.
A child should not be phlebotomized before the age of twelve, a woman who is pregnant should not be phlebotomized until the fourth month at the latest, and elderly women should not be phlebotomized who have passed sixty years.
If someone wishes to be phlebotomized in some way, it is necessary to empty the intestines with a leon clyster before the phlebotomy, if there is an inflammation or fissure in the intestines, to prevent superfluous blood from accumulating in the phlebotomy of the veins, which are pure, and not affecting the main organs.
Phlebotomy should not be performed on patients suffering from nausea or vomiting, nor on those suffering from illness or drunkenness until their condition has improved, nor on a patient with dropsy, and moreover, phlebotomy should be avoided in cases of colic pain, vomiting, abdominal disorders, multiplication of secretions and work and exercise during fasting or vigils, and any cause that dissolves the virtue, whether corporeal or animal.
Also consider in the subtlety of humors before this if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medications if it is possible for you to do so.
And consider taking a bath if there is no prohibition against it, or exercise for some exercise to make the blood more subtle.
And pause the phlebotomy on that day in the afternoon, namely around three o'clock, as has been said.
And ensure that the foot of that person is kept on that day free from all animal and physical accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and any other similar accidents.
And in his case, ensure that the causes are present at his service for which the use of aromatics and fragrances, balms, and similar substances according to the quantity of possibility is customary among men.
And follow the phlebotomist on a couch that is higher than the one of the person who should be phlebotomized.
And stretch out the patient's arm and press it with your hand two or three times, and tighten the ligature with straps or bandages for two repetitions.
The ligature should be tightened promptly, since a loose ligature or a ligature with excess can cause the flow of blood; or if it is to moisturize, then prevent the heart from beating.
And ensure that the person who should be phlebotomized presses his hands between them until the veins are inflamed and can be felt.
The phlebotomist should anoint his phlebotomy with a little ancient oil specifically; and the patient should place his left hand on that vein, away from the location where the phlebotomy is to be performed, so that the vein bulges a little, and the percussion is quiet since it is the vein that contracts like a cord when the phlebotomy is desired, and it is full of vitality and when the phlebotomy is performed on that one, it becomes contracted, and the phlebotomy is discovered; and the phlebotomy should not open the vein, and if it opens, it is tightened.
Therefore, to ensure that the bloodletter is held firmly and stimulated in all these causes.
Then hold the bloodletter in place, but if the vein is swollen in one area, then it's good; otherwise, you move to another area a little away from that spot or wait with haste, if the location isn't opened.
If the location is opened, or the patient feels pain, then you leave it for a day or two and do not tighten the ligament, because strong pressure can cause the wound to swell further, or enter into bath.
Then move to another bloodletting if necessary.
If the opening is small and the blood flows thinly and you fear that it will not flow the desired amount, then you move to another bloodletting at that spot and adjust the opening a little, and do so quickly before the location is opened, because in many people you should make few openings.
But if it has already been opened, then do not move over it, because there is no excuse for any reason; and rest on a certain part of the oil hole, because it relieves the body of blood. And it is better in this spot than other oils.
Similarly, make an oil hole in every bloodletting where you must prohibit crossing the blood vessels, and do so according to tradition and expert knowledge when resting one of them over the spot, because the blood is made thin and turned when it is thick.
If a large abscess is generated in the bloodletting spot, which often happens, especially if it does not stop bleeding on that day or during the vein incision, then you cauterize, and rest the spot on a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly scalded, and tighten it for an hour, because it dissolves.
It is necessary to make sure that the scab of the blood from that vein forms on its own or another vein.
And if a black or green discoloration remains in the spot for several days, do not worry about it; and if you wish, rest on some cause of aloe and rosemary dissolved, or some cause of mint juice or calamine or similar to it.
And often abscesses and growths require bloodletting from the basilica (a large artery in the neck).
Therefore, place your hand on it, and if you find softness, then your compression should be on it; this growth is bad and harmful; so be careful that you rest on some cause of what was said, because strong bleeding from the artery will flow.
Make a poultice with something that is stiffening, so that the spot hardens, and take care of it with other treatments until it is healed.
It is necessary to draw blood from all people according to the amount of their virtue and according to the color that appears in the blood according to what happens.
Because if the blood is black, you leave it to settle until it turns red; and similarly, if you see it thick, you leave it to settle until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, you leave it until its sharpness subsides.
And it is necessary for those who are strong and healthy and have a need for bloodletting on one day to have the bloodletting of the vein increased and the incision be large.
And in those who are frail, the opposite should be done, and it is necessary to draw it out in too many days, and that the incision be narrow.
The best method of bloodletting from a vein is a cross-section, not a puncture.
This method of lancing is safe from bleeding and nerve injury, and it is praised and considered safe as the lancing is performed according to both length and width (literally: This manner of lancing is free from flow of blood and entry into nerves, and is laudable and safe that lancing is done according to length and width [according to its dimensions]).
If fainting usually occurs during the lancing, you should take care of that person before lancing with a small piece of bread soaked in milk-grain wine or simple scalded oil, and extract the blood in three or four viewings.
If it is a complication, then take care before lancing by soaking in an embrocation of myrrh or scented honey with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar ones, or in scented and strong-smelling embrocation.
If fainting occurs during the lancing and it is caused only by blood, then you must drink water of meat and a subtle-smelling embrocation; and use aromatics and limit their feet with that.
Use the other causes mentioned in the chapter on fainting for evacuation.
Whoever wants to reduce their arm and dissolve the blood in stages according to observation, must do it on someone from whom lancing is for major evacuation, and its virtue is fennel, which gradually evacuates the small amount of blood, just as the strength of the virtue lasts continuously for several days.
However, whoever wants to reduce their arm and expel the blood in stages, and their body is strong, must do it approximately seven or nine hours after the first lancing.
However, whoever wants to direct the blood from their body in the opposite direction of the flow from which it is descending, must be reduced on the second or third day.
However, in a body where there is already warm blood that is acute and causes fever, it must be expelled from the blood in one viewing and a large amount must be expelled and the opening increased before fainting occurs, since you will have kept all the conditions of lancing; and place your hand on the pulse of the arm to prevent death in the place of fainting, because many times death results when the lancer is ignorant and negligent.
And it is not necessary when you want to remove the arm and expel the blood in stages, if the orifices of the vein are closed and it is difficult only for the blood to come out, that you press on it with great force and stretch it slightly, because this is very bad.
Wait until it is time to lance again; or remedy the lancing that was acute and coagulated blood in the vein orifices; or place a mustard plaster or sage leaf, and compress lightly until the blood comes out.
And if the vein is inflamed, leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
And if there is a need to expel the blood in stages and there is no excuse, then you should make an incision on that location or in the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "the sheath of the arm" is lanced in the location of the fusca or basilica, when it is not twisted or hidden, because it consists of these.
And the quality of the lancing is that the patient immerses their hand in hot water until the probe becomes swollen and the vein appears clearly.
And apply strength to that with a moderate narrow strap; and lance transversely, not longitudinally or according to the width.
And make the opening wide and make your lancing with the one that you lance on the joint of the hand.
And if the flow of blood is forbidden, move your hand in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your goal.
However, if you are in the summer days, you are exempt from moving your hand in hot water, and in winter the body of the blood is paused in hot water.
And lancing of this vein is safer than all other veins, because there is no pulse or nerves there.
And the lancing of the tendon of the right hand is applied to liver diseases.
And the quality of lancing is that you tighten the hand with a strap or your own hand, then place it in hot water until the vein is inflamed and clearly visible to the eye; and make the lancing transverse; and if this is not found in all cases, it will not be known in the result.
Maintain that your hand should not endanger the phlebotomy, as nerves of the said area are now exposed by skin.
Approach the hand into the water's rear and allow the blood to flow in that, for if you do not approach it into the water's rear, the blood will coagulate in the vein's opening, and flowing is forbidden.
And as the blood is withdrawn according to the required quantity, then pause over the oil and salt vein so that it is not hardened excessively; similarly, you must do this for every narrow branch.
Moreover, the advantage of the phlebotomy on that from the left hand is that it helps with the diseases of the liver.
And do similarly in the phlebotomy there as you have done on the other.
Moreover, the advantage of the saphenous vein phlebotomy is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as uterine diseases, retention of menstruation, and lung diseases and ulcers in chest and groin areas, and their similarities with other diseases.
The quality of the phlebotomy there is that the patient immerses his foot in warm water and searches for a friction spot where veins appear; and on the joint of the foot with a strap; and the location of the vein, it should be pointed to, and from that it branches out in the face of the foot many ramps.
Therefore, phlebotomy the bladder or the groin area should be done on a larger vein, for it is better and more accessible.
And if you phlebotomize that in the foot, then guard yourself from the nerves that are below there on the foot's surface, and pause your phlebotomy with the one that you phlebotomize transversely, as if you want to incise it.
And may your phlebotomies be sharp.
Moreover, drawing blood is forbidden; therefore, immerse the foot in warm water and allow the blood to flow there until it is evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake in the first examination, immerse it again with the phlebotomy in another small area, for the location is salt; do not fear the evil, but rather guard yourself from the nerves as we have said.
Similarly, do this with the saphenous vein of the other foot.
And for the sciatic vein, its location as we have said should be pointed below the wilderness of the hip.
Moreover, the advantage of the phlebotomy there is for back pain when it is due to blood clot.
The quality of the phlebotomy there is that the patient enters into bath, and quickly and forcefully compresses the buttocks of the lower back up to four fingers' width under a long thin bandage, for it will not appear otherwise.
Therefore, when it appears, then phlebotomize that according to any method that is possible for you and transversely, which is better; or incise that through incision or cut that through section, for the location is salt.
This is in many men with diminished sensation; and if that disappears, and it does not appear to the touch, then phlebotomize one of its branches, and it is the one that appears at the back of the foot near the said auricular and anular veins.
Guard yourself from the nerves, and let blood flow in the amount that you want.
Return the narrowing, and pause over the location of the phlebotomy spot, for it will heal easily.
Regarding venuction and the qualities of using those.
Venuctions are of corns, or of erysipelas, or of veins.
Venuction is performed in two ways: one by scoring and drawing blood, and the other without scoring.
This venuction that is without scoring is in two ways, for it can be with fire or without fire.
And the venuctions that are performed with scoring and bloodletting are in twelve locations of the body, among which one is where phlebotomies are applied, and it is the back of the neck; and the middle of the two collars; and venuctions on the chin below the lower jaw; and venuctions of both palms; and venuctions of the alohoster, and it is at the end of the cavity; and venuctions of both eyeballs, and they are two arms' length; and venuctions of both hipbones; and venuctions of both thighbones.
Venuction does not draw blood but from small, scattered veins in the skin, and therefore it does not acquire its virtue through them, as it is in phlebotomy; nor should venuction be performed with fire or without fire in any disease caused by repletion until the entire body is evacuated.
However, if necessity requires venuction due to disease or continuous bleeding, administer it at the beginning and end of the month, and in its middle and any time.
And when in some cases of that kind, and particularly if it occurs on the third day or the fourth, then command vomiting to be induced after two or three hours have passed.
In addition to vomiting, it is also helpful when that condition causes heaviness in the head and if it leads to filling of the ears. But it must be complete evacuation of the entire body.
This vomiting is in the location of cranial lancing (or trepanation).
It is not appropriate to use it in the case of a complete fracture or one with catarrh, as it causes great harm.
It is not necessary to use it on the elderly, and in cases of fractured skulls with diseases.
But in the case of someone who is continually vomiting, it is necessary to command the vomitor to pause his hand slightly on the sides of the mouth, to prevent the generation of forgetfulness (or confusion).
Vomiting at the neck is in the location of lancing of the dark vein (or basilic vein) and the jugular: it causes asthma, constriction of the trachea and scissure of the tracheal cartilage, coughing, and suffocation.
It is necessary to force the vomiting at the neck to be a little sharp, because if it is paused, it causes weakness in the body and stomach.
Vomiting at the temples causes headaches and otitis (inflammation of the ear), migraines, fever, dental pain, and it is in the location of lancing of the basilic vein.
It is necessary to command the vomitor not to press his hand with a laceration, to avoid puncturing an artery and causing bleeding.
Vomiting below the chin causes alcohol in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and resembles other diseases of the mouth, and is in the location of lancing of the alar vein which is on both lips.
Vomiting made between the two hands causes croup, which is caused by suffocation with heat.
Vomiting between the two openings of the eyes also contributes to lancing of three veins, namely the basilic, dark, and cephalic, because it draws the blood from all those veins which are located in the flesh, and those small veins of the other veins into which the blood is drawn before it reaches the three main veins.
Command the vomitor not to proceed with laceration, because the area is bare of flesh and there are nerves and arteries nearby.
This vomiting is made on the shoulders and causes diarrhea in the anus and ulcers below it.
It is necessary to command the vomitor that it should be a large vomiting, and of iron, because the location requires deep incision; and strong blunt vomitings with fine edges should be used, and it should be lacerated with a laceration.
Smaller vomitings at the legs manifestly show blood from all over the body, cause old diseases of the lungs and womb, and the bladder; they induce menstruation, and cause hemorrhoids and edema; they are in the location of lancing of two saphenous veins, and the anterior and posterior cubital.
However, it does not weaken the whole body and cause fainting in many men.
And from the bladders, when they are suspended, the help is similar to the aid of two bladders. (Translation)
And the quality of the position of the bladders is that you stop the ventose at the beginning by gentle suction and do not prolong its position, but stop it lightly, and leave it in place moderately, and let the humors come to the place by natural passage. (Translation) And do not stop doing this and continue until the place becomes red and swollen, and the pus appears from the wound. (Translation)
Then you make a small incision and gently drain the pus little by little, and be careful in the position of the body. (Translation)
Since that man is of tender flesh with rare pores, you should make an incision once and not too deep, to prevent the place from becoming ulcerated. (Translation)
Instruct the lancer that he should widen the incision slightly and deepen it gently, and collect the pus easily. (Translation)
If the pus is thick, it is necessary to make an incision twice, as in the first incision, the way of sublimation to the pus and its moisture will be opened. (Translation) But in the second incision, it is necessary to achieve the thorough scrutiny of the extraction of the thick pus. (Translation)
If the pus is very foul-smelling, make a third incision to achieve the final result. (Translation)
And finally, when we want to extract the pus little by little or in small quantities, it suffices for us with one incision. (Translation)
If we want to extract a lot of pus, we must make a deep incision; and if we suspect that the pus is thick, it is necessary to make a deep incision. (Translation)
The term "incision" only refers to the depth of the cut. (Translation)
If the cut is thick, hard, black and the pores are narrow, it is necessary to soften the places of the bladders with oil of aloe or violet oil, oil of marigold, camomile oil, or oil of thistle in summer; and if it is winter, use oil of garlic, oil of lily, oil of camomile, or oil of wine. (Translation)
If the excess is thick, you should use oil of turpentine or oil of balsam, oil of aloe, or oil of anise, etc. (Translation)
But if the lancer has wide pores of tender flesh, it is necessary to prohibit oil and use warm water or water from saltwater, water of vinegar, water of figs, or water of wormwood for washing the bladder areas. (Translation)
If the pus is very wet, wash the bladders with vinegar or water of myrtle and sumac, etc. (Translation)
If the excesses are thick, wash the bladders with old vinegar or water of sage, wormwood, dill, camomile, etc. (Translation)
It is necessary to protect the bladder from bathing; having it administered immediately after bathing for an hour or two and sleeping near the bladder. (Translation)
What is necessary to bleed a bladder before lancing it. (Translation from Latin)
You must first consider: it is necessary to consider if the lancer or the one who is to bleed is colic and has cold on the sharp and inflamed pus, you should take cooling causes such as millgrana acetosa, and vinegar, wine, and anise, etc. (Translation)
Place food for them in this way as if it were porridge, and provide cooked chicken broth, and foods seasoned with vinegar, and foods resembling those.
For the one whose complexion is cold, it's necessary to have him drink elderberry syrup or absinthe made from seeds, sumac, and a fragrant spice between autumn and winter; and recommend that he use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid porridge, canabis, pissers, small birds, and pigeons.
It's necessary that on the day of ventozacio and fleubotomia, drinking should be greater than eating.
It's necessary to give some men tyriac alpharac or medicines made of musk, mastic, or alcela during ventozacio or fleubotomia or around that time, so that the main organs are comforted and the blood is made subtle; and it's not necessary for them to take that salt.
But the ventozas that are incisions should be incisions of the liver, and on the spleen and gout, on the umbilicus, in the locations of the joints, and the anus, because these members do not tolerate incision upon them.
And for those, it's not incision but the attraction of blood from a member, such as making an incision on the nipple in anemia caused by bleeding from the nose; and they use this to dissolve cold, inviscid vapors in a member, such as making an incision on the abdomen or umbilicus; because that makes the member rarefied, scalds it, and reduces pain, which resolves vapors.
And an incision has already been made on the throat when it happens in their paralysis or palsy, because by the strong power of attraction, it relieves paralysis and eradicates palsy from its location.
And similarly, an incision made on the liver or spleen removes vapors trapped in them.
These incisions are administered using only juice, while others are administered with fire.
Others are administered with hot water in the sicknesses of the spleen.
And this is so that the incision is filled and is as large as possible, which is hot water alone or water in which appropriate herbs have been boiled.
The method of incision with fire: the size of the orifice should be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the amount of the probe should be the width of a palm; and in the longitude of it, at the location that is on the circumference, the length should be the same, but the depth should be small according to the amount that fits an awl into it.
It should be made with a linen cloth or lemon, with thick edges, lion's wool, and clean and smooth to avoid injuring the member in its position on it.
And at the middle of it, a crossbar made of linen or iron should be placed where the candle is held with fire.
And this incision should be much larger than the one we recommended earlier; and the size of it should be smaller according to the sickness and the state of the one who uses it.
And the incisions for infants and extended ones are different from those for young men with thick chests.
The quality of making this incision with fire on the member is to extend the flesh with fire gently in front of a small amount of wax candle, and make it over the middle of the crossbar in the middle of the incision, so that the fire is ignited away from the patient's body to prevent burning the patient.
And it should be made over the patient's member, and the incision should be made over the crossbar that we have mentioned, until when we have incisions and do not need to stretch the skin and allow the vapor to come out over the crossbar, then the incision will quickly dissolve.
And burn the flesh according to its method, and repeat it if necessary.
But in an incision administered in the sickness of plague, with water, without a crossbar or probe, and it is not filled but only made on the member itself.
And this is its method: The larger the incision, the better, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Chapter 75.
Sanguisuggas are not administered in any member except in members where the position of incisions is not possible due to their small size, such as the eyelid and its similar parts; or in a denuded member of flesh, such as the nose and its similar parts.
And the quality of using those that have found sanguisuggas in clean, purified waters.
Prepare the patient's day and night in warm water until they are comfortable, and ensure no cause remains in their stomach from this; prepare for evacuation of the body at the beginning with flebotomy and ventose; prepare to treat the patient's limbs until they swell up; prepare bandages over it.
When the stomach is filled and relaxed, and no cause remains within it; when the body has been evacuated at the beginning with flebotomy and ventose; when the limb has swollen; when the bandages are applied.
And if it is possible to draw out fluid from the affected area with a ventose, it is more beneficial as an aid.
If not, then wash the area with warm water and apply salt water; rub and press it out.
If the body's blood persists in the wound, it is necessary to place leeches at the wound site, and let them absorb the excess blood; then insert a piece of cloth dipped in cold water over the wound until the bleeding stops.
If the bleeding is excessive, sprinkle vitriol trisulfate or similar antihemorrhagic substances onto it until the blood is drained; or bandages soaked in powdered fav beans are applied, and they are left in place until the beans adhere to the wound, and the blood is drained.
If necessary, repeated use of leeches, when possible replacing them.
If the use of leeches is prohibited, rub the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the wound until it bleeds; then apply bandages, as when they sense any bleeding, they will immediately adhere.
When you wish to make them fall, sprinkle a little aloe powder or salt or ashes on them, and they will crumble immediately.
Thus begins the process of the third procedure: restoration. This chapter deals with necessary observations in the art of medicine; it is the restoration of bone fractures and dislocations due to accidents.
Oh son, understand that the foolish doctors and the common people, and those who do not attend to the books of the ancients or read a single letter from them, boast about this chapter.
Therefore, this method of the learned in our land is kept secret; and I have not forgotten it for a time being of everything; and I have not applied it immediately, but by long reading of the books of the ancients and studying their understanding, until I extracted their science.
And approach experimentation and study in the duration of my life.
I have already described in this chapter everything that contains my science and on which my experiment has been passed; therefore, here I abridge it for others and relieve it of the occupation of prolongation; I abridge it in the end of abridgement; and in the end of declaration, I show it; and I form many forms of the instruments that are administered in this case, as is done by addition of description, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Chapter First.
Summary and compilation of the causes of bone fractures, from which a preface is necessary before we begin the restoration of fractured limbs and various ones of each type. Therefore, we must state in the preface of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters at the understanding of which the artist stands and waits for the truth of these matters; you and those who are quick to learn or know this noble art of yours.
And therefore say that when a fracture, dislocation, twist, or wound occurs, it is necessary to start immediately with flebotomy or leeching of that limb, or whatever else, if no cause is prohibited, such as debility of virtue, or the person in whom it occurred has been injured, or the person is elderly and decrepit, or it is a time of intense heat, or of intense cold.
And ensure that the food is cold, consisting of herbs and meats of birds and crabs; and prohibit thick meats and any filling or all food that fills the veins with blood, until you are assured of a cauterized abscess, and if there is no fear of matter exuding from the limb.
Then return the patient to their usual diet that they are accustomed to.
Therefore, as the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient be fed with nutritious foods rich in protein and heavy in consistency, containing viscosity, such as foods made from cooked wheat with water, rice, cabbage, beans, beef, veal, liver of cows, hog's fat, fresh fish, large vegetables, and similar foods, and with this diet, coagulation of the fracture occurs more easily and quickly.
Know that the bones crushed in young men and the elderly cannot be continued or consolidated according to their nature due to the dryness of their limbs.
But nature adjusts and connects certain causes similar to glue in the case of a broken bone from all parts, which results in thickening that adheres to it until it is consolidated, leaving it firm, such as fire at the beginning, until no cause prohibits it from its works.
It is necessary to stop the food of the patient, food that is heavy, viscous and thick, as mentioned earlier.
Know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the differences in body parts, for the fracture of the thigh bone is different from the fracture of the skull; and the fracture of the foot bone is different from the fracture of the arm; and similarly all other members are diverse among themselves.
Remember all kinds of fractures, explained in their own separate chapters.
The diversity of fractures is in itself obvious. Fractures of bones are diverse in their characteristics; for example, there is the bowed fracture, which occurs at the joints; and some fractures are characterized by the length of the bone: and those of the femur and tibia and others, whether they occur or not, such as when it happens at the writing pen, and it is a fracture with wound and disruption in the skull, and it is the fissured fracture.
Each type of fracture has its own treatment or torment in the healing process, as will be explained separately in their respective locations.
Sign of a bone fracture. By this is recognized the fracture of a bone: it is the twisting of the limb, and from this protrusion and sensation of it, and only when you compress it with your hand.
Therefore, if there is no apparent twisting in the location or it does not occur when you touch the bone and the patient does not experience great pain, then it is not a fracture here.
If it is possible that there is twisting or a small fissure, then you should press and compress the area with your hand, wait for the appropriate medicine to be applied at that moment; and keep it tight by subtle restriction.
Know that the location where it is bowed but not split in two or any other condition that does not occur at the thigh, such as when the entire circumference of its shaft is affected, then you should begin the healing process by applying a cauterizing ointment to it.
If there is cauterizing ointment applied, then you should leave it for several days until the ointment stops; and apply heat to it according to any method that you can in a gentle and skillful manner.
Know that the healing of the affected area and the draining of it is easier than drilling a bone where there is such a fracture.
Strengthen the affected area according to what will be explained later.
If in the bone there is such a fracture, then it is necessary to extend the broken limb from two parts, if it is the arm or the leg; or with both hands if the member is small; or with two ropes or one rope and one hand.
Place the affected limb in a position according to its natural form while the fractured parts are being extended, then you should proceed by carefully returning these additions with skill and in their respective locations.
Be careful not to harm the patient through your action or injury, and proceed according to your strength by applying one bone to another in the best possible ways.
It is necessary that at that time you touch with your hand the affected area, and if there is any other cause here, correct it and compress it according to the quantity of your power.
Avoid excessive extension and compression, as many foolish doctors do by causing abscesses to occur through their actions, or by causing contraction in the limb, as we have seen in the actions of their foolish colleagues.
The quality of the compression of the immobilized limb is what I recommend, for you should know that fractured limbs are diverse in their size and shape.
For those that are small, such as the arm and thigh and similar to these, it is necessary that the bandage be made of thin fabric.
However, for those that are large, such as the thigh or leg, it is necessary that the bandage be thick and strong, because the broad coverage strengthens the entire limb with compression, so that no infection enters.
First, begin by adjusting the alignment, stopping at a convenient place, over the location of the fracture with three or four bandages according to the needs of the member; and apply gentle pressure with one hand on the bandage.
Approach that person to the place of the fracture with sovereignty, and stretch the muscles so that your compression does not tighten the area of the fracture. Approach that person a little to the place of the fracture, and gradually relax the tightness, so that you take a great distance from the area.
Take another bandage and cover the observed location with it, and approach the bandages to a distance from the fracture; make your operation on the compression of the bandage and in the relaxation of that as you said in the first covering above.
Approach the soft leather or cloth that has been rolled up and tied to straighten the curvature of the fracture, if there is any curvature in it; but do not pause for any other reason.
Approach the other bandage and approach the small, well-made steel needles as soon as possible, if there is no inflammation or cauterized wound in the location, and then pause over the area of the wound and that which treats the inflammation; leave it for several days; and then apply pressure to the steel needles.
The needles should be made of the finest cane reed or bamboo, well-formed; or made of pine wood; or made of ramps from palm trees; and their width should be according to this form and figure:
However, it is necessary that the needle that is placed over the fracture should be thicker and wider than other needles, and the length of the needle according to the size of the limb; apply pressure on the needles with another bandage according to your previous compression; and apply oil or ointment on top of the needles as we have said for compression, and it should be your compression according to the location of the fracture more, and when further away from the fracture, decrease the compression.
It is necessary that the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and they should be of silk; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the procedure of some foolish people using thicker threads like ropes, it is a great error when tightening the compression unevenly.
Subtle threads are not appropriate, because you will not be able to achieve the desired compression with them, and it is necessary that there be a space of one finger between each needle.
And if the patient is pierced by the extremities of the stars near the narrow place in those locations, then pause it with a cushion made of leather or wool until it does not cause injury.
Some fractures are similar to a wound, and happen in the collarbone, and it will come to remembrance in that section regarding individual cases.
And know that every broken member is not stricken with stars on the first day; this is because when the member, which is large, does not require immediate pressure on the stars but rather after three to seven or more days, depending on your certainty of the occurrence of an abscess caution.
And this is the method of plaster with which the ancients restored them, which are placed over fractures and dislocations and twists.
Method of common plaster reinforced for the restoration of fractures, suitable for complex cases and more so for women and children because it is made of something that does not require heat or moisture: take powder from grinding, and it is the marrow of flour that you must grind in the walls of the mill.
And prepare it as follows: unless you filter it through egg whites, and allow the mixture to be neither thin nor delicate; and use that instead.
Another method of plaster for the restoration of fractures, dislocations and twists: recipe of asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, aloe, myrrh, and aloewood, which is measured from 1000 grams; of frankincense and oil of lavender 500 grams; alcohol 2000 grams; all should be crushed and sifted and mixed with water or egg white if the complexion of the patient is scalded; and apply this plaster, for it is of good composition and restores broken bones lightly, and gives strength to many men.
Another method of plaster for fractures and twists: recipe of myrrh, oil of aloe, white clay 10 drachms; frankincense and oil of lavender 5 drachms; acacia 6 drachms; Armenian pitch 20 drachms.
All should be ground in a mortar with a pestle, filtered, strained, and mixed with water or egg whites, and then administered.
Method of plaster for dislocated joints and separated bones in those places, and for relieving pain in those places and for treating fissures and fractures: take sheep's wool and soak it in sour wine and oil of cedar and place it over the location.
However, this plaster does not have the virtue of restoration, of abscess caution and expelling pain directly.
Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take the leaves of the fig tree and leaves of wild poppy, grind them together to make a plaster of them.
Method of plaster that reinforces the restoration of broken bones and when desired, resolves the presence of abscess: recipe for marigold, chamomile, violets, oats, and all parts. All should be ground with wine if the member is not scalded.
However, if it is scalded, then prepare it with water from hydrangea or water and use that instead.
Another method of plaster with a strong healing effect in the resolution of hardened abscesses that the first does when there is a need for the restoration of the member: recipe for marigold, its seeds, and balm, mallow, majoram, violets, camomile, all parts and honey; grind them all with water of elder or sweet water or wine, according to the quality of the member and the state of the color of it.
However, Hippocrates did not specify in his book that it should be placed on a broken member for its restoration unless it is made of beeswax and oil, and not another cause; he recommended that it should be moderately thick rather than too thin or too thick.
However, in Gaul it is seen that they are placed on a broken member for its restoration and the causes in which it is exsiccation with low heat are as follows: myrrh, incense, and similar to them of those causes that we have recommended.
Method of plaster that strengthens wounds and pain: recipe made with chicory, cress, human skin or hare's pen, and marigold, salt, all parts ground, filtered, strained, and mixed to make a plaster.
The quantity that must remain tied and be carefully undone, is considered if there is no pain or swelling nor the bone is broken out of place, then you should not untie for many days. If the place is affected by strong pain or swelling or inflammation, then you should tie or untie it at that time, and apply a plaster to it.
Take linen cloth and sea sponge, wring it out with warm water, then immerse that in hot water and wash the affected area until the swelling and pain cease; let the member rest for an hour; place over it wool soaked in sour wine and oil or rose oil, and leave it there for a night to ensure that the abscess is cauterized, and that the inflammation of the member subsides, and the pain be alleviated.
Apply a gentle and subtle pressure and plaster to that narrow place and do not strain it with your initial constriction, until it heals gently.
If the abscess, the burning, the pain and inflammation and all the symptoms are already subsided, and you do not need plaster and pressure anymore, then you loosen that area as you did at the beginning of the constriction.
If no cause affecting the member occurs as described before, then you should not untie it but rather wait for three or four or seven days. And some weeks everything is left for twenty days according to what appears due to the member's untying, as described before, until the fracture heals and the flesh comes together around it.
Then you should tighten the constriction more than your initial constriction and adjust the swelling of the patient's food, as the memory of it is recounted before.
But if you see the fracture site already drying out and extending more than necessary, then you should know that nourishment must not reach there; therefore, it should be wrapped in hot water throughout every observation of it; and this should be for three days; and loosen the constriction slightly, and by this operation, let the member receive nourishment, and heal gently.
But those who restore the fracture of the member late when it is not restored at the beginning, as required, and it is restored incorrectly, according to their operation, is an error, and there is great fear, and if they had followed the Ancients in their books and acted accordingly, they would have increased the danger.
And I have not seen anyone do this, so it is reasonable that it should not be done.
Chapter on: When a fracture occurs in the head.
The species of fractures are various, and the shapes of them are diverse, and the causes are distinct, for one kind of fracture is made by percussion of a blow, which breaks all the bone into pieces, which is then broken off, as in the case of a club, and this type of fracture is called an open fracture; or the blow cuts some part of the bone, and also cuts through the flesh but does not pass beyond its end; and this type of fracture of the bone is called complete lifting.
And the wound of these two types of fractures is either large or small, and whether the fracture is contracted or separated; and its cause is a blow with a hammer or bludgeon on stone, and similar things.
And this type of fracture is penetrating and approaching the panicle which is outside the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the wound of these two types of fractures is either large or small.
And this type of fracture is hollowed out in the bone, in the small subtlety of hair and therefore it is called this species of capillary fracture.
And this type of fracture is made either by bludgeon or blow on stone and similar things, which causes some layer of the bone to be driven into its fissures, and it occurs in concave areas as when it happens to plows when struck and is split into its fissures.
Moreover, this type of fracture occurs in moist bone cores, such as those of infants.
And all these species of fractures are treated like separated stones. I return to the recollection of everything in its place.
And we know all these species of fracture by detection on them and by the examination of them with tests and excision of rotten flesh that is over them.
The capillary species is recognized by this that it appears on the bone and is scraped off, and the edges are smoothed over with a test, because the fracture appears black.
But in the treatment of fractures, consider at first the symptoms of the patient, and then if you see by manifest signs of fear, such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of consciousness, abscess of the voice, fainting, acute fever, and similar things in greater dispositions, do not doubt that it will not heal.
And if you see symptoms that do not indicate danger, then you hope for health, and then you begin the treatment of it.
The initial sentence to translate is: "La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio."
"If it is during the summer days, then you must take care of the bone alignment by the 7th day, because it may be spoiled by the fat and accidents as we have recommended."
"And if the fracture has already reached the fat covering the brain, and it is divided into small parts and stirred up, then you must compress the crushed and stirred-up pieces as I will recommend to you."
"You should examine the head of the affected patient, and uncover the bone according to your custom and skill as you can, following the shape of the injury, and make it easy for the patient."
"If you find the bone, blood flow or an abscess, then do what is necessary and be careful not to make it worse. Soak a piece of cloth in wine and warm oil, place it on the injury until the abscess subsides and the bleeding stops; ensure that the wound does not bleed again; and begin with the circumcision of the bone and its removal."
"And this procedure is one of two ways for surgery."
"And the first method is that you compress the bone with a straight pair of forceps like this: And hold another pair of forceps a little further back like this:"
"Then move the forceps further back."
"It is necessary that you have several pairs of forceps of different sizes, some of which are longer than others, and some shorter with the tips at the end of their sharpness, and made of iron or steel."
"Use them carefully when striking the forceps to avoid hitting the head and causing pain for the patient."
"And if the bone is hard and strong, you must bore through it before applying forceps with wedges, which are called non-penetrating wedges."
"These wedges are not called so because they do not reach the end of the bone, rather, at their edge is a rounded or angled part that is opposite to the sharp point of the bone, which prevents them from being submerged and passing through the bone."
"It is appropriate that you take many of these wedges, the number of which should be suitable for the thickness of each bone, until it is present in all parts of the skull whose edges are sharp, the length and width according to the thickness of that bone."
"And this is the form of three types of wedges: The purpose of using a wedge to pierce the fractured bone is that you place the wedge on the bone and rotate it with your thumbs until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the wedge to another location, and insert a piece that is suitable for the size of the ray or environment around it."
"Then insert the forceps between each crack in the bone, and insert a piece that is as thin as possible at the end of the crack, as we have said, until you split the bone or with your hand or another cause using tools such as chisels and small forceps."
"It is necessary that you take great care that the forceps do not touch any blood vessels."
"And so when you perforate the bone and it is continuous with the blood vessels, if they are separated, you must extract them; then you should saw and file the sharp edge of the bone with another tool similar to forceps, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other forceps."
"If there remains any small splinters or rough edges of the bones, you should remove them carefully with whatever tools are necessary; and then clean and lubricate the wound as we have said."
"And the second method of surgery is simpler and less risky, known as Guillotine or longitudinal traction; and this is its explanation: it is necessary at the beginning that you begin to uncover the fracture in the place where it is most visible and pronounced, until when you have discovered that fracture and stopped at the end of the forceps, the shape of which is as follows:"
"The lenticular fracture is concave and does not pierce anything, and the angular fracture is two-edged along its length, as sometimes; the lenticular fracture should be adjusted to the blood vessels with the convex side of the forceps piercing the bone."
"Then strike the forceps of one fracture with a small hammer until you compress the entire bone, as it is rotated, and you ensure that the fat does not enter in any way that you fear; if the patient was the most foolish and ignorant of all men, certainly, he would be asleep."
If a bone within the panicle (possibly meaning 'the soft part of the body') is broken at some locations of the bone, you shall cut it with the pointed instrument at the round end, and release it easily as it will be freed from harm and fear.
If the bone fracture does not penetrate into the soft part of the body, and what is separated or remains of the bone is the face (possibly meaning 'the outer surface') of it, and it remains rough with coarse protrusions and fine fissures, then you must smooth out that roughness and remove those fissures with fine razors which you have prepared in different quantities so that it will be possible for you to administer the most suitable medications at all locations on its surface and the correct direction of the treatment according to where you find yourself lost during your operation on the broken bone and the shape of it.
You must apply the ointment to it (the fractured bone) with which you will smoothen the bones at the beginning using those fine razors, and place it near the fine substance of it, and do not stop doing so until you have completely covered all its parts with the healing ointment and the fine substance.
But for small and subtle fractures (possibly meaning 'hairline fractures'), you must administer care according to what is needed for the correction of it.
And it is due to the fact that not all the causes have been studied in that discipline (possibly meaning 'field' or 'subject'). And it should be based on what has been shown in large fractures.
If the soft part of the body is rectangular when you smooth the bone, then you must take cloth according to the size of the wound and immerse it in warm oil, and place it over the wound; and take another cloth folded or triple-folded and immerse it in vinegar and oil and place it on the first cloth lightly, but not too much that it causes swelling; and apply a liniment lightly to it, and do not press down too hard unless necessary for the wound.
Leave it (the fracture) with this care for a day or two until you are sure that it has formed a scab; and then remove the scab and administer medicines to prevent dryness, such as linseed oil, flour of eggs, powder of incense and aromatics, and similar substances.
It is that you should make a powder of these medicines that is finely ground over the wound, for example dry substances; and in general, administer all medicine with properties that have the ability to stop bleeding and not cause irritation.
Keep the wound clean during its healing process, and do not let it get infected with any other substances; nor should you allow anything to add more toxicity to it. For when it is covered by the soft part of the brain (possibly meaning 'the membrane covering the brain'), it corrupts it and causes harm to the patient, and brings about a malignant ill effect on them.
If there is swelling in the head (possibly meaning 'swelling in the skull'), when the bone has been treated and especially when the care of it is given, it becomes black in its surface; therefore consider whether the patient experiences the symptoms we mentioned, as they can be dangerous without doubt.
And if the blackness does not come from the medicine applied to it, but rather due to the nature of the medicine itself causing that effect, then you must take honey in one part and warm oil in three parts. and wrap that linen around the swelling; and care for it with the appropriate healing herbs until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On repairing the nose when it is broken.
Know that it is not the nose that is broken, but rather two parts of it are broken together with one or more perforations, for there are two bones in it, and the fracture does not occur in one part but rather stretching, twisting, and swelling.
But if one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert a small instrument into the nose and hold the fracture inside it with the pointed end from both sides until the nose returns to its natural shape. Do this with care and caution, ensuring that your treatment does not harm the patient.
And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose and it does not penetrate that area, then you must adjust it with the tip of the finger where there is a small indentation.
If the fracture is in two parts, then you make it look as if it were whole.
Cover the wound with lint or oil in the first day of the fracture, if it is possible; otherwise, place a warm cloth over the wound and let it rest for 3-7 days using a cautery.
Insert a piece of fabric into the end of the nose if the fracture is in one part, or use two plugs, if the fracture is in two parts, and let it be as thick as it fills the nostril.
Some of the old restorers say that plugs should be covered in wax and kept in for the entire day, but I do not see it; however, it is necessary that the cotton be covered in oil of rosin with powdered chalk, and place it inside until the bone is healed and the cartilage hardened.
Sometimes, insert your fingers into the nose instead of the plug, as long as it is wrapped in lion cloth; and if the fracture of the nose is severe and the patient is not forbidden from breathing.
This method is not necessary for you; and if you want to, do it, and if you want to, use plugs.
And if another wound occurs again with cautery, pack the nose with beeswax or fat soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or lard.
But if there is no wound with cautery, it is necessary to pack it from outside with sizam flour and powdered hempseed mixed with oil of rosin; place your hand over the cotton wool, and do not let anything touch the nose for any reason.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small or comminuted fracture, it is necessary to cut through them, and extract those using the appropriate instrument; then suture the wound, and take care of it with what heals and strengthens, and use the appropriate packing.
And if a boil occurs inside the nose, it is necessary to treat it with plugs and administer leaden tubes until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jawbone when it is broken.
When the jawbone is broken and the fracture is not due to an abscess, examine whether the fracture is only outside, and if it is not broken in two and curved at the inner edges, its recognition is easy.
Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and in the same way, if the fracture is on the left jawbone, insert the right index finger; and press gently to palpate the fracture inside with ease at the inner edges and the outer edge of the bone; do this carefully.
If the jawbone fracture is already separated into two parts, it is necessary to administer extension of both parts according to the straight line until possible alignment of the bone can be achieved.
If there is loosening or disruption of teeth that you believe will remain attached by gold, silver, or ivory threads, place a cotton swab on the fractured jawbone, and a double layer of cotton over it, and a large piece of cloth stitched together, or a sole cushion of appropriate size along the length of the jaw; and apply that above according to your accessibility and appropriateness until it is no longer damaged.
Tell the patient to rest and take a gentle diet without spicy foods.
If you suspect that the figure has been changed in any way, remove it on the third day; and correct what is already altered with oil of rosin, oil of linseed or flour of sizam, since you will have removed the beeswax, and place cotton wool over the packing.
And when the packing is attached and adjusted to the bone, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it alone until it heals and strengthens the fracture; since many weeks pass before this fracture becomes strong.
And if another abscess occurs again, administer what was mentioned in the previous sections for its treatment until it is healed, and remove the abscess.
If the fracture is due to an abscess, consider whether it is a separated piece of bone or a sequestrum, and carefully remove those pieces with the appropriate instruments for their removal.
If the abscess opening is narrow, expand it with a flebotome according to your need.
When you have removed the sequestrum and it does not heal, sew the abscess opening if it is wide; otherwise, place one of the appropriate packing materials over it and allow it to heal.
Chapter V.
On the restoration of the collarbone when it is fractured.
Whenever the collarbone is broken at its middle part, you should split open the muscles in that area, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
It can be broken, separated, or separated into more than two parts which do not meet the joint; and it is easy to heal if this is the case; or it occurs with dislocation, making healing difficult; or the fracture involves a wound.
And the operation in such a case, when the fracture involves a wound, is that two ministers should be present: one should assist and hold the broken collarbone, while the other extends the neck to that area.
Then bind the fracture with ropes tied together as necessary for its proper shape, and ensure that it is neither too protruding nor concave.
If more extension is needed, then you should place the patient's shoulder under a blanket or wool and ensure its size according to your necessity; stretch and elevate the collarbone and press the shoulder with your hand inside the blanket until you bind the fracture as necessary.
And if you cannot pull the end of the collarbone to its opposite sides due to obstruction, then have the patient lie on their back, and place a medium-sized cushion over the muscles on that side.
The minister presses the muscles on that side towards the center where the collarbone bone is lifted up to the protrusion and then you correct the fracture and bind it with ropes.
But if there is dislocation or pain in the collarbone, you must cut it open and remove those dislocations with ease.
If it is stuck in the bone, then make an incision into it with one of the cutting instruments you have prepared, as you had placed the collarbone on the grinding stone to sharpen it; and this tool is either a staff or iron, which has the following shape:
And it is similar to the shape of a cauldron with its concavity facing downward, and its width should be according to your necessity, based on the size of the bone or the shallow area around it.
However, the length of this tool should be as long as is possible for the operation; it should have two ends, one broad and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound that you have cut when you remove the dislocation from the bone is wide, and you are certain there is an abscess, then you should align the two lips of the wound with stitches.
If the disruption is small or you fear an abscess, fill the wound with cloth and powders according to the size of the wound's incision.
If an abscess develops, fill it with wine and rose oil and let it sit.
And that the stick does not harm the broken bone; and so you must check the patient every day, as when the injury is healing or the stick becomes soft, correct it and strengthen the connection.
Place the patient's head on their chest, and place a small cushion under their neck so that the assistant can support the lower part of the collarbone from its side, and thus raise the fracture of the collarbone to a higher position due to muscle elevation; or let the arms be tied to the patient's chest.
Do not remove the plaster if there is no problem in that area or abscess within twelve days.
Renew the plaster if you notice any problems with it, adjust its shape and reapply it, and let it remain until the fracture of the collarbone is healed and clotted.
It becomes strong and comfortable within 28 days, and in some cases it is made in a shorter period of time for men.
Chapter VI.
On the restoration of shoulder fractures.
The scapula is broken at its lateral edge and not through the body, only the edges are broken.
And when the edge is brokenand it is broken at its middle partand it cannot be identified without touching, you should prepare for it according to the shape of the fracture and reduce it as naturally as possible in any way you can manage.
And place a cushion over the area filled with powder of milled alum and hulled poppy seeds, and place a double powder on it; and place another cushion on the leaden needle of the fine table according to the amount of the spatula or more slightly.
If the needle is concave at any of the locations on the spatula, then plug the concavity with poppy seeds and adjust the needle according to its shape.
And apply a long, strong bandage with appropriate tightening and secure the needle firmly in its place so it does not move.
Consider the liniment in every day, and whenever it is softened, apply another layer and tighten and adjust the needle if it has moved from its place.
Anoint the patient on their left side.
The spatula will be restored in twenty or twenty-five days.
And when this period has passed, you must dissolve the liniment, and be sure that it does not affect the bones from which it began nor its dissolution.
If there is a problem with the bone pressing on, remove the bandage, then cut it, and proceed as mentioned in the treatment of the sacral furcula for abscess cauterization if this occurs.
Chapter VII.
This is the title of the text, which translates to "On the Restoration of a Broken Foot." It seems like this treatise was actually discussing the treatment for gout (podagra) and hernia, but it appears that the author accidentally used the wrong title.
Sometimes a foot is broken in its middle part and it heals slowly; but the extremities of it move slightly, becoming swollen and inflamed.
When the middle part of the foot is broken, it may develop complications such as swelling and inflammation in the surrounding areas, causing severe pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, fever, and bloody vomiting; and the fracture can be detected by feeling a hollow space in the affected bone.
The restoration of the foot is to support the patient on their back, place a cushion under them between their shoulders; and press the muscles of the affected area while adjusting the costal arches with your hands so they are at their maximum width, taking care in the operation and positioning according to every means possible and what is necessary, until the shape of the bone returns as it should.
And place a plaster and dressing over the affected area, along with a thin lead or ivory needle on top of it, as you wrap it in fabric; be careful not to harm the fractured bone while applying it; move the splint according to the curvature of the back occasionally, tightening it appropriately; and always consider the splint and ensure that it is neither too loose nor too tight.
If it is necessary to remove the plaster due to corrosion or pain or an abscess that occurs in the area, you should cut and loosen it and remove the dressing while treating the problem as needed; and if the plaster needs to be adjusted, do so by removing some of it, and tighten it appropriately until healed.
Chapter VIII.
On the Restoration of Broken Ribs.
Know that a fracture of the ribs only occurs in large parts where there are two; and the ends of their junctions do not contract due to the fact that they are cartilaginous. The fracture cannot be detected by touch alone, so it must be investigated with questions.
The restoration should be done by filling the fracture with questions according to what is possible, until it is filled in as needed, and applying plaster and tightening the affected bone with a splint if necessary.
If the fracture of the ribs is descending towards the internal junctions, you should administer painkillers and puncture the affected area like when treating pleurisy, thereby placing a linen cloth over it; and observe difficulty in breathing, coughing, and bloody vomiting; and this type of fracture is difficult to cure.
The ancients were skilled in dealing with such problems using various methods.
And it is said that: the patient's diet should be restricted to prevent inflammation and bloating, so that the abdomen remains flat and the fracture is pushed out towards the junctions.
But we must be careful not to create conditions that could cause abscess cauterization unnecessarily, if possible; and if it occurs, help with the necessary treatment.
Some of the ancients said that the patient should avoid wind and drink with caution, as it is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that wind may attract superfluidity to the affected area due to weakness.
Some of the ancients said that: the affected area should be covered with wool soaked in heated oil, and powders placed between the ribs until it is filled; the splint should be adjusted according to curvature when wrapping it; and the patient should be treated for pleurisy with diet and medication.
And if the patient suffers from intense constriction and cannot endure it, and the bones are punched with a blunt instrument at the affected spot, beware of the patient, then it is necessary to make an incision over the location, expose the broken costa, and place a pad on top of the instrument that keeps the fracture in place, remember its position, and cut the bone gently and remove it.
Then adjust the lips of the wound if it is large with sutures, and treat it with ointments inside until it heals.
If an abscess occurs internally, then you should collect it and pour red oil over it and let the patient heal from the internal abscess with what is needed for healing.
And turn the patient onto their side on the affected side until they are healed.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of a fracture of the spine and neck.
Some fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and later the ligaments adhere to them, and similar things happen to the vertebrae of the back. And when something happens to someone and you want to know if they will heal or not, consider that if their muscles are already softened, stupefied, and dead and cannot be healed or strengthened, and when you compress them with your hands or prick them with a needle and there is no pain, then you know that it is not healing, and in such cases the outcome is fatal.
And if the muscles and pain occur in those areas and you compress them with your hands or prick them with a needle, then you know that the neck bone is saved and that the patient will heal with treatment.
And if you see similar signs in the vertebrae of the neck and want to know if they will heal or not, consider the weight of them.
Then if you see that they have already become softened, attend to those areas where something happened on the back, and when you press on their back, there is swelling and excretion without their will, and sometimes they are turned onto their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is fatal, and at that point do not bother with treating them.
But if no such cause occurs, the prognosis is better and easier.
And the treatment for them is to perform cauterization of the abscess on the swollen vertebra, using red oil or beeswax, and let it heal over a few days until the abscess is cauterized.
Then apply a comfortable and soothing ointment or salve, and strengthen it with linen; and command the patient to rest, be calm, not sleep on the affected side until it is healed.
And if you have to set the broken bone or any other cause that is already known from it, then you must saw off the protruding part of the bone; and then adjust the lips of the wound, with sutures if it is large; and then treat it with a carbolized dressing until it heals.
But if the tip of the bone is broken in the heel, and it is at the end of the cavity, then you must insert your left hand into the anus and grasp the broken bone with the other hand according to what is possible by equal measure; and then apply a plaster and splint if necessary, and strengthen it.
And if you feel a broken fracture there, then you must break it, remove it, and treat the wound with treatment until it heals.
Chapter X.
On the restoration of the anus.
The bones of the anus are often broken, and if they break, their fracture is not simply a crack in the ends but rather a comminution throughout the bone and it is driven into the length and declines to the inside; and when the patient experiences pain in the location and pricking, the anus becomes stupefied when it is broken.
And the restoration of it is to spread your hand over it until it covers the fracture, which is the shape of it.
If the fracture is only at the end of it, then you grasp it according to what is appropriate for equal grasp until it resembles its natural shape.
But if the fracture is in the length or has already descended to the inner parts of it, then you make the patient lie on their stomach until the restoration of that fracture is prepared for you. Therefore, when you have grasped it, apply a plaster and then apply an elm or willow splint, and strengthen it by tightening the bandage so that there is no fear of fracture or removal of the splint.
Grasp the hollow area with what fills it until the bandage takes on an equal tension, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their unaffected side.
But if there is an abscess, you must stop extending it and the restoration of it until the abscess is cauterized, and apply what heals it according to what is prescribed; then return to restoring it, and strengthen it as necessary.
If this happens in the broken bones or they are comminuted, you must treat them.
Chapter 11.
On the restoration of the dislocation of the shoulder joint.
The shoulder joint is that which is between the arm and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one is that you take a flat piece of wood about this size:
And let them be attached to two ends with straps, and hang it from the raised place.
Follow the patient on a wheelchair; and place his broken arm inside the splint so that it reaches the elbow in the same location where the curve of the splint is attached.
And suspend it with some cause of weight, or the servant extends it to the other side; and place the doctor and whoever is treating the fracture with their hands on it until the fracture heals as required.
The other method is that the patient lies on their back and suspends their hand with a strap from their neck, and commands two servants to each hold something above and below the fracture with their hands; and each one extends it to their respective side.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then tighten both straps on the fracture and the other one, and each of the two servants extends it to their respective sides.
And so if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then it should be stopped halfway along the strap over the elbow and the other half should be on the side of the fracture towards the shoulder.
And similarly if the fracture is close to the shoulder, then it should be stopped at that location and on the shoulder as well.
Tie it with ease and without effort, and then when it is tied as required and applied well, tighten it if there is no abscess formation.
But if an abscess forms, leave the strapping for up to seven days and wait until the abscess subsides; then soak the wound in warm vinegar and rose oil before tightening it again.
The method of tightening it is to apply a plaster over the fracture, and place an enveloping cloth of new linen over the plaster; then adjust the arm in the splint and place a soft cloth over the muscle.
Fold the cloth and tighten it over the splint so that the arm remains in a stable position, unless there is any reason forbidding it due to the broken bone.
Use of steel pins.
And the steel pin should be thicker and stronger than the others; and there should be a space of one finger width between each pin, and the length of the pins should correspond to the fracture with an addition of three fingers on all sides.
And tighten the pins with the strapping mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
Your compression at the location of the fracture should be made tighter. Here is the translation: And as the fracture becomes longer, the compression should be looser.
Here is the translation: And when you set the bones and loosen the compression as previously said at the time of restoring the member to its position, then do so.
Here is the translation: If you fear an abscess, leave the compression and the bones in place for seven days as previously said.
Here is the translation: Then consider the wound in all divisions for three days to prevent purulent or inflammatory occurrence at the location; or, food should not be brought near the member due to the surplus of compression; and thus correct everything as previously said.
Here is the translation: However, if you are sure that no cause of this occurs, do not remove the ligature except after three days or more.
Here is the translation: The patient's bed should be on their back, and their hands on their stomach.
Here is the translation: Place a cushion filled with wool on top of the broken limb, and consider at all hours of the night or day that the fracture figure should not be removed or dissolved; rather, the ligament should be softened, so correct everything in this manner to your advantage.
Here is the translation: The food of the patient should be given according to the previous order, in such a way that the food is subtle at first until it becomes stronger; and thus, the food should be thickened from then on.
Here is the translation: The duration of the cushion and the leg rest are usually forty days; and thus, they should be removed and warm baths administered, and medications with soothing properties given to correct it.
Here is the translation: If the fracture is adhered, do not remove the ligament and bones within ten days or two months.
Here is the translation: Chapter XII.
Here is the translation: On the restoration of a fracture in the arm.
Here is the translation: The arm consists of two bones that are called the two forearms; one is small and located at the end of the upper arm, and the other is large and located below the lower end of the upper arm.
Here is the translation: If only the larger forearm is fractured or both are broken at once.
Here is the translation: If only the smaller forearm is fractured above, the restoration and healing of it will be easier.
Here is the translation: If both forearms are fractured below, the fracture is severe and healing is difficult.
Here is the translation: This is even more severe when two bones are broken at once.
Here is the translation: Therefore, if the bone fractured is the smaller forearm above, the doctor should carry out the restoration with a small, gentle extension and immobilization until it heals.
Here is the translation: However, if the larger forearm is fractured, a more vigorous extension should be carried out.
Here is the translation: If both forearms are broken at once, the reduction of the fracture should not be done too forcefully.
Here is the translation: The figure of the hand should be restored and extended on a cushion; the wrist should be positioned above, as previously said, and the elbow lower than the other mentioned areas; and the patient should lie down on a bed with a headrest.
Here is the translation: There should be a cushion in front of it at an angle or elevated position, so that the patient does not exert themselves.
Here is the translation: Then extend the arm above and below with your hand or ligament, and another assistant extends it in a similar manner above.
Here is the translation: Then the doctor should immobilize the bone until it reduces to its best possible position.
Here is the translation: If there are fracture fragments, you should try to reduce all the pieces in their proper position with your skill.
Here is the translation: If a separate fragment appears that pierces the skin and you are not confident in its healing, you should make an incision over it and remove it according to the method previously described.
Here is the translation: If there is a fracture with an open wound, I have already discussed it in a separate chapter, so take care of it accordingly.
Here is the translation: If an abscess appears at the beginning of your restoration, line up a cloth with a mixture of rose oil and white wax, neither too thick nor too thin; stretch the cloth over it with a gentle compression until the abscess subsides; then remove the wax and apply a prepared plaster made from powdered moly with clay of huou, and place a ligature over the fracture, which should be tightened and tied firmly.
Here is the translation: You should know that the number of bones in the arm is seven in major placement, or a fracture in one forearm or both at once.
Here is the translation: Then apply your compression at the location of the fracture firmly and forcefully, and when the reduction moves upwards above the fracture or below it, loosen the compression slightly as previously described in the beginning of this chapter.
Here is the translation: The bandages covering the fracture should be soft and moist, neither hard nor harsh; the thread used for tying should be of moderate thickness as previously recommended.
Consider the member and the limb for several days. If any cause occurs for which correction is necessary, such as swelling that occurs in the member, then you must bind the member with a cold water bath until the swelling ceases.
Let the member not be bound until it returns to its normal state and the swelling subsides.
If the swelling has been softened and the bone has returned to its normal condition, then correct everything with your skill.
Consider more whether nourishment is prevented from reaching the member due to excessive swelling, for then you must soften it slightly and leave it for several days until nourishment reaches it again, and strengthen it.
If the patient does not have any of the causes mentioned before, then it is not necessary to be released until about twenty days or thereabouts.
Then, keep the patient's hand suspended by its virtue of agitated movements, and make him sleep on his back.
Know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-two days, or perhaps it is restored in twenty-eight days, and everything depends on the complexity of the case and the dispositions of the skill.
Chapter 13.
On the repair of the fracture of the thumb and fingers.
Know that when the thumb or fingers are crushed, it results in a fracture and not just sprains watched over for a long time.
And when the hand is fractured or sprained, then it is necessary that the patient rest with his arm hanging down and elevated to the level of the chest, and place his hand over the affected area.
Then, the minister should extend the broken bones and the doctor should align them until they are well-aligned.
It is necessary to apply plaster and padding, unless there is an abscess formed; in that case, place a steel pin according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped it in linen.
However, if the fracture is in the palm partitions, you should wrap the belly of the palm with a bandage and command the patient to squeeze it with his injured hand; it should be tightly bound with long linen.
Let the steel wire with cotton in which there is some slack be applied to the palm, so that the wire can be applied to the palm; tighten it as needed.
However, if the fracture is in the outer partitions, then place a steel wire and another wire on the outer partition of the palm, so that the hand remains open and straight; and tighten it, as the hand is rotated at the wrist between the fingers with linen.
If there is a fracture in one of the knuckles of the fingers, then if it is a phalanx, bind it according to what is needed and tighten it with the palm; if you wish, place a small straight steel wire on it to elevate the fracture and prevent it from becoming crooked.
If the fracture is in another finger, such as in the middle one, index, thumb, or ring finger, then bind it to the finger so that it heals correctly; or bandage them all continuously, which is better; or place a small steel wire on it, as mentioned in the phalanx.
In your treatment, consider the disposition of an abscess and its opposition - with the opposite operation - against what is needed when any cause of this occurs, as the narration of it has been repeated.
Chapter 14.
On the repair of a femur bone fracture.
The thigh bone is sprained and declared to be broken and identified by the sensation when it becomes swollen in front and above the skin.
The treatment of it is done by binding the linen on the fracture and another linen below the fracture, and the patient is laid down on his stomach and face.
Then, extend all the linen to its side according to quality when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
However, if it is protruding from the groin of the thigh, then bind the linen close to the groin at the side of the adductor muscle, so that the extension moves upward, and another bandage below the fracture.
Similarly, if the fracture is protruding from the backside, then make the linen close to the groin and let the extension be towards the sides.
Then the doctor aligns the bone with both his hands until it returns to its natural position and the bone is joined well; then it is necessary to apply plaster and bandage, unless there is an abscess in the member. However, if there is an abscess, you should leave it for several days until the abscess heals, and then return to your care.
The bandage for it should be made like this: cover the fracture with a thick bandage, fold it twice or thrice and remove any excess; then wrap it around the knee joint and the groin of the thigh.
Insert a long iron splint between the thigh and the knee joint near the groin on the sides, and the ends of the splint should protrude from the swollen part on both sides; then revolve the splint around the thigh and knee joint so that any excess bandage is removed.
Approximate pressure should be applied on the thigh at the site of the broken hip fracture, and place a splint over the bone of the thigh.
Fill the space between the thigh and hip with thick cloth to promote blood clotting.
Begin with a strong bandage wrapping around the location of the fracture using three or four layers, and gradually move away from the fracture site as the bandage becomes less tight and more moist.
Extend the linen strips from both ends to reach the ankle of the foot, and stretch both ends of the splints on the other side to ensure that the bandage does not move from its place.
Apply the bandage in such a way that it does not cause corrosion, ulceration, burn, or inflammation of the member, similar to those conditions; and if any of these occur, then carefully remove the bandage, correct whatever has happened as soon as possible according to what has been previously mentioned.
If there is pus in the bone, it is necessary to pack it as much as possible; and if this is not possible, drain it and remove it, and cure with whatever remedy has been previously mentioned until it heals.
In some cases this hip fracture is stronger than those that are set with splints, as has been mentioned in the adjutorium and in the arm.
However, in this type of healing, do not cause the patient to limp; if it is only restored, apply the other thigh as well, then it is necessary for the limping leg to be treated immediately.
Know that the thigh is strengthened in about 40 days or a few months, and this depends on the complexity and other circumstances.
Chapter XV.
On the restoration of the fracture of the heel bone.
Know that the healing of the heel bone fracture can take a long time, but it often occurs in several weeks.
If there is a fracture, it is not simply a crack or break in the bone, but rather a wound or multiple wounds, and on this everything depends.
The healing consists of packing what is broken in the bone fracture with the substances mentioned until it is united and healed as easily, accurately, and efficiently as possible.
Apply plaster and place a round splint on it if necessary; and strengthen the area with bandage as appropriate.
Consider all the precautions that have been recommended for other fractures, such as cauterization and similar treatments that prevent any accidents until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of the broken thigh bone.
Know that in the thigh there are two bones of which one is large and is called femur, while the other is small and is called patella (kneecap).
If there are various types of fractures that occur in the two bones of the arm, and the restoration is made as with the arm, the operation for both is the same.
If both bones are broken at the same time, the thigh bone is broken into many parts.
If the smaller bone (patella) is broken, the thigh bone is broken in front.
If the larger bone (femur) is broken, it is located behind, and these are the causes that you are not familiar with.
Apply extension, alignment, and ligature of the splints as described previously.
However, if the thigh bone fracture is shallow (not displaced), the extension should be less and gentler, and do not force it too much.
If there is any cause for operation on the thigh in relation to the arm, when you bandage and complete the entire operation, you will take pieces of pine wood that are cut to fit the causes that have been mentioned previously, and are made exactly like branches of the palm; align them according to their small curvature, and not be too rough, and the length of these should match the length of the thigh from the hip to the ankle.
Wrap each piece of cloth in two layers according to its length and place one on the fracture site of one side and the other on the other side, with a distance from the hip to the ankle.
Place the two splints in three locations on both sides of the middle location, as this structure prohibits the thigh from bending to the right or left side and maintains good position.
And now a basin of linseed oil is administered according to the length of the leg; it should be placed on the leg to keep it motionless.
Moreover, you must do this in a fracture, and when it is truly a wound.
Furthermore, consider the leg every day and study it carefully, and keep it from abscesses, inflammations or other similar causes; when any such cause arises, then apply whatever treatment is necessary until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the fracture of the heel and the bones of the foot, and the toes.
Not every part of the heel experiences a fracture, but some bones in the foot may experience fractures occasionally; as for the toes of the foot, fractures occur rarely, and they do not easily dislocate.
And if the bones of the foot have a fracture and those bones sometimes rise above each other, then the patient should lie down on the ground in the manner described earlier.
Then one foot should be placed on the raised bones, and the other foot should press down, hold it in place, and keep pressing until they return to their original position.
Then apply plaster and padding on top, and place a small table with two flat handles below the patient's abdomen of the affected leg.
And strengthen the fractured limb with a downward traction device, as you have wrapped it with bandages and other necessary supports.
And after three or four days have passed, you should loosen the ligament, because you will find the bones compressed, broken, or dislocated, and the operation in such cases is as follows.
But if a toe is broken, you should set it and immobilize it in the same way as I have recommended for setting the fingers of the hand. Then place the broken toe in a straight position according to its length, and keep it slightly bent towards the body; place the affected leg on the table that I have recommended, and strengthen it with proper traction.
But if more than two or three bones are broken, you should place a splint of appropriate size around each affected toe, and raise the table to the highest position under the affected leg, and have the patient stand on one side of the table, away from their abdomen to maintain proper support.
And it is important for you not to forget that you should consider all possible causes as I have mentioned in the other fracture sections, and be prepared for any accident that may occur.
Chapter XVIII.
On the fracture of the pelvis in a woman, the pubic bone in a man, and the tailbone (coccyx) in both genders.
When the pelvis in a woman is broken, you should cause it to rest on a flat surface and gently incline it towards the separation of the two halves, keeping it behind.
The woman fills the cavity with cotton and it is done in the cavity as expected; and the woman is struck, and her hips are gradually raised because everything is forgotten until she is before the parting of the cavity as expected and the broken bone returns.
Then pause powders on her hips, and when she wants to urinate, she moistens the cavity with ease and urinates, then collect it and return it as described in the manner in which it was previously placed, and then return the first powder.
Make this for seven days or until it recovers, because that will be restored.
If you wish, take a bladder of an ewe and force a canal of cane through the wound; then insert the entire bladder into the cavity, and inflate the canal with virtue until the bladder is inflated inside the cavity, because the fracture returns.
Then it should be filled with cotton and kept for as many days as recommended until it is healed.
And when the bones of a male or female pelvis are broken, then administer in its healing and alignment what is recommended for the bones of the hip according to the medical texts.
And the correct thing should not be hidden in these near fractures that do not occur often, especially to those who have some knowledge and use of this book; because that fracture signifies for you in the greater dispositions the right path in healing and in the stricture of it, so understand well.
But in the man's anus when it is broken, take guarguamela of oak, and put it on it; then pause over it with a covering of cloth, and wrap it, and let it rest for three days or until it recovers, and healed.
Chapter 19.
On the healing of bone fractures when they are infected.
It is appropriate for those who suffer from a fracture with infection, and especially if the bone is large like the femur or humerus, or similar to them, that you cauterize and probe it as soon as the conditions of cauterization and probing are favorable, as previously mentioned.
And if the infection flows pus, you should take care to retain it until it dries up, and then sprinkle it with powder of three times, unless other reasons are present.
Then begin the healing of the fracture on that day itself, and do not prolong it unless an abscess occurs.
But if an abscess is cauterized, you should allow the healing to continue for up to nine days, until the abscess subsides, and do not approach it on the third day and the fourth thereafter, because you will cause bad accidents.
But if the broken bone protrudes above the skin, you should be careful to reduce it and close it with your hands as easily and with little extension possible.
But if the extension is not prepared and the position of it with your hands, you should reduce it with this instrument; and the instrument is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight inches, and the width according to the size of the injury; and it is necessary for the physician to take three or four of these according to the quantity that is required in the healing of any type of fracture.
It should be round and slightly rough to avoid twisting during the operation.
It should have a sharp end with a margin on its edges, and the upper part should be thickening towards the middle, and from the middle to the ends.
This is the shape of it:
It is called in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which means small pallet.
Because it should be paused with the end of the instrument raised above the protruding end of the bone.
And call for a surgeon to attend it until the bone returns and is closed with some positioning.
Thus, you must close the fracture ends with some positioning, and if the fractured end is subtle, do not use the instrument for good reason, but instead insert the end of the bone into the instrument until it has the power to do so.
But if you cannot reduce the bone entirely with what is recommended, then insert it with one of the instruments mentioned before, or use one of the saws in whatever way is possible for you.
Then file down the remaining bone that has roughness and small irregularities.
And when the bone is reduced, and the patient begins to feel intense pain gradually, you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural position; and then do what you can to confer great benefit on the patient.
When your healing of the bone is complete, immerse a black stiptic cloth in wine and place it directly on the wound if it's summer, but do not pause over the infected area or any other cause with oil, because this will prevent pus and corruption from forming.
Administer stitches at the time of the patient's bone restoration, and leave the wound exposed only to the extent necessary, incising it with a scalpel and using bandages according to the size of the wound.
Take great care not to strain the wound with a fracture, for many times ignorant doctors have caused death or severe illness or amputation by such treatment. If the patient's stricture is soft, flexible, and different from other fractures.
If the wound is large or bad, and you fear a possible accidental injury there, and feel pain in that area, then it is not necessary to make stitches, but apply a hard bandage instead of stitches and strengthen it with that.
And when the wound begins after one or two days due to a blow, remove the cloth that you had placed on it and apply cold compresses, which is our custom for treating wounds, such as a four-fold ointment and similar ones.
It is necessary for you to remove the ligature and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and it is important that the limb be prepared in such a way that the purulence runs out of it with ease towards the surrounding areas.
If the wound has passed many days without being consolidated or abscessed from the blow, then you should know that here are signs of gangrene, and it is necessary to examine the wound with caution. And those signs that are separated and drain, those that do not separate but place the limb and cause pain, cut them out accordingly as is possible for you.
And if the wound swells or emits an odor, which is a sign of corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary to make an incision with the one that is appropriate for the cure of which there is a preceding discussion in its own chapter.
And in that matter where you must give the most attention and present your judgment: when the bone is broken, make an incision on the limb as with the bones of the thigh and the forearm and similar to those of large members, but do not attempt to attract it or extract it because many times this leads to death; leave it inside until it can be set, because it may fall apart by itself within twenty to thirty days. And if the wound is visible, heal it, but do not leave it as it is.
Chapter XX.
On the treatment of knots that occur at the site of any fracture.
Often this knot occurs during the healing of a fracture, and especially near joints, and it is hardened by the shape of the limb; and greatly it prohibits the limb from its natural operation.
Therefore consider if the knot is recent and administer medicines that have astringent properties such as alum, and ensorcellum, and look, and sercacollo, and similar ones; in this way take some or all of them, and compress them with vi stiptic, or album of huou, or vi agre, and place it on the knot with a plaster, and constrict it well.
Let the extraction of the knot not loosen it for many days; and remove it when the knot is gone; or strengthen over it a plate of lead firmly, because lead has the property of keeping anything that swells in the limbs.
But if the knot has already become hard and is tight and necessitates removal, then cut it carefully at the highest point of it, and incise the excess and protrusion or remove it with some resoris until it is gone; heal it until it is healed.
Title. XXI.
When restoring a broken bone, once it has been set and allowed to heal naturally, let the limb remain immobile.
Once the broken bone has healed, let the limb remain immobile except in the following cases: if there is excessive swelling of the ligaments before the healing process is complete; or due to excess tension of the ligaments before nutrients are prohibited from reaching the limb; or due to excessive bruising; or because of excessive movement at an inappropriate time; or due to insufficient blood circulation and weakness in the patient.
Treatment consists of feeding the patient, stimulating their circulation until blood is produced in abundance, administering baths, and providing comfort and happiness to them.
Cover the affected limb with a plaster to draw the pus out, or apply cold water compresses until the circulation returns and the limb regains its normal shape.
Title. XXII.
Treatment for fractured bones that have been improperly set and require further surgery.
When the repaired limb is still crooked or has a prominent fractured bone and nodules, if it appears misshapen, but the limb's natural operation is not prohibited, it is not necessary to receive the word of someone who claims that the limb was recently fractured.
But there are many foolish doctors and healers who have performed such operations in our land, and this operation is highly condemned as leading to grave consequences, including death.
If the limpness and nodules are recent, they should be treated with cold water compresses containing soothing herbs such as althea, dittany, mellilot, and similar plants; and they should be wrapped in a plaster made of soft materials such as diluted white poppy juice or guaiacum oil, or treated with mucilage from althea root mixed with colomba wool or olive oil, and then wrapped with that; or they may be treated with fat figs macerated in honey and columbine leaves, like the medicines known as "amaranth consolidation".
In some cases, the deformity may be resolved with gentle, continuous friction using a damp cloth and encouraging movement of the limb in all directions at all times.
If the deformity has advanced and is hard and turns into a stone and requires surgery to correct it, it is necessary to remove the pus and dissolve the bone with the help of a surgeon, then carefully cut away any excess nodules using fine instruments, and administer ease and comfort to the patient through gentle manipulation and careful study.
Title. XXIII.
On the subject of dislocation:
Dislocation refers to the displacement of one of the joints, which causes it to be immobile, distorts the shape of the limb, and brings great pain and injury to the patient.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to act quickly and reduce the joint as soon as possible, because if reduction is delayed, the joint becomes separated and difficult to reduce.
And it is important that the patient remains calm and still during the reduction, as excessive movement can cause spasms and prolonged pain.
If reduction is not possible, it may be necessary to perform an incision on the patient and allow the joint to separate further before reducing it with greater ease. This should only be done after the patient has been properly anesthetized and the area has been prepared to prevent infection. The affected limb should also be immobilized with bandages soaked in warm water and oil, and gentle manipulation should be used to reduce the dislocation as smoothly as possible.
And all members should be healed with whatever is necessary for their recovery in their proper place.
And the chapters on dislocation follow those on fractures, from the upper to the lower parts of the body.
Title. XXIV.
Treatment for dislocation of the jaw follows.
If the dislocated jaw cannot be relocated with minimal movement, and it is dislocated completely, it should first be softened before attempting to return it to its place. This can be done by applying pressure on the sides or having the patient bite on a cloth until they can open their mouth wide enough for the jaw to be placed back in its socket, with the tongue wrapped around it.
But if the dislocation is minor, it should be treated with the utmost care and caution to avoid causing further damage.
If the dislocation is complete and total, prompt reduction should be performed with caution, but not delayed.
The doctor should position the patient's head, then insert his thumb or two thumbs into the mouth of the patient to locate the dislocation if it is on one side, or insert both thumbs simultaneously if it is on both sides. The rest of the doctors present should hold down the other parts of the face to keep them from interfering. The doctor should then tell the patient to relax their jaw and let it move in opposite directions, and gently guide the jaw back into its socket. Once the jaw is in place, the doctor should wrap it with a cloth to keep it there.
If reducing the dislocation is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, administer warm water and oil to the area, then ease the reduction of both jaws gently without delaying it too much. As previously mentioned.
Once the jaws are relocated and wrapped in place, the patient's mouth should be closed and not softened further. Then, let it rest for a while on cotton pads with wax, made of wax and rose oil. Cover it with a clean cloth and leave it to heal gradually.
Make the patient lie on their back, with their head between two pillows to keep it straight and prevent it from rolling to one side or the other. Do not force any food or drink into the mouth of the patient. Give them only liquids such as broth until the pain subsides and the jaws are no longer swollen. Then, you may give them what they desire.
Give the patient light food and drink, and avoid forcing their mouth open for eating or drinking until the jaw is healed.
If it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws at any time and they do not return to their proper position, observe for signs of fever and sodium overuse, and administer strong laxatives and pure emetics to induce vomiting.
When you see these signs, know that it is a disaster; and in ten days, the patient who experiences this will die.
Chapter XXV.
Treatment for dislocation of the neck and the extremity of the muscle.
The neck is not dislocated from the back by its continuous connection with the spine, and sometimes it can be dislocated to one side, which can be confirmed through examination.
The treatment for this is to have the patient lie on their back and extend their arms. Then, grasp the neck with your palm and apply strong pressure to keep it in place, as it will return to its proper position.
Place a warm compress on that area and hold it firmly.
However, the extremity of that bone which is continuous with it cannot be dislocated at any time; in such cases, it should be reduced and immobilized as previously mentioned and according to what you are equipped with.
Place a warm compress on that area, apply pressure and bandage it. Tell the patient to rest quietly until they are healed.
With this treatment, the dislocated extremity of the muscle is reduced and returned to its proper position.
Chapter XXVI.
Treatment for reducing a muscle dislocation.
Know that the muscle can only be dislocated in three ways: one of which is when it is dislocated from the tip of the coccyx to the side.
The second way is when it is dislocated above the muscle, which can be corrected quickly and should not be dislocated behind the shoulder or in front of the nerves.
Dislocations that occur outside the side of the coccyx are more common and can be easily reduced in those with little flesh; however, in those with thicker flesh, it may be difficult to dislocate it.
In some cases, trauma such as a blow or fall can cause the muscle to develop an abscess, which should be treated with cauterization and drained if it has already been dislocated.
Then you must spread this substance that is over-secreted from him, and then proceed with the treatment of it.
It is known as the dislocation when it occurs at the joints and you should feel for the displaced muscle; so that you may distinguish between the displaced muscle and the normal one, because you will find differences among them; and you should feel for the head of the displaced muscle and then touch the tip of the head of the muscle like a hawk, and the patient cannot return his hand to its socket or move it at all.
If it is a dislocation, you must touch the limb or the joint and make sure to feel its exact location, as it should not be hidden.
And with this type of dislocation, there is usually an easy reduction when it is fresh and the patient is young.
The reduction is when the assistant raises the patient's hand to the joint above it, and then places both hands under the affected area, lifting it with force towards its original position, while the assistant raises the patient's hand, stretching it out; and then holds it in place, so that it returns easily.
However, if it does not return despite the previous instructions, and if it is in the beginning of the dislocation, several days later, you must have the patient bathed in warm water and administer a poultice that softens and soothes, such as a mixture of chamomile tea, fenugreek, and marshmallow in water, and administer it.
Place the patient on his back and hold him down gently but firmly, with a wool pad placed between softness and firmness, and the doctor should place his foot on the affected area and lift the head of the muscle with force; at the same time, pull the patient's hand towards the unaffected side so that it does not protrude from the joint, and another assistant should hold the patient's head to prevent it from protruding from the joint, as it will return quickly to its original position.
If you wish, reduce the patient in this manner: and it is that you bring a man who is taller than the patient, from the side of the bed, and penetrate his muscle near the patient's groin and lift the patient's groin area towards the incision points above, until the patient is suspended in the air, and another servant pulls the patient's hand from below their abdomen. If the patient is lightweight, then it is necessary that the one who causes the weight be suspended, in order to ease the displacement, for the dislocation returns quickly.
It is reduced in the same way by another method: and it is that a long pole with its head round like a mortar pestle, neither too thick nor too thin, be placed near the patient; then cloth lion skins are placed over the top of the pole, and the patient stands according to the length of the pole, and their hand is extended towards the other side; and the part of the other side should be strong, for the joint returns quickly to its place.
If the reduction is difficult for all the reasons mentioned, then use this remedy: and it is that you take a pole whose length is two forearms, and its width four fingers, and reduce its thickness at the handle according to this form:
Cloth lion skins are placed over the rounded head of the pole to prevent the pole from hurting the patient.
The patient's groin area should be placed near the pole, and their hand or arm should be extended over the pole towards the other side; the pole should be covered with a leather strap and the arms and hand of the servant.
The arms should be placed on a step according to its width, and the hand extended towards the other side, while the other part is suspended, for the joint will return quickly.
When the penetration of the instrument is complete according to any method possible for you, then it is necessary that you place a sheep's wool pad over the groin area; and apply a plaster prepared with flour and egg whites over the entire muscle, so that it is rolled up, and tighten it around the groin area with a suitable bandage; and the linen should be wrapped over the plaster, and the patient's hand should be tied to their neck, relaxed, and not be swollen for 7 days.
It is necessary that the patient's diet be limited until the affected member is comforted, for it is easier to heal in this way.
And the diet should be given more meat or eggs, and exercise should be done; therefore, if it is closed and not softened, then it is healed.
But if the joint is dislocated for multiple observations due to moisture or other reasons, then in that case it is necessary to administer cauterization with three cuts, as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization.
And if all this is done and the linen and joint are not closed after seven days, and the plaster and bandage are reduced several times without being closed, and it cannot raise that arm towards the other side, then you should know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, have been severed or extended or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be placed in its proper place.
The reduction of that dislocation should be done by pressing and stretching the feet and hips or the back parts, until it returns.
And administer the other bandage to it, and cure that one until it is healed.
If there is difficulty with the healing of a member or slow movement in it, then have the patient bathe several times until that gravity is relieved and it returns to its natural state.
Chapter XXVII.
On the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
You should know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated with difficulty and also returns with difficulty; it can be dislocated in all directions, but especially towards the front and back, and the dislocation of the shoulder is not relieved by any means, because it is hidden by muscles or by a deformed shape, and when you adjust the dislocated shoulder with the hand, that is clearly indicated to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or touch the muscle with it.
And you should cut it, and reduce the dislocation as quickly as possible before it forms an abscess cauterized, for if it forms a cauterized abscess, the reduction of it is difficult, and it does not heal easily; especially when it is towards the back, because it is worse than all other types of dislocations, and more painful, and may lead to death in many observations.
The restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce, is that the hand of it should be extended with two hands, and the arm should be stretched out, and the hands of the doctor should be on the shoulder and below it, and they push the joint with the knuckles of their fingers or with the flat of their palm until it returns to its place.
If the dislocation is at the shoulder joint, then you should return it as if doubling your hand with its other, until you strike the hip with the back of your hand using the side of your palm.
If reduction does not occur, then administer strong extension and movement.
Two ministers should extend the arms, and another two to ensure that there is no resistance during extension.
The arm should be rotated completely, as it is wrapped with long fabric around its hand, or bound.
When the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil to help in lubricating the joint and facilitate its movement, then apply strong pressure and push it back into place.
The reduction process should be stopped over the plaster in which there is a rigid and excessive swelling with an albuminous discharge, and it should be compressed with a bandage of gauze, and tightened with a descent traction. The arm should be suspended from the neck, and left in that position for several days.
Then remove the bandage; and if the joint is formed in its location, you should then remove the dressing from it and leave it as it is.
If the joint is not strong, you should apply fresh plaster and bandage, leave it for several days until it becomes tightened, then remove it.
But if there is difficulty in the reduction of the joint and its position is moving, you should administer humectation with bathing and subtle friction, compress it until relief occurs; or place a cushion over the affected joint, this being made of thick grease; and bind it, leaving it on the bone for a day and night. Then remove it and put it in the bath; when it is healed, you should scrape the joint with a heated friction tool, and apply it again over the affected area, three times a day, on the first day, the second, and the third. Corruption has reached the intestines internally through bathing, until it becomes hardened.
If you wish, place a wet and warm cowhide patch over the wound, sew it on and press it down; and do this for some days, as the wound is moist and helps in its healing.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the treatment of shoulder dislocation, that is the joint between the arm and the hand.
The shoulder of the hand sometimes gets dislocated, and the reduction of the dislocation of it is relatively easy, but the opposite is true for other joints; however, speed is required in reducing it at the time of its dislocation, before the location is closed or there is cautionary puncture.
The reduction of the dislocation is that you place the patient's hand joint on a table and have the patient extend their arm, and then place your hand or palm over the proximity of the joint and push it back into place until it returns to its location.
However, it is important to consider whether the palm has already been placed on the patient's abdomen, in which case you should have the patient extend and reduce their hand on a table; if the dislocation preceded this, you should position the patient's hand intrinsically on the table so that the doctor's hand can rest on the proximity of the joint.
And if it returns quickly, that's good; otherwise, you should strengthen it with plaster allowing the puncture to heal and leave it as it is; do not repeat this, because you cannot force or endure the reduction of it any further until several days have passed.
However, the joint may remain twisted; and do not inform the patient of any cause, but rather that the hand is softened and cannot be strengthened in any way; in this case, you should know if the nerves are broken or torn, and in such a situation, do not manipulate it but rather strengthen it with a hot cautery near the amputation site and provide some means of relief.
Once the shoulder has been returned, you should place it on the plaster that you have recommended, and allow it to rest and heal for 5 days; then remove the dressing and leave it exposed and exercise the hand.
But if there is no movement in it and some difficulty occurs, you should apply warm water and gentle friction for several days until relief is achieved.
Chapter XXIX.
Of the treatment of finger dislocation.
Fingers are sometimes dislocated at all joints.
If a finger of these is dislocated at the palm or the back of the hand, you should hold the finger and push it back into its place with your thumbs until it returns to its location.
Then support the finger's head and suspend the affected area, and leave it for two days.
Suspend the affected area and extend it until it is properly aligned in that day.
When it is night, lay the affected area as described above and do not stop unwrapping it during the day or exercise with movement, but keep it wrapped at night; do this for several days until it becomes strong.
Make it appear as if water, if the hand is dislocated in the abdomen and you place it at that division and make it appear as if water the first operation, until it is healed.
Making it appear as if water when the hand is dislocated in other places.
Chapter 30.
On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When a dislocation of any of the vertebrae of the back or neck occurs and remains uncompleted with other vertebrae at its location, then there is no cure for it, because death comes to the patient.
A sign of this is that the patient's excretion is outside their control and they cannot retain it; and in many cases, some limbs or both legs or both arms, or one of these, are softened or dislocated, or a vertebra is removed from its location, because in many cases, it is dislocated and the removal of these is made to four places.
Therefore, it has been removed at the back parts and is called scoliosis.
But the treatment for it is to consider whether scoliosis occurs in childhood, because in that case, there is neither a cure nor healing of it entirely.
But in those cases that occur by accident or by blows or similar, the ancients used to discuss the methods of treatment at length, from which much returns with profit; but I have shortened it from that, because the small excuse for the excess of it, due to the more convenient explanation, with which I have explained and formed it using various instruments from that, and I will show and explain it here.
There is no cure for these, except the one I recommend.
The patient is to be stretched on their back close to the wall, and their legs are to be extended away from it so that they are not pressed against the feet.
A straight stick is placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the head, and another stick is tied to the feet at the other end of the head.
The attendant holds the stick, and it should not be fixed in a hole; another attendant should hold the other according to that form.
A cloth is wrapped around the head of the patient and tied tightly with a linen strip, and the end of the linen strip should be attached to the stick that supports the head, and it should be held there; and another linen strip is tightened around the lower back of the patient, on the heels, and over the buttocks, and holds the legs; and all the strips are adjusted and tied to the other stick that supports the feet.
The attendant should stretch the strip at the division of the stick, and the two sticks and the strips in their locations where they are fixed, should not be removed, but rather they should be loosened as we said earlier.
The doctor places their hands firmly on the vertebra until it returns to its place, or they place a table over it, and adjust themselves so that their feet are supported by the table until it returns.
But if it does not return in this manner, then take a table whose length or width is three feet, and carve a hole in the wall near the patient, into which the end of the table fits. The mattress of the table is placed on the vertebra, and the doctor places their feet on the other end, and presses hard until the vertebra is straightened and returns to its place.
If you want to turn the patient's head, open the pillow that is under it; and place yourself at the end of the patient's head, with two sticks whose lengths are each one arm, with the distance between them being a palm, and make a hole in each stick through which the head can pass, and they should be firmly fixed on the ground so that they do not move.
Make another round stick with a handle, and turn it in both holes of the two sticks.
At the end of it is a hole through which the stick is formed, the length of which is a palm that can be turned; and in the other two sticks it is similar.
Tighten the strips that you have stretched in the patient's feet on the hole through which the head passes, and tighten the strips that you have stretched around their thighs in the handle of the stick that supports the feet.
You should also place a turner at each handle and have an attendant who turns the handle while the doctor adjusts the vertebra as we said earlier.
When the thigh is set in place and the area is closed, then apply a thick plaster made of alum and lard, followed by linen; place another plaster over the first one using a flat tablets three fingers or so wide and long enough to cover the swelling, and on top of the division of the thigh bone.
And apply a bandage made of thin cloth that we have mentioned before, and use it to feed the patient with nourishment until he recovers.
If there remains any threat in the area after recovery, it is necessary to administer medicines that dissolve and cleanse through long-term administration of the tablets, which we have recommended; and a sheet of lead has already been administered in that place.
Sometimes there is a threat in the lower part of the thigh bones due to dislocation; this bone is already known to be weakened; therefore, do not apply any intervention on it with this medicine because it could lead to death.
Chapter 31.
On the treatment of a dislocated pelvis.
Know that the joint of the pelvis and the joint of the muscle do not move except for dislocation; this does not occur to those who have displacement or cavitation in other small joints.
The joint of the pelvis can be dislocated in four ways: dislocation at the inner divisions, outer divisions, frontal divisions, or posterior divisions.
It is more often dislocated at the inner divisions, and less so at the frontal or posterior divisions.
The sign of the dislocation at the inner divisions is that, when you adjust the thighbone of the patient with the healthy one, the affected thighbone is longer and the protruding part is more prominent than the healthy one; the affected leg cannot be folded, it must be tied up, and the location where it should be tied up is marked with a cauterized wound so that the head of the swelling has been reached.
The sign of the dislocation at the outer divisions is that the injuries occurring in that area are contrary to this injury.
The sign of the dislocation at the frontal divisions is that the thighbone expands as it bends, but does not bend without pain in the front; if it is pierced and cannot go forward to the frontal divisions, the urine is retained and the swelling is marked, and you must walk on the heel.
The sign of the dislocation at the posterior divisions is that the front part does not expand, nor can it be bent forward; the thighbone is shorter than the other one, and the swelling is softened, and the head of the swelling should be in that location.
But the reduction of these types of dislocations is that you consider whether the dislocation is old and chronic, in which case it has already been healed with the approach you administer, and therefore it is not necessary for treatment; in this case, no intervention should be made.
But in the case of a recent dislocation, which is one of the four types of dislocations, you must try to bring back the joint and extend it to the inner and outer divisions on both sides, moving it to the right and left; this will return it without needing further treatment.
But if it does not return in this manner, you must prepare a strong medicine and extend the thighbone of the lower division or from the side, or with thin cloth on top of the thighbone; another medicine should be extended above it as far as his hands can reach; and another medicine should tighten a tourniquet around the swelling, and have another person hold the end of the bandage.
The extension should be made either to the lower or inner division towards the neck of the femur, or to the posterior or lower divisions at the pelvis.
The extension should be made all of them in one movement while the patient is lifted off the ground and remains hanging.
This type of extension is common to all four.
And if the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be good; otherwise, it is necessary for all types of dislocations to do what we have said about the treatment of each type of dislocation.
In the treatment of the dislocation when it is at the inner divisions, it is necessary that the patient lies down on his back; and place bandages around the swelling in the area between the head of the swelling and its lower end; then extend the bandage above the neck towards the uppermost part of the pelvis.
Then take another strong servant and tightly grasp the patient's arms, and forcefully extend the affected limb to its outer extremities, for it will return to its original position.
This kind of treatment is for light pus cure where the affected limb is reduced as opposed to other treatments.
But if the patient is unconscious and unable to comply with this kind of treatment, then the two feet must be tied together firmly, lightly, across both the heels and wrists.
Make each of the ropes the length of four fingers, and stretch the affected side more than the other by two fingers.
Suspend the patient over the post (or pillar) and let their head hang down as much as possible, and make the length of the rope from the ground equal to two arm lengths.
And order a strong youth to compress the affected area with his head, and suspend the patient from another strong youth, while the other youth gently but firmly pulls the joint back into place, as it will return to its original position quickly.
But in self-reduction (when it's a dislocation at the outer joint), it is necessary for the patient to walk on their toes as much as possible, and tie the affected side firmly with ropes around the limb and the feet.
And pause two posts, one by the feet and the other at the head; and pause ropes adjusted to the middle of each post, which are wrapped with damp cloths so that the patient is not damaged by the post being between their legs, thus preventing the affected limb from being pulled too tightly.
And assign each servant to their designated position, and the doctor with their hand guides the reduction according to their art (or technique).
When the dislocation is at the front joint, the affected limb should be gently extended (as described earlier), and the doctor places the palm of their right hand on the affected limb, while using the other hand to rotate the limb around its axis. The affected limb should then be gently pulled inward toward the center of the body.
When the dislocation is at the back joint, it is not necessary to extend the affected limb, but rather the patient should be raised above the ground and tied down firmly on a hard surface, just as it would be if the bone were dislocated in front of the joint (as previously described), placing it on its back and extending the ropes. This approach does not help.
It is necessary to apply compression with a wooden board on the joint location.
Therefore, since the reduction is complex, as you are aware of the joint reduction technique, and you extend two ropes from the patient, when you see them tighten and the patient extends their affected limb while relieving the tension, you know that the affected member has been restored  then you adjust the ropes and bind them tightly with plaster so that the bone is not injured in any way; and keep the patient resting for three or four days.
Then loosen the rope and the plaster, and compare the two bones.
If you see them tightened in place, then you know that the dislocation has been closed, and at this point let the patient walk around.
If you see any signs of swelling, then return and rebind it, and apply pressure as before, and let it rest for three days.
Then loosen the affected limb, and have it walk slowly on it for several days, until it is comfortable again.
Chapter XXXII.
On treatment for dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: outside the joints, inside the joints, and towards the chest; but it is not dislocated in front.
And the sign of dislocation is that you command the patient to apply their leg to their shoulder, then you will know the shoulder is dislocated.
The restoration of all the types of dislocation is that you make the patient lie straight, so that their leg is extended if possible; you attach your hand to the shoulder, and place your foot under it; and hold the arm with your palms, and keep it between your feet with strength, and another assistant extend their foot into the area where the shoulder returns to its place.
And the sign of reduction is that their leg adheres to the shoulder without effort.
Then place them and make the leg adhere to the shoulder, and tie them together with a bandage for three or four days, and then untie it.
Do not allow the patient to walk for several days until they are healed and comfortable.
But if the reduction of it is excused, then administer strong extension to them with leeches as was described in the treatment of hernia.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the treatment for dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle is sometimes reduced by slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated due to a blow, and the dislocation of it is caused either inside or outside the joint.
And the sign of dislocation is that the ankle appears swollen coming from the joint where it is dislocated.
But the treatment for reduction of it is gentle reduction, and it should be extended with ease by the hands and placed back into its place as soon as possible.
But in the treatment of it when it is dislocated due to a blow, you must make the patient lie straight, and have a strong and skilled assistant from behind the foot in the correct place.
And you place your right hand under the heel of the upper part, and your left hand below the foot in the location of the ankle bone.
And pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and push it with your left hand for two days, extend it with the left hand; and push the leg of the foot against the chest without effort.
And do this for two days as you have counted.
And push the leg of the foot against the chest on the third day, and you are at the ankle bone.
If it returns in one or two days according to this method, and if you see the foot placed, that is good; otherwise, you must perform the operation again, because it will return.
But if reduction of it is prohibited by what we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a small stone in the earth fastened, and let it fit between their legs, and you already have wrapped them with cloth to prevent the patient from being hurt.
And the assistant holds their legs, and another assistant extends the foot with their hands or leeches that are placed on the neck of the foot; and each assistant extends it against its extension, and the stone remains between the patient's legs to prevent the body from being drawn towards the outside of its extension.
And the doctor places the dislocation with their hands, and another assistant holds the healthy joint towards the outside because the dislocation returns easily.
And therefore, when the dislocation returns and it is declared that the reduction of it is healed, you stop plastering it and drain it strongly with leeches, and tie the foot to the chest.
You must be careful or protect the nerves behind the ankle because the leeches on it should not be vigorous and hurt it strongly.
And leave it for two or three days; and if the leeches are softened, drain it.
And untie it on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days. But if it is necessary to go in front of that space, it is not certain that the dislocation has not been dissolved and corrupted, and therefore it will not receive treatment.
If there is an abscess at the cautery site, you must administer the treatment as described in our narrative, in another place for healing and dressing, until it is healed.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the treatment of dislocation of the toes.
It must be placed gently without much effort, and if it is not difficult, it can be done easily.
But if the dislocation is in some nodes of the foot, you must make the patient lie with their foot on a flat surface or table, as though they were walking.
And you stand with your feet, and place your foot on what is below the joints, and press it with the sole of your foot inward until it returns, and watch that it is placed and does not appear at the site of dislocation.
Then place a table underneath the foot of the patient, which supports the entire foot, having two legs, and strengthen it with a suitable structure for three days; then release it and let it rest from walking for several days until it becomes firm and its recovery is secured.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of the types of dislocation that are caused by blow or fracture, or any other way. (The numbering for this line is unclear in the text provided.)
When any cause of that kind occurs, and you undertake its treatment and restoration, many times death ensues. (The numbering for this line is unclear in the text provided.)
And it is not enough to approach the treatment of it presumptuously, but rather the one skilled in the art, long experienced, merciful and compassionate, slow, neither hasty nor presumptuous; who uses only medicines that prevent gangrene and cauterizes solely, leaving the patient to divine judgment, except for the one in whom you hope salvation from destruction, or relief from illness, and where some hope appears. (The numbering for this line is unclear in the text provided.) And therefore, make every effort to reduce it at the start of the cause, before gangrene sets in. (The numbering for this line is unclear in the text provided.)
And if the limb returns as desired, then administer a regimen that prevents gangrene and treats the wound with whatever is appropriate for it of drying agents. (The numbering for this line is unclear in the text provided.)
And if the dislocation is a fracture and happens in separated bones, then perform the setting of them, and do whatever has been said about simple illnesses in those locations. (The numbering for this line is unclear in the text provided.)
And beware and avoid that which threatens the intestine in the paths of fear, as my preaching has guided you; because what is better for you must be desired from your Creator, more persistent for your glory, and more healthy for your true body during your times. (The numbering for this line is unclear in the text provided.) Thus, the words of Albucasis are finished, to whom may God be blessed. (The numbering for this line is unclear in the text provided.) Amen.
