Therefore, my children, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the knowledge in medicine, by completing it you will attain its end, and by reading its explanations and clarifications, I find that I should complete this treatise on surgery for you.
Since the art of surgery is almost entirely obsolete in our kingdom and time, due to the great danger it poses, and the instruments of surgery are lost; only a few small descriptions remain in the books of the ancients, which have been corrupted by many errors and hazards until their meanings are obscured and their power diminished.
I find it appropriate to arrange this treatise according to the method of explanation and clarification and abbreviation; and so that the forms of cautery instruments and other tools of the work come with their explanations and preparation, which is necessary.
One reason for the scarcity of good craftsmen in this field is that the art of medicine requires lengthy study, and the one who practices it must have knowledge of anatomy, which includes knowing the joints and shapes of members, their connection and separation; having knowledge of bones, nerves and ligaments, and their number, and the extraction of them; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the locations for their incision.
And as Hippocrates said, a word is a small thing in itself, but it has great significance in work and especially in the art of the hand.
And we have already said about this in the introduction of this book; whoever is not well-versed in anatomy is not qualified to avoid falling into error, which can lead to the death of men, as I have seen many of these people, some are ignorant of this science and abandon it after their learning and experience.
I saw a foolish and experienced doctor make an abscess called scrophulus on the neck of a woman, and he cut some arteries in her neck so that a large amount of blood flowed until the woman died among them.
I also saw another doctor who believed he could pull out a stone from a man in his condition, and the stone was large, and it came to him and cut a piece of the bladder while pulling out the stone, so that the man died on the third day.
I have already stated that this is the case, and I saw that due to the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, it was clear that he would die.
I also saw another doctor who received a salary from a duke of our land to perform surgery, and he went to a black castellan who was owed a fracture in his thigh; and the doctor prepared himself with his ignorance, extracted the fracture, on the wound, with pulvines and splints of strong construction, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
He laid it open as desired, and he applied the dressing, and he left it to heal for several days and commanded us to remove the bandages; and so it was until the thigh and leg became abscessed, and this led to ruin.
And you are called upon to him, and prepare to unbind the liniment, and peace and quiet is obtained, and he may then alleviate his pains.
However, corruption had already spread in the limb, so it could not be restrained, and the corruption continued to spread through the limb until the patient was at risk.
And another doctor pierced an abscess full of cancer, and it became an ulcer close to several days, until the evil within it was magnified by its lord.
The cause is that the cancerous growth is pure of melancholy humor, and therefore it should not come upon him with all ferocity, but rather on an organ or member that is most vulnerable to it.
And for this reason, my son, it is necessary that the operation be divided into two parts: one part is the operation associated with health, and the other part is the operation in which danger lies in greater decisions.
And I have already examined this matter in every place of this book where the operation is carried out with error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to guard against this and let go of that, so that foolish people do not find a way to speak and mislead you.
And therefore, take your weapons with caution and the protection of God, and your patients with compassion and firmness.
And use the best way for the grace of God to be lost in salvation and a blessed succession, and set aside the terrible diseases that are difficult to heal, and lay down your weapons from that which causes you fear, so that examination in your faith and in your name does not cause you to be led astray: for it remains with your glory, and moreover in this world and in the next to your sanctity.
Gualla now says in some of her teachings: "Do not treat an evil disease, so that bad doctors do not become known."
And I have divided this book into three chapters.
The division of the book begins, and it starts with the first chapter of the first part. The first chapter is arranged for the foot, regarding the shapes of instruments and the fire of cauteries, and what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter is about cysts and piercing, wounds, sores, extraction of bladders and similar things, all arranged in the shapes of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoration and dislocation, and treatment of twisting and similar things, arranged for the foot, and in the shapes of instruments.
It is necessary that I speak about the quality of the juxtaposition of the cautery and its negative effects, and in what circumstances cauterization should be prohibited.
Therefore I say that the speech about the quality of the juxtaposition of the cautery and its negative effects is a long, detailed, subtle discourse full of science, hidden secrets; and many wise people have already spoken at length about it, and they disagree, and to me it amounts to only a small part of their discourses, fearing prolixity.
And therefore I say that the use of cauterization applies universally to all matters or substances, with two exceptions, which are situations without matter.
In the situation without matter and dry, there is disagreement; for some say that cauterization is beneficial in this case, while others say the opposite, that cauterization is not suitable for a disease that is due to quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is appropriate that a dry and desiccated disease be treated with wet things.
And I say that he who says the opposite is correct, that cauterization is beneficial in all dry and desiccated diseases that occur in the bodies of men, because when you compare the bodies of men and their humidity to the nature of fire, the bodies of men are burned by it.
And I say from experience that this has been observed in some cases by me.
However, it is not necessary to reiterate that which has already been expounded and exercised in the chapter on cauterization by previous exercise, and to know the diversity of human bodies and the disposition of diseases in their bodies, and the causes of these diseases, and the accidents associated with them, and the time span of these conditions.
However, in other situations, there is no need for fear, and especially in wet and cold diseases, because all doctors agree on these, and there is no disagreement about the beneficial effects of cauterization in these cases.
And you, my sons, know that the secret of healing by cauterization with fire and the goodness of it is that cauterization with burning medicine is superior to cauterization with fire, because fire is simple, its action does not extend beyond the member being cauterized and is harmful only to a small extent to neighboring members.
However, the action of burning medicine extends to adjacent members, and it has a strong effect in bringing disease to the diseased member that is difficult to heal and causes pain.
But fire, because of its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do this, except that it superfluesc. It is already known to us by experience and by the length of service in the study of the art concerning the truth of the causes; and because of that, I am excused from the length of the sermon. If it were not forbidden in my free speech here, I would reveal secretly hidden about fire, and the quality of the operation in the bodies and its expulsion through which diseases are expelled, philosophical demonstrative discourse, which sharpens your thoughts.
Know, sons, that they disagree about the time in which it is appropriate to perform cautery and pause the best time of springtime.
I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harm due to accidental time is submerged in the benefit of what is drawn from cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pain or necessary pain, which do not tolerate delay, since it is feared that the harm coming from malicious intent, which is greater than small harm entering through time, could overcome it.
Do not believe in your thoughts, or sons, that it is not considered except by the common people and foolish doctors, because reduction of that disease which is cured by cautery is not complete at all times, and they pause on this consequence.
And the cause is not as they believe, because cautery is not simply in a place of medicine that alters the complexion and dries up the humidities that are the cause of pain.
But indeed, cautery surpasses medicine due to the desire for its value and virtue in its operation and the greatness of its Lord.
It is possible that the disease will return at some hour of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease, as well as its power, and what is prepared in his body from accumulations in him of superfluities and humidities, and what is obtained for him in food and similar things from these causes; except that the disease in which cautery is administered is a subtle disease in a member with few superfluities and humidities, such as cautionery on teeth for pain, it is possible that the pain will not return there, but rather it is done in small amounts.
But the common saying is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and this is an incorrect saying, not according to what I understand in it, because I believe that it is not a cure that improves with medicine or any other reason for cautionery.
And the cause is opposite of that; and my intention that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is not because it is administered in some diseases when methods of healing do not confer, but rather at the end of the disease, cautionery is administered and improves upon it. Now you understand that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the intention that I understand from the common people and the follies of foolish doctors.
They said the ancients that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
They said that the location of cautery does not harm, as this is not absolutely true, because I already have it proven and observed that it does not do so in some bodies, and cauterizing with gold is better than with iron as they say; however, when you perform cauterization with fire from gold, it is not declared to you, because it depends on the quantity that you want according to the roughness of gold, and it prepares to receive cold; and if you adjust it above the fire, the gold melts due to heat, and if some layers occur in the fire for the craftsman to cut through the occupation of that.
And because of this, cautery with iron must be done lightly and more carefully in terms of operation.
And I have arranged this chapter on cautery according to the chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the feet, so that I alleviate your request for what you want from it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers upon coldness and humidity the harmful accident of which there are two causes, namely scrofula and an abundance of rheumatic fluxes, called corrosion, from the head to the parts of the ears and eyelids flowing, and an abundance of sleeping, and tooth pain and hoarseness, and universally on all disease that comes due to coldness, such as paralysis, scurvy, apoplexy, and similar things in those diseases.
The form of this cauterization is as follows: first, you command the patient to be evacuated with a laxative medicine, cleansing his head for three or four nights, according to the power of the patient and his age and his custom.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and position it so that you sit on top of it between your hands on a sloping bench and hold his feet.
And then place the edge of your palm in line with the base of the nose between his eyebrows. But indeed, as your hand position has been reached, mark that location with a test and then ignite the olive oil cautery, which is the form of this.
And place a cushion on the spot indicated, in such a manner that it descends, with which your hand should be gently constrained little by little, and you turn it over.
And lift your hand slightly and look at the spot, if you see any part of the bone exposed, such as a small amount of gravel, then raise your hand, and if it does not return to that position, use another tool, if it is cold, until the bone that I told you about is seen.
And take a small amount of salt and dissolve it in water at that spot, let it remain for three days.
Then place a cushion over the sore wound and leave it until the scar from the fire is destroyed. And treat the area with a strong four-ingredient medicine until it is healed.
They say that when the wound remains open, it gets better by applying honey, because it is better and more beneficial.
They say that some of them should have the callous burned to the bone with a cautery and keep the cautery on it until some part of the bone has been burned away.
And shave that which is next to the bone and treat it.
Others say that with the cautery you can reach the marrow, until it causes deep pain in the bone, and this is the method of amputation in small cases. They believe that from that spot the vapors of the head escape.
Keep the wound open for a long time and treat it until it is consolidated.
Moreover, I have not seen these two types of cauterization in every case, only in some men out of fear; and leave that one alone, for it is better for your health when you do so, because the head is exposed due to a continuous solution of such things as we have testified in other members, and especially if the patient's head is naturally frail.
The primary type of cauterization is safer and better for your health, and from that moment on, use it for your health.
Chapter Two.
On the cauterization of the head.
When a chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the entire head in the patient and it is prolonged, and he uses medications such as headaches, migraines, head wraps, and capillary treatments, ointments, poultices, balms, oils, liniments, and similar remedies, especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery that has not helped in any of those ways, then consider whether the patient's head is naturally strong; and if it is not frail and weak, perform another cauterization using a different cautery. And cauterize that part of the head near the ear with cauterization until the callous is separated. Cut the callous and expose the bone in the quantity that has been determined and cauterize it at the back of the head in the place called "Venus," - which is the location where a blister is placed. And be careful not to expose the bone because the patient will experience great pain different from the pain of all other head cauterizations.
And I will tell you where this cauterization should be performed, because the cauterization in which the corn of the head and the occiput is cauterized is more subtle than the one used for cauterizing other parts of the head; and this is its form.
Chapter Three.
Treatise on modern cautery (or Cauterization in Modern Times)
When pain in the head occurs or pain penetrates into the skull, or pain settles in the neck, it should be treated with medications that heal the head, and the other remedy, which I have mentioned in the treatments for diseases; but if this does not help, then cauterization is required in two ways: either cauterization with acute burning medicine, or with iron.
Moreover, burning with a hot iron requires that you take a ladle of lime, scrape it and remove its edges on both sides from the handles. Then make an incision in the temple area with a scalpel that enters deeply until it is made hidden (covered up).
Then press down on the area with compressed bandages and leave it like that for three hours; then loosen the bandage and remove the lime, leaving the wound open for two or three days, and then place a dressing over the submerged area until the tissue heals.
Then care for the wound until it is healed.
And if you want, do this with some burning medications that I have written in the second treatise on burning medications.
However, ironing cauterization according to this method: fire for the cauterizing is required. The shape of it is:
and is called a nail-like claw, because its head is shaped like a nail with a slight curve, and in the middle of it there is a small elevation.
Place your hand over the area of pain, keep your hand - so as not to be harmed by the archer's equipment that is nearby - and rotate the small iron slowly.
And if the amount that is burned by the sharp edge of the scalpel is small compared to the size of it, raise your hand in such a way that the artery is not harmed, which is nearby, so that there will be no bleeding.
Then immerse the area in salt water and place it over the location, leaving it for three days; then cover the area with lint, and care for the wound until it is healed.
And if you want, perform the cauterization with the extremity of the cutler's knife according to cautery and be careful not to make an incision in the artery during this modern gout treatment (cauterization).
Chapter Four.
Treatise on ancient gout cauterization.
When you treat gout with the remedies that I have previously mentioned, and the treatment does not work, or the disease is one that does not respond to the remedy for the first cauterization with medicine or fire cauterization, then it is necessary that you ignite the cautery knife until it glows, meaning placing it on the location of pain with a line of sufficient length, so that it covers the area; and after pressing your hand for a while, pierce the artery and reach the bone.
However, you must be careful not to damage the jawbone, which is necessary for chewing, and that the ligament is not injured and the nerves that supply it, and that there are no spasms.
And if it concerns the care and caution of stopping the flow of blood from an artery that is incised, for in the incision there is fear, especially for one who does not know what to do and is not skilled and experienced; leave the operation on it at the beginning.
Here comes the next sentence to translate:
If this illness is not alleviated by this cautery and the body of the patient tolerates it, cauterize in the middle part of the head as we have mentioned, and heal the wound until it is healed.
And if you find that the cautery mentioned in the section on artery obstruction with cautery having two irons is not effective, this caution is more beneficial and appropriate.
Capital V:
Chapter on Cauterization of Ear Pain.
When there is pain in the ear due to cold and is cured by causatives or other treatments mentioned in the division, but the pain persists, then ignite the cautery, which is called "puncture." Here is its form:
Approach the "puncture" with caution and bring it near the ignition, ensuring that it surrounds the entire ear as a wheel is rolled or in the circumference of each sample if the pain is in one area. Approach the ear cauterization slowly, taking care to locate the exact spot before proceeding.
If multiple points of cauterization are made in the entire ear, ensure that each is properly treated until healed.
Chapter VI:
Chapter on Cauterization for Torticollis (Wryneck).
Wryneck that is cured with cauterization is only done for the species that come from poison, as mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
Cauterization should be avoided for the species that enter by dryness or spasm of the nerve.
If the treatment of wryneck with herbs, capers, and gargles does not work, you should cauterize the patient with three cauteries: first, make an incision in the ear, second, apply a small hot iron to the temple, and third, cauterize the junction of the lips.
Allow the cautery to cool in the opposite direction of the affected side, as the healing process will only occur in the healthy area.
The method of cauterization involves using the cautery to make an incision in the upper part of the ear near the corner of the head, and another incision along the temple, the length of which should be the same as the width of the finger used to make it. After making the incisions, allow the cautery to cool before proceeding with treatment. Ensure that the cauterization is carried out until the affected area is completely burned away.
And this is the shape of the cautery, it is the specialized tool of the blacksmith, its shape being like a tabletop. However, it is more subtle than what one can see with the eyes; and it is necessary to remove any excess thickness from it.
Then take care of the place with what is in front of the process before it heals.
Chapter VII.
On the ancient cautery for apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you are treating it with what has been said and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: primarily on all corners of his head; at the middle of the head, as has been said; and at the neck. The method of using the cautery is done as has been said before.
It has been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; it is more recent; take care of it with what you are processing.
Chapter VIII.
On the cauterization for forgetfulness caused by fevers.
It is necessary to give the patient at the beginning large and round pills, altering them if needed.
Then shave the patient's entire head and place on it a plaster made of the ingredients described in the treatise on plasters.
Leave that area uncovered for some days, as this is the method of using the cautery. And do what that medicine orders, which I have already mentioned before.
Therefore, if it cures well with that treatment, then there is no need for anything else; but if not, make three cauteries on the lower part of his head, decreasing from the most superior part of the head to the lower part of the neck. Leave a gap between each cautery and take care of the cauterized area with what you are processing.
If you feel that the patient can tolerate more, then make a single cautery at the middle location; but if you want to be more aggressive, make it over both ears.
Take care of the cauterized area until it heals; and let the cauterization be olive-shaped, as described before.
Chapter IX.
On the cauterization for preservation and the softening of the entire body.
It is necessary to process the head with what has been said and give him pills; then shave the patient's head, make a cautery at the middle of his head, a cautery over all the corners of his head, another cautery on the lower part of his body, and three cauterizations over the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of softening the body due to a severe condition and the patient can tolerate it, cauterize it over the vertebrae of the back with four cauterizations, and later make a cautery at the place where the cord emerges from the spine, and raise your hand above it. Take care of the cauterized area until it heals, and let this be olive-shaped cautery.
Chapter X.
On the cauterization for epilepsy.
The epileptic is not to be cauterized; rather, that epilepsy is due to a fever.
Therefore, it is necessary to process the brain of the patient at the beginning with what has been mentioned before and with the other treatment that I described in the division when the patient is strong and can tolerate the exception of medicine.
If the patient is a child who cannot tolerate medications, administer powders and sweetened medicines that can be processed, with the help of purgatives for several days, with purification of food.
Then shave the patient's head and make a single cautery at the middle of his head according to the previous method, another cautery on the back of his head, and one over each corner of his head. If the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that area with a cautery, having paralysis and softening of the body over the spinal column at the neck and the spinal column at the back.
Then use olive oil as a precursor to the cauterization.
However, if the patient is a child, pause the subtle cauterization in this manner.
Chapter XI.
On the cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and weakened humors, then cauterize that area with a cautery, having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess declining to melancholia, and the patient's body is moist, give him water that purifies his brain as described in the previous division.
Then shave the patient's head, and prepare a turtle shell properly made for him on top of his forehead, and apply it in the middle of his head.
The patient should be seated and kept from all sides.
Then apply a lining, which is suitable for an old ewe's fleece. Heat that area over a fire at a moderate temperature, which the patient should endure when it is placed there. Then place it in the middle of his forehead, and leave him with it until it is cooled down.
Do this to the patient every week once, along with his other treatment until he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that area by making small points as much as possible, without letting go of a cautery in such a manner: this is a type of cauterization that moistens the brain evenly.
Then place that area in sheep's wool or linen cloth.
Chapter XII.
On the cauterization of water flowing down the leg.
When you have identified the start of water flowing down the leg according to the signs I mentioned in the previous division, begin and give the patient water that purifies his head, and keep him away from all moisture.
Apply that salt in a bath every day.
Then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle of his forehead; and cauterize it twice with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of a flow of water in both legs, or once with one cauterization if it is the beginning of water flowing in one leg.
Make incisions with a cautery on all veins and arteries that are already open; and make the cauterizations in that area near the temples.
Be careful to avoid bleeding when cauterizing; and if you see blood flowing from there, stop it with some medicine that is available to you.
I will come with knowledge that is in the extraction of arteries and the opening of those, as well as caution for bleeding.
It is sometimes cauterized in the neck, just below two bones, with two cauterizations properly performed.
Chapter XIII.
On the cauterization of ancient tears.
When the tears in the legs are ancient and persistently, and it is determined that it is an excess of phlegmatic fluids in the areas of the head visible outside the skull and confirmed by the veins and arteries in that location, then cauterize that area with a cautery as described in the beginning of water flowing down the legs, and use a cauterization on the forehead and two cauterizations near the temples, as well as two cauterizations near the neck bones. And if it requires addition (meaning treatment), then cauterize the entire length of the hernia along the base of the scrotum at the eyelash tip using a small cautery.
This appears to be a reference to a chapter number in the treatise. The Roman numerals were used in medieval texts, and this one corresponds to the 14th chapter.
On the cauterization of nasal foul smell.
When you treat the person you mentioned in the previous section and your treatment does not work, prepare your equipment and give the patient three nights of cochina (a type of medicinal drink) to drink; then shave their head and cauterize the area using a medium-sized cautery with an olive oil cautery. Then cauterize that area with a small clove-scented cautery on both eyelids, removing the hair slightly.
And be careful not to burn the affected area by accident.
And here is the shape of the clove-scented cautery: (No further translation provided for this line as it seems to be describing a visual aid rather than text.)
Capitol .xv. (15th chapter)
On the cauterization for softening the eyelids of males.
When the eyelid of a male becomes soft due to illness or moisture, you should cauterize it with a cautery and this is its shape: (No further translation provided for this line as it seems to be describing an illustration or diagram.)
And if you are cauterizing that area, make a small mark with two cauteries on both eyelids in all directions, and extend the marks to the temples. And let the length of each cautery mark correspond to the width of the eyelash.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the third part of the eyelid that is affected.
Capitol .xvi. (16th chapter)
On the cauterization of the male eyelid when the hair is converted into parts inside and pierces the eye.
When the hair of the eyelid is converted into parts inside and pierces the eye in this manner, cauterization can be performed in two ways: either by burning or by using a medicine to burn.
If a pointed cautery of the foot is heated, tell the patient to read these words just as those who clean themselves do, until they are prolonged and swollen; and if you puncture it, then hold the heels with a bandage so that it is not harmed until the skin grows back.
Then have the patient close their eyes and put your hand on the eyelids of the heels with a signal to them as shown by the figure of the holly leaf, and begin the signal at the place where the skin is.
Then put cotton soaked in oil or bird glue on the heel.
And heat the pointed cautery of that shape.
And cauterize with the pointed shape that was signaled, bit by bit, in small patches until the surface of the skin, which is like holly leaf, is burnt entirely and appears properly.
And a sign of the cure of your work is that the eyelids of the heel will be contracted and the skin over the heel raised due to the puncture of the heel.
Therefore lift it up and place it for three days, and have it bandaged until the scar has risen. And cure that one with mouthwash until it is healed.
But if the skin returns due to some cause and the eyelid becomes soft, then do another time the cautery over it just as you did the first time.
But if the skin is in the eyelid, cauterize it until it returns to its natural position and is swollen and the skin does not touch the heel.
But if the cautery with medicine burns this one, tell the patient to read the skin until it is prolonged and swollen, and have paper or cloth in the shape of holly leaf made.
And take known sage and live coals in a cup. And mix it well. And say that, and mix those substances well, and do it quickly so that it is not spoiled; and spread that over the paper in the shape of holly leaf, and place it on one or both heels; and place a cotton soaked in oil under the heel, and the head of the patient should be in your lap.
And place the medicine on the skin and press it gently, but do not let it be too hard because biting is like fire.
And when you notice that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, then remove the medicine and let it dry; and once the biting stops, remove the medicine and wash the heel with water; and consider if the eyelid has been raised as it should be washed with fire or incision because at this point it is good; and if it does not return to its original position due to the medicine being pressed too hard or if the operation is spoiled, then put the medicine on the same spot until the heel is swollen.
And have it bandaged until the callus of the adhesion is removed, and cure that one with mouthwash or another remedy until it is healed.
And you must keep watch over your operation to make sure that no pus from the medicine falls on the heel, and if the eyelid becomes soft after a few days and some cause of the skin touches the heel, then repeat your medicine on the spot where the eyelid has become soft, just as you did at the beginning, and continue until it is healed.
This is the shape of holly leaf.
You should know that the heels of men are diverse according to their size and thickness, and therefore your treatment will depend on this.
Do not hide the true path from the one who studies in this art.
Chapter XVII.
On the cauterization of fistulas that are in the heel's lacrimal gland.
When you treat fistulas as mentioned in the division of diseases and do not confer your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize it in this manner: tell the patient to place their head in your lap, and have a servant hold the head of the patient in such a way that it is neither harmed nor agitated.
And put cotton soaked in oil or bird glue on the heel of that fistula.
And heat the pointed cautery of this shape:
The subject should be in a concave shape, similar to a reed or a pen with a bent tip, from one end of which the cautery is made.
And if it penetrates into the other extremity. If you wish it to come out thus it tries.
However, the concave one is better for this work.
Then press the fistula if it is open, and draw pus and dry it out from there. And if it is not open, then open it and remove the purulent material from there.
Then place your hand on the cautery which should be well ignited, and hold it there about one finger's width below the patient's nose, so that neither you nor the patient are disturbed, and then press the cautery onto the vein and burn it.
Therefore, if the cautery enters the bone at the beginning, it is good; otherwise, you should repeat the cautery one or two times, if necessary; and leave it as it is for three days, and then press on that spot with a border and cover it with an absorbent dressing until it is healed.
However, if it has passed ten days and is not healed, then press on it with a sharp, corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and scraped as needed in its respective chapter.
And another method of cauterizing a fistula, which some have said earlier: enter the location of the fistula and fill it up, then press on that fissure with a fine metal rod of the shape of a feather; It was the quantity of one inch of melted lead; hold your hand with good grip, but do not harm the patient because the melted lead should not reach the vein of that location; and you must also press on the vein of the patient's location with albumen of egg or water, for the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed by what has been said about cauterization and cure, that is good; otherwise, it is necessary to administer a nose drop and reduce the fistula into the nostril according to its proper location.
Chapter XVIII.
Treatise on the Cauterization of Fissures in the Feet.
Swelling frequently occurs in lips, especially in those of children.
When the swelling does not improve with the treatment we've told you about, then heat it with a small cautery knife following this method:
The concavity of the area should be in accordance with the subtlety of the knife.
Place a cushion carefully over those swellings so that the cautery reaches the base of the swelling.
Apply the remedy until it heals.
Chapter 19.
On cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
When an abscess appears on the uvula or the palate or in the roots of teeth and you apply a bandage, and it bursts, and becomes infected, and a fistula is formed, and you treat it and its cure does not improve, then you must heat a cautery according to the amount required for the fistula, and insert the heated cautery into the hole in the fistula, keeping your hand inside until the heat reaches the base of it, and at the end do this once or twice; and apply treatment with what we have told you about its cure until it heals.
And if the pus is drained and heals, that is good; otherwise, it becomes necessary to find the location and remove the corrupt bone as described in its chapter.
Chapter 20.
On cauterization of teeth and softening of swellings.
When swellings are softened by moisture and teeth are damaged, and you use medicines to treat them but they do not improve, then place the patient's head on your lap, and heat the cautery according to the method that will be described next, so that you can quickly press the handle of the cautery against the tooth and insert it into the swelling, keeping your hand a little away from the tooth until the patient feels the heat of the fire reach the root of the tooth.
And lift up your hand, and repeat heating the cautery several times as you wish.
Make the patient rinse their mouth with salty water and hold it for an hour, then spit it out, because a damaged tooth is closed and swollen gums are tightened and decaying moisture is dried up.
Chapter 21.
On cauterization of tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to coldness, or it has rotted or worms have invaded it and cannot be cured with medicine, then cauterize in that manner according to two methods: cauterization with a cow's horn, or cauterization with fire.
Cauterizing with a cow's horn means that you take a horn of a cow and sharpen it with iron, wrap it in cloth, immerse the sharpened end in boiling water, and place it on the painful tooth as quickly as possible until it cools down.
And repeat the process several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you prefer, immerse cotton or cloth in the horn mentioned earlier, place it on the painful tooth, and hold the heated iron over it until the iron reaches the bottom of the tooth cavity.
However, cauterizing with fire requires careful attention to the quality of the charcoal or iron, and there should be some coarseness in it so that the heat of the fire does not burn the patient's mouth.
And apply the chosen method of fire cauterization, place it on the tooth and hold your hand over it until the cauterization cools down; do this several times to alleviate or eliminate the pain that day or the next day.
And it is necessary to inform the patient that they must keep good cotton in their mouth for an hour and then spit it out; this is the method of fire cauterization.
Cauterize with whichever method you prefer.
And this is the form of the cannula:
Chapter 22.
On cauterization of hemorrhoids.
When hemorrhoids are caused by coldness and humors that do not digest properly due to lack of digestive capacity, and you want to promote digestion of those humors slightly, apply heat cauterization using the following method: two openings should be made so that the smoke escapes from one side, and the cauterization is performed on the other side, placing it ignited on the hemorrhoid for a moment, and repeat if necessary until it reaches the root of the hemorrhoid.
If the hemorrhoid is small, apply the cauterization according to its size, and leave it for three days and place cotton dipped in oil on top of it until the smoke has burned away what the fire has burnt.
And take care of it with mouthwash, tents, and cloths until it is healed.
Chapter 23.
On the cauterization of throat ulcers and constriction of veins.
When moisture comes on the trachea of the lung, especially when it is accompanied by inflammation, then the patient must be evacuated at first with laxatives, and the affected area should be cauterized with a cautery following the judgment of the physician.
Be careful not to burn the trachea with the cauterization or burn its covering, but only a little bit.
Cauterize the area with another cautery should be done at the joint of the neck in the lower part of the spine. The cautery used should be a small, pointed tool as mentioned before.
Care for the affected area with that which has been previously stated until it heals.
Chapter 24.
On the cauterization of lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are due to moisture, the patient has no fever nor phlegm and the illness is chronic, then cauterize the area with two cauterizations on the collarbone at the points where lions' paws and bulls' hooves touch; and with another cautery in the middle of the thigh between the nipples; and let the cauteries be small and pointed as mentioned before.
And if you wish, make the cauterization with a pointed cautery called a punt, whose form has been described in the treatment for ear pain.
And make points at those places; and care for the affected area with that which has been previously stated until it heals.
And let the cauteries have three prongs, for cauterization is with this: once you can do three cauterizations in this way:
Chapter 25.
On the cauterization of tickling that is the head of the appendix.
When the head of the appendix is displaced due to lubricous moisture and does not return in its place at the time of its return, then its displacement should be returned before it is accustomed to do so; and with a slight movement, displace it so that it ends up, as we have testified, then it is necessary first to reduce the displacement, and to place the patient on their back or on their side; and to lift the skin which is in the lower part of the appendix to the upper parts with your left hand if the junction is displaced below.
And heat the cauteries, which have two heads; and this is their form:
And carefully cauterize the skin, until it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cauterization will come soon with four pointed cauterizations.
And some days are adjusted according to this count and because there are eight cauterizations.
And pause over the cauteries for three days with salt, and apply tranquility to the patient, and let the member not be harmed for any time before it is comforted.
And if the displacement is above and has been done, then cauterize over the muscle with a pointed cautery or many cauterizations, because the junction is confirmed, the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Chapter 26.
Treatise on cauterization of the stomach.
When heat and moisture penetrate the stomach, causing it to swell and multiply within, and if the treatment methods are not followed, then it is necessary that the patient lies on their back, extends their arms and legs, and a cauterization must be made with three cauteries: one cautery placed under the feet about the size of a finger, another two cauteries placed at the costal margins of the cautery, until the triangular figure of the cautery is formed; and elongate those not in line to avoid burns.
And if the depth of the cauterization is the thickness of two thirds of the skin.
And the shape of the cautery should be in this form without addition. If you wish, cauterize with a large cautery at the midpoint of the stomach according to this form; and this is a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form:
Cauterize the stomach where the cauterization is afraid: and if you feel on the stomach at the place you want with the test, then cauterize that area with the cautery in the points; and treat that area with the healing that precedes it until it heals.
Chapter XXVII.
On cauterization of the swollen vein.
When pain occurs in the vein due to heat, moisture or swelling that is beyond its normal course and exits excessively, and the patient has been treated with what has been said and it does not heal, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back and feel three cauterizations according to this form and this quantity placed on the vein near the hip bones (on the side of a man).
The space between each cautery should be the thickness of a finger, and the cauteries should be according to the length of the straight body.
Do not press the hand with the cautery too much.
If the quantity of what is applied is less than the thickness of the skin, and it is not tightly fitted; and if the patient is standing on their feet (on a stool); and if they are not, then let them sit, who has already extended their limbs, and raise their arms.
You can cauterize these cauteries with a surgical knife if you have the subtlety and prudence in the art.
Be careful not to overdo the cauterization, and make sure that the entire skin is covered for the whole body to enter the intestines, as the skin here is thin; and know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the perforation of an abscess in the vein with a cautery.
If an abscess or tumor has arisen in the vein and you want to know if this abscess is in the flesh of the vein or in its sheath, then if it is in the flesh of the vein, the patient becomes heavy and more painful.
If it is in the sheath of the vein, then the pain increases greatly and often wearies the doctors in its treatment.
Therefore it is necessary that the patient be turned on their back; and feel the location of the abscess with your fingers; and apply fire to the cautery that resembles a thread (a thin piece of wool or cotton), whose shape has been described in the previous page. Burn with that and the cautery until all the skin is burned up to the cyst (abscess), so that it breaks open and purges pus.
Then take care of that (area) until the other abscesses are healed.
And do not use this method of cautery unless the study in the art of medicine has been prolonged and more maladies are known about it; but experiment with this operation a few times, nevertheless, leave that (one) alone, and it is better.
Chapter 29.
On the cauterization of pain.
The ancients used cauteries for the removal of arteries in the treatment of pain according to this method; and it is this one that you will take from the long dry artery, and choose a pointed probe that is found, and its thickness should be like that of a finger.
Then immerse it in oil and heat it up, and cauterize that location with a cautery between the junction of the collarbone and neck; and with two small cauteries nearby, one slightly inclined towards the area below the beard, and two more in the area that is declining between the fifth rib and the shoulder blade, slightly inclined backwards; and another on the same spot on the foot; and another over the stomach; and three cauteries at the rear; and another at the location between the shoulders, and two cauteries at the sides of the feet, excluding the one that is between the shoulders.
And do not hold your hand with the cautery, but rather keep it uncovered in the open air.
And some ancients used a cautery made of iron resembling a ray and heated it in that location between the ribs until they reached the abscess and drained the pus as mentioned in the case of an abscess on the thigh.
But in this perforation with cauterization there is no fear, for one may die immediately from the fistula in which there is no healing.
Chapter 30.
On the cauterization of the spleen.
When you treat the malady of the spleen with the method we have described for its division and do not make progress in your treatment, then cauterize it in the following three ways, all of which are appropriate; one of which is to perform three or four cauteries according to the length of the spleen as shown in the figure of the cauterizations of the thigh (which has been previously described).
And the thickness of each cautery should be like that of a finger or slightly more, and the method of cauterization should be the same as we have described in the cauterization of the thigh.
And do not hold your hand with the cautery; and the patient should be on his back.
And there is another way to cauterize, which is to ignite the cautery with two prongs, as we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle; and lift up the abdomen that is on the left side of the spleen so that the patient can lie on his right side.
And your lifting should be such that you raise the abdomen according to the length of the body, so that cauterizations can be made according to the width of the body.
And place the two warm compresses together, ignite them, in that area where they penetrate each other's bandage of the other part.
Then extract the cautery; and therefore, forge four cauteries.
And if you see, cauterize with the cautery having three warm compresses.
And apply the cautery that has been soaked in vinegar for several days, because it is more appropriate than the other causes mentioned in the treatment.
Chapter 31.
On the cauterization of hydrocele (hydrocele treatment with cauterization).
Cautery should not be applied to the hydrocele, but rather to the scrotum itself (properly).
When you treat the hydrocele with the methods of treatment mentioned in the division and your treatment does not improve, then it is necessary that you cauterize it using four cauteries around the testicle and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the spleen, and another cautery on the liver, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery on the right side of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach. And the depth of the cautery should be proportionate to the thickness of the skin.
And allow the cautery to cool down before using it again (to prevent burns for long periods).
And do not evacuate the patient from treatment immediately after applying the cautery with anything that is necessary for healing, and it should be hastened to him with assistance in recovery.
The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be curved, as it was previously described, and this one is used to cauterize the back, following its previously mentioned shape.
Chapter 32.
On the cauterization of feet and other things.
When the feet are afflicted with hydrocele and filled with sclerotic water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the heel at the point between the auricle and the ankle, and lift your hand with the cautery, but do not turn it; then lift your hand again, but do not return it entirely, as the sclerotic water will flow.
The cautery is made in this manner: Place two cauteries on both thighs and within each thigh make a cautery with the tip of the cautery knife. The cautery should be as long as the thigh: Draw it down and the other one a little lower on the same thigh; and over each thigh two cauteries.
Leave the wound open without treatment for a long time to let any pus drain from it.
And take care of those causes which I have mentioned.
Chapter XXXIII.
On Cauterization of Abdominal Wounds.
When an abdominal wound is caused by cold and moisture that softens the internal organs, this affects the digestive and retentive functions, which are in the stomach and intestines. This condition is treated with the methods of treatment mentioned earlier, but sometimes the patient suffers from cauterization due to the display of virtue. In such cases, perform a large cautery over the patient's stomach as described in the cauterization of the stomach, using the circular cautery and four thin cauteries around the umbilicus, also using a fine cautery tip; and another cautery on the navel or two cauteries.
If the humidity excessively appears and the patient can tolerate it, then perform cauterization on the navel and intestines, and firmly apply two cauteries over the stomach and near the groin area, as this is a perfect cure for that condition without error.
Chapter XXXIV.
On Cauterization of Old Hemorrhoids.
When old hemorrhoids occur due to cold humors or decayed humidity, or when they have been treated but not cured as mentioned earlier, then cauterize with three cauteries on the lower part of the anus, in a triangular shape, and another cautery across the navel area.
And if you suspect that the patient's stomach is cold and their food is not spoiled, and sometimes their face is abscessed, then cauterize over the stomach with a large cautery as described earlier; and use one cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the spleen with a fine cautery tip. Leave the cautery open for some time and take care of the wound until it is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
On Cauterization of Atheyl near the Abscess.
When you remove atheyl, heat the cautery that resembles a ray. Place that heated cautery into the removed atheyl, and hold the handle until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
And perform this procedure once or twice, as if atheyl is numerous, then cauterize each one individually as previously mentioned, and take care of them with the methods that promote healing until they are healed.
If you cauterize with a large cautery on any area, it is more effective.
Chapter XXXVI.
On Cauterization of Fistulas Caused by Nature in Various Parts of the Body.
When nature does not obey the work recommended in its location and the patient is frightened by it, use cauterization for healing.
When a person has an ulcer in nature posterior and it is old, the wound and corrupted humidity drain from it, so it is fitting that you try to heal that with subtle means, and approximate the amount of its depth with the previously mentioned probe.
Approach the cautery that resembles a ray. Then apply that heated cautery to this ulcer and according to the depth to which it penetrates.
Repeat the cauterization over those rotten humors until they are burned quickly one or two or three times, according to your need.
Be careful not to burn the nerves or veins; or if the ulcer is in the body of the bladder or the body of the intestine, be careful with all those areas; and do this only when the ulcer is in a fleshy location and you believe that it does not penetrate deep.
Treat the affected area until it heals.
If the location is sealed and all matter has been removed from it and it remains in that state for a long time, then you know that it is completely healed.
If the matter is not removed, you know that it is penetrating or corrupting bone, or it may cause the return of those causes which will be remembered in its location.
Chapter XXXVII.
On cauterizing abscesses.
When pain occurs in the abscesses due to cold or large swelling, and so the patient is uncomfortable, it is necessary that you cauterize each abscess with a cautery on each abscess using a hot iron previously heated.
And firmly apply the cautery with a small delay, so that three cauterizations will be made in sequence, and thus they will help each other more effectively.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On cauterizing the bladder.
When there is weakness and softening of the bladder due to cold and moisture causing the patient not to be able to retain urine, you should cauterize it in a lower location below the bladder, at the point where the penis begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left side.
The length of each cautery should be according to the size of the bladder opening; cauterize that area with one cautery in a lower location or with two cauteries if necessary.
The iron for cauterizing should be prepared accordingly.
Chapter XXXIX.
On cauterizing the small intestine.
When the small intestine is affected by cold and moisture, it is prohibited to perform an operation, and menstruation becomes corrupted, and its onset is delayed, and pain occurs, you should have the location cauterized with three cauterizations around the navel, as we mentioned in the section on the bladder; and with a cautery on the lower location of the intestine or two cauteries, and ensure that the cautery is hot.
Chapter XL.
On cauterizing the dislocation of the ankle.
When moisture thickens at the heel joint and causes swelling of the area, and it is extended over the other when compared to it, this is called prolongation of the toe. And the location of the dislocation is sought in the bone.
Therefore, you must cauterize the patient at the heel joint with a circular cautery because you will have a sign when the circle is around the joint as it revolves, and in this way the joint falls into the center of the circle.
And let the shape of the cautery be that of a stomach in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three small olive-shaped cauteries.
Let the cautery be made according to the severity of the bladder stone; and take care of it until it heals.
Chapter XLI.
On cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs at the heel joint and is caused by cold and moisture, the patient is treated with the water that has been mentioned earlier (and not conferred), which is an old remedy. Therefore, you must let the patient take laxatives made of foul-smelling or artificial pills or similar ones; then cauterize it.
The method of cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either cauterizing with a burning medicine or cauterizing with fire.
According to two methods known to science, one of which is that you cauterize it on the heel joint with three triangular cauteries in this shape and make sure they have good depth. And let the space between each cautery be the size of the fingertip, and if the cauteries are olive-shaped or large.
In some cases, the cautery should be over the middle of the heel where there are four cauteries.
And if you want, cauterize it with a circle whose shape is that of the joint dislocation and which encompasses and burns the entire bladder stone.
And this is the method of cauterization in sciatica when pain is attached to the heel but not extended into the toes.
But if it is extended into the toes, then you cauterize it with two cauteries on the toe at the location where the pain occurs; and with one cautery on the calf four fingers below the tendon.
And if it is a surgical cautery, let the depth of the cautery be according to the severity of the bladder stone.
And if the patient's pain is extended to the location near the feet, then you cauterize it here where the pain occurs with a cautery at three or four points or more as needed.
And if the patient's pain is below the testicle, then you cauterize it here with a surgical cautery.
And be careful in all cauterizations that you do not burn nerves or large vessels with the cautery, because this causes harm to the patient and spasms.
And I have seen one and another of those who cauterized on the calf and ultimately burned in the cauterization, and the leg swelled up to the knee, and the tumor advanced until it reached the foot, and the skin was perforated and corrupted the entire foot. And a strong solution of the abdomen is a very dangerous remedy, and this leads to death.
And if the pain is in two joints, cauterize each one according to this method.
The wise men of the past said in the cauterization of the heel that this is the method for the cautery: make it similar to a circle of iron, and let its circumference be the size of a palm; and let its holes according to the thickness of an almond or peach pit.
And inside that circle should be another third; and let the space between them be the size of a thumbnail; and let those circles be open on two sides; and let the length of the gaps be one or two thumbnails, and make the edges of iron decorative in the circles; and this is the shape:
Let it be ignited in the fire until it glows and sparks, and let it be placed on the heel joint, with the patient lying down on his side. And therefore, you cauterize it with three concentric circles in one sitting.
Let it rest for three days; let it be dressed with a bandage and leave the wound open for several days; and take care of it with warm compresses until it heals.
Said Albucasis: or, my children, of this type of cautery we have used little due to fear of the consequences and because few have been found who pay attention to it.
But for those who bear the pain of the cautery, seek out the location where it is.
Cauteries with burning medicines should be done with two concentric circles, and the thickness of the wall of the inner circle should be the diameter of a nut or whatever size you like.
And let the space between each one be the size of a fingernail; and let them be open below and above, and let them contain the solution in this shape:
Then place a cushion on the incision of the ankle where the patient lies, compress your hand over the incision of the ankle; and take hot water and pour it between two circles, its quality should be like a small fire gradually, and hold it for the duration of an hour, allow the patient to bear the pain and adjust themselves  since this burning sensation is similar to fire  until the pain subsides.
Then lift your hand from the instrument and clean the hot water from the entire ankle with warm water.
Let it heal for three days and apply ointment on the wound until the blackness of the burn subsides, then let it heal for some more days, and the scab will fall off; this is the final remedy.
Then treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
If the pain spreads to the body or the leg, make it stand in such a way that it contains water as was done with the ankle.
This is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Recipe for alkaline and for a non-extinguished wound on both sides of the ankle, stir and let it settle in a new wave, in which the incision should be perforated by a small hole according to the quantity that enters into it.
Allow the other wave to settle, and pour live alkaline and fresh water on it, which takes up the perforations with a finger, and when you compress them with a clean hand for good compression, allow the hole that results from the sharp water in the incision to fill the other settled wave.
Then adjust all the water, and pour more live water and renewed alkaline on it, since at this point it will be of great strength, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of other members, since this operation works like fire.
And some of these medicines are cauterizing broad areas, such as pitch, honey, and sulfur mixed with each other.
Similarly, a man from the ancients describes the operation and cure for joint pain and sciatica pain, and it is very beneficial to do so, and he says that no other treatment is necessary, and he heals by a single application as recommended, since this remedy works effectively in bathing and drying quickly.
It should be prescribed a certain green herb, and if it is not found, fig leaves should be used; and they should be crushed with a little salt and applied to the ankle where the pain is, or to the body, or to the leg, and let it soak.
Let it remain for the quantity of three hours or until the patient can bear the burning sensation.
Then immerse that in bath and when the body of the patient is warm, put it on the sole, since the pain subsides and heals.
Know that it is not necessary to use a cautery with these medicines, but rather promote the evacuation of the body.
However, Hippocrates himself says that when the vein is stretched with a goat's cut, it is cauterized, and this will be of more benefit; and use the cautery in this way: take wool and immerse it in ancient oil, and place it between the toes and hollows.
Then take dry goat skin and inflate it with fire until carbonized; and place it on the wool and let it remain until it is stretched. And repeat this treatment, and do not stop until the sensation of burning reaches the ankle and relieves the pain.
This method of cautery is called "cauterization of cows."
Chapter 42.
On the cauterization of pain in the feet.
Sometimes pain in the feet occurs for various reasons, such as overexertion, trauma, or excessive sweating, and for causes similar to these, due to the infusion of cold and wet matter.
Cauterization should not be done except in this specific case that occurs due to the effusion of cold matter.
Therefore, promote the evacuation of the patient with pills that are similar to them, which should be made on the foot where the pain is, three fingers wide according to its length, and then sow seeds along each line with caution or more, depending on the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the seeds.
Make a puncture cauterization with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauterizations using a medium-sized cautery nail in the following manner:
Chapter 43.
Beginning of cauterization for jaundice.
Observations of this disease in infants; and the sign of its beginning in infants is that the structure swells and lifts up, and it moves (shifts).
And it thickens in the lower part of the back and the neck that begins to protrude above the other vertebrae.
Therefore, when you see this and want to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery of this shape: The cautery should take all the protruding parts of the vertebrae surrounding it (the affected area).
If you wish, you can cauterize around the vertebra with a linear cautery of two or three lines. And make small points between them (the cauterized areas).
Cure the area inside where healing should occur according to what has been said.
But beware that cauterization is not administered in jaundice caused by nerve spasms.
Chapter 44.
On cauterization for gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Therefore, when gout is treated due to cold and the pain is not alleviated, then you should use cautery.
It is that you cauterize around the affected joint of the foot with multiple cauterizations.
And the shape of the olive-oil cautery is as follows: (I'm unable to provide the image requested, but I can describe it: It is an oval or elongated oval cautery tool, used in medical procedures for cauterizing or sealing tissue.)
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain spreads into the nails or other joints, and this movement is observed, then you should cauterize each nail with three or four cauterizations all around using the olive-oil cautery.
And if more cauterizations are needed, you should cauterize it and do not press too hard with the cautery beforehand, but only touch the skin with the tip of the cautery.
And if the pain spreads to both nails, administer the cauterization as described in its own chapter.
And if the pain is only in the toes and it is called pyaemia (an infection of the bone marrow), then you should make points along the edges as follows: make points along each line.
And if the pain remains in those areas, you should make points along the edges of each toe and at the base of the thumb (palm area).
And if the pain spreads towards the joints or muscles within several days, you should cauterize all the affected areas with helpers (assistants).
And do not remove the patient from proper care and administration of medicine, for if good treatment and rest is administered and this cauterization is performed, may God help him heal.
Chapter 45.
On cauterization of ruptures (tears or lacerations).
When a rupture occurs in the groin and you say that it is starting to heal, then you should command the patient to rest on his day (bed rest) and to use calming substances (medicines) so that the tear does not reopen from his stomach.
Then keep the patient under your hands on his back, and command him to keep his legs together until they are healed or until the hernia or intestine appears.
Then return that to its previous position, and press gently on the rupture over the pelvic bone with your fingers at the area where the separation of the abdominal muscles is similar to the size of a circle above the lower parts of the body.
And heat the cautery that has this shape: (I'm unable to provide the image requested, but I can describe it: It is a small, sharp, and thin instrument, used in medical procedures for making punctures or incisions.)
until it becomes red and sizzles. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And press the cautery onto that area with your hand and cauterizing tool in position, and hold it until you feel the pelvic bone touch the middle of the perineum (the area between the scrotum and anus in males, or the labia and anus in females); repeat this process if you did not achieve this in the first observation.
Observe the intestine carefully during your cauterization to ensure that you do not burn the intestine, for if you burn it, the patient may suffer death or some other great harm.
Know that when you do not touch the bone with the cautery, your procedure is invalid.
And the cauterization for infants should be delicate according to their size and age.
And cure the area of the cauterization for three days with a bandage until the burn wound heals.
Treat that person carefully among other wounds until he is healed.
The patient should lie down on his back for 40 days until the wound and its place are sealed.
It is necessary to stop feeding him according to the duration of his treatment, and to keep his stomach empty in order that the intestine not come out during the healing process.
When you want to move him after 40 days, give him appropriate food carefully, and keep him for other 40 days.
Let him rest from work and replenishment of food and drink, and abstain from excessive talking, because when he uses this method of treatment completely, he will be cured.
I will explain the treatment of abdominal ruptures in other parts, and it begins by not stopping, therefore cauterize the rupture of that person with a heated iron corresponding to its size, and let it come out as the third part of it does; then care for him as we have said, but do not adjust (it).
It was also said by some earlier ones that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular iron in this form, which is called trial by fire.
And a line is drawn that goes along the long side of the wound and above it, and another line at the top; then lay your hand on the rupture with one heated iron, but the first cautery should be lighter and better.
Chapter 46.
On cauterization of twisting (worms).
When a wound occurs in some body part by accident or blow and the pain persists for a long time without being cured with medicines, then it is necessary to cauterize it with a pointed cautery.
The cautery should be of all body parts according to its size and smallness, as well as the strength and effectiveness of it, and the location of twisting and pain of it.
If it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; otherwise, continue to cauterize it; because it is customary for those pains to be punctured in a body part near the affected one, so it is necessary to achieve that with cauterization until the patient is cured.
Chapter 47.
On cauterization of leprosy.
Some types of leprosy are observed to be cured by cauterization, especially the type that is caused by the corruption of phlegm and melancholy.
Therefore, when you want to cauterize it, consider if the leprosy is common and can be cured with what we have said in the division (of the text) and not deny or doubt, nor is it present, and fear that corruption may affect the entire body of the patient and his complexion, then cauterize it on the head with 5 cauterizations: one in the middle of the forehead, one below it, turn the face to the end of the hair; one on each ear; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
Lastly, place your hand on the cautery a little away from where there is slight pressure on the bone, and thus the scabs are moved, so that the expulsion of thick vapors is alleviated; then cauterize it on the sole as previously prescribed.
If the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with the cauteries that we have mentioned on the head; on the tip of the nose, and two cauterizations on both cheeks, and two on both shoulders, and 6 cauterizations on the spine, and a large one near the backbone, and one on the coccyx, and two on each ankle, and one on each heel, and 2 on each elbow, and one on each wrist, and 2 on each finger joint, and on each toe joint, and on all the joints of his hands and feet, and on each tendon of his limbs; then cauterize it over all the joints of the aforementioned parts, and on each talon of his feet, and on the phalanges of his toes.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are over the heel (talon).
Sometimes it is cauterized with a single cautery on the bone of the penis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
You should know that the more cauterizations you make, the more beneficial it is and the faster the healing; you should also know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as has been said, because the body of the patient is already numb.
It is necessary that the cauterizations be large or few depending on the body parts and joints according to the characteristics of the tools (used).
Care for the cautery with flour of eggs beaten with honey and the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
On cauterization of numbness (paralysis).
When some body part is paralyzed or numb and cured with medicines, oils, and plasters, but not healed, then you cauterize the paralyzed member with cauteries according to the size of the body part or its smallness.
Let your cautery enter the intestine a little. Approach care for that which is swallowed until it heals.
At certain times, some paralysis is cauterized that affects the limbs and feet, the spine of the back and causes numbness in the nerves that affect that member, and the paralysis is relieved.
However, do not presume this unless one is skilled in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves throughout the entire body moving them.
Chapter 49.
On cauterization of ulcers that are morphous.
When ulcers are old and do not respond to any of the swallowed medicines, then you cauterize over it with a cautery, using a small amount of the substance according to the size of the wound until its whiteness and color is removed, and its color is changed.
Approach care for that which is made of errors and lentils with roasted oil and fennel leaves, and pigeon or hare blood, each one is divided and all are mixed, and let a strip be sewn over it until healed.
Chapter 1.
On cauterization of cancer.
When cancer begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around it as it is rotated.
The wise ones say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle position; however, I have not seen this, because I fear that it may be ulcerated, and I have seen this several times.
It is therefore correct that it should be cauterized in a circular manner as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Chapter 11.
On cauterization of adubilati.
If an adubilati is delayed in ripening, either due to the excess or the condition of the patient, who is old and decrepit, with little blood, or by time, and you want to hasten the ripening of adubilati; then cauterize it in a circular manner with multiple small puncture cauteries, and apply leeches to it so that it will ripen quickly.
However, if you want to perform perforation with cautery, then heat the cautery whose shape is as follows, and place it in the middle of the adubilati until it penetrates the wound.
And if the cautery is placed in that location which is below, to relieve the body of the arm; then care for it until healed.
Chapter 12.
Of cauterization by corrosion.
Corrosion is decay that spreads in the member, which consumes it like fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you see that decay in a location that requires cauterization with fire, then you should make small and large hot coals as appropriate for that location where the decay is present.
And cauterize it entirely over all parts, so that you exterminate all decay and there remains no cause for it.
Leave it for three days, and keep pressure over the cauterized areas with oil mixed in, until all scars are healed and all corruption is exterminated.
And apply cure to that with tender meat-producing flesh.
However, if after three days the flesh born is healthy and there is no corruption, that's good; however, otherwise, repeat the cauterization over what has rotted in the corrupt locations.
Decay is treated with certain medications at times because it is a medium for cauterization. However, cauterizing with fire is of little help in healing.
And as I have already said, the cure for it with sharp medicine should be taken when necessary.
Chapter XXXIII.
Cauterization by nails and similar things.
Observed in the feet of patients suffering from what is called a nail (claw), which is large, deep-rooted, and penetrates the foot; and cauterization for these is performed in two ways: either by fire or water boil.
However, caution with fire is that you make a concave cauterization in the shape of a nail head, which should be made of iron and the size required to fit entirely around the claw, as well as being thin-walled.
And place the heated cauterization on the nail and rotate your hand with the cauterization around the circumference of the nail until the cauterization reaches the depth of the nail. Leave it for three days until pus begins to appear. Apply a plaster made of crushed wild mustard mixed with salt to it, and leave the plaster on it for a night, as this will exterminate its roots.
Treat the area with tender generating flesh until it is healed.
If it does not improve and other observances occur on the surface of the body, particularly in the more important areas such as the chest or feet, then you must administer cauterization with water, which means you take a spoon (cucurbita) or needle or nail and place it over the claw; and apply a little hot water to the spoon, keep your hand, and rotate it around the spoon with compression of your hand from all sides, pressing the edge of the spoon against the root of the nail, and allow the hot water to flow through the root of the wound; wait for the patient for an hour for the water boil to subside, then remove it, as the claw and its roots will be exterminated.
Do the same with these and the others until you have treated all those in the body.
Treat the pus that results from the roots of the nails being exterminated with what generates flesh, which is what causes the flesh to grow in.
Chapter XXXIII.
Cauterization for tremors.
When tremors occur due to friction on the nerve or fever caused by friction, or for any similar cause, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with four cauterizations or five on the spinal column, between each spinal vertebra there should be one cauterization; in the feet, and on the stomach, use olive oil as a cauterization.
And the tremor of it subsides, and hastens the healing of the frigid disease.
Chapter LV.
Cauterization for accidents involving ulcers on the body.
When ulcers or pustules appear on the body, and are made of gross, corrupted materials; then at the beginning when it appears, it is necessary to cauterize over the entire fistula with a thin cauterization made of myrtle wood, the end of which is extended by fire; or with a long razor from erestology; or with a slow cauterization.
And at certain times, the cauterization is applied at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and it is not believed that it is destroyed, but rather, it is ruptured, making them heal from it.
However, it should be done with appropriate evacuation by phlebotomy.
Chapter LVI.
On the cauterization of fluxes of blood caused by an accident through the incision of an artery.
At certain times, flux of an artery that is cut must be stopped by sewing the wound closed, or the incision of a postemate (a surgical opening to evacuate pus) or cauterization of the member, and then it seems so, but it is difficult to prevent its return.
Therefore, when it happens to someone, you should immediately tie it with your hand at the opening of the artery and press on it until the flux of blood stops within a certain number of moments so that it does not come out again.
Then press the olive oil cauterizers (a tool used for cauterization) few and large, by name, and exhale on them until they are hot.
Then take one of them, either small or large, according to the place and the wound where the artery is broken, on that vein as quickly as possible after stopping the blood flux, and cauterize it until it is sealed and stopped the blood flow.
And if the blood is expelled from the wound of the artery when you stop the blood flux and withdraw the cautery, then take another cautery cautiously from those in the fire that have been prepared, and do not cease this until the blood flow is stopped.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and let another evil come upon the patient.
And know that when the artery fluxes blood, it is not possible to stop the blood in those cases, and especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: either with cauterization as previously mentioned, or extraction when it has not been extracted, because when the extremities are burned and the blood flow is stopped, or by being tied with thread or by strong ligature, or by placing medications on it that have the property of stopping the blood; and they should be strengthened with pulvinar (a surgical instrument) or compression in a decent manner.
However, the one who applies a decent ligature with thread and strong compression with cloth or by heating the causes and similar ones should not be trusted completely.
However, if this happens to someone who is not a doctor or does not have medication present, then close the wound on that vein as previously mentioned, and be aware of the great caution required until the blood flow is stopped from the upper part of the wound, and the artery should not be touched; and over the artery it should be sprinkled with cold water of great coolness until the blood is coagulated and thickened; and moreover, sew where cauterization or medicine is necessary.
On incisions, perforations, ventosas (sucking cups), phlebotomy, wounds, and their similarities.
We have already said in the first chapter that cauterization with fire is appropriate and medication is needed for all illnesses where it is necessary, and the occasions and causes of its use, as well as the instruments required in these cases, and the forms of the cauteries; and I have arranged the chapters on the upper part of the head to the feet.
And in this chapter I will proceed with that method, so that the one who seeks this may be relieved, then I will speak about what is needed for it.
And before I begin this, know that in this chapter it is for the fear of what is in the first chapter on cauterization. (This sentence is actually not a continuation of the previous lines but rather an introduction to another section within Chapter LVI of "Chirurgia Magna" by Roger of Salerno.)
And because it is necessary to be in great caution, because the operation that is in this chapter requires evacuation (that is with blood which is life-threatening), the aspersio (sprinkling or irrigation) of the vein or incision over an abscess or opening of a postemate or purification of a wound or extraction of splinters or incision of stones and their similarities. And all these should be accompanied by fear, trembling, and in the most extreme cases by death. (This sentence is actually not a continuation of the previous lines but rather another introduction to another section within Chapter LVI of "Chirurgia Magna" by Roger of Salerno.)
And I warn you that this should not happen to you in which there is uncertainty, because some cases you must act as a doctor with cases of illnesses of many kinds. And there is one who goes with his illness and it will be light for him to die, because of the severity of what he finds from his illness, because of the long duration of his illness, and because of the illness that signifies death. (This sentence is actually not a continuation of the previous lines but rather another introduction to another section within Chapter LVI of "Chirurgia Magna" by Roger of Salerno.)
And there is one who gives you money and says that he hopes for your health, but his illness is destructive. (This sentence is actually not a continuation of the previous lines but rather another introduction to another section within Chapter LVI of "Chirurgia Magna" by Roger of Salerno.)
Therefore, you should not agree to the method of the one who comes to you with this manner; and your caution should be greater than greed and your rapacity; and do not presume any cause regarding it except certain knowledge that confirms what you must do, and to which success leads praiseworthy results.
Use in the treatment of all your patients prediction and indication of the one to whom recovery is turned, because in that lies help for you in gaining fame, memory, praise, and glory.
Oh, sons, may God inspire your understanding, do not let it deviate from its direction and protection, for that is in His hands.
And I have arranged this chapter to be divided into sections as it follows in the chapter of cauteries, regarding the treatment of the head to the feet, so that what you seek and require from it may be alleviated for you.
First Chapter.
On the treatment of water, which is contained in the head of infants.
Know that this disease often occurs in infants, and when the newborn girl has difficulty passing through the head of the infant with her head.
And sometimes it occurs due to a concealed cause that is not known.
However, I see this disease only in infants; and for all those whom I see, it is a certain work of death, and thus it seems to me that it is useless work in them.
I have seen an infant whose head was full of water and his head was so magnified that it could not cease on its own due to the greatness of his head, and moreover, the increased humidity led to death by fire.
And this humidity can be added between the scalp and the bone, or it can be added below the bones at the fontanel (the soft spot on an infant's skull).
For the operation on this case if the humidity is between the scalp and the bone, and the abscess is small, then it is necessary that you make an incision in the middle of the head with a fissure in length about two inches to allow the humidity to run out, and this is the shape of the spatula.
And if the humidity is more increased and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions according to this method:
And if the humidity is below the bones, it is a sign that you see the sutures of the head opened on all sides and the water is squeezed out when you compress it with your hands at the joints inside and not hidden from you. It is necessary that you make three incisions in the middle of the head according to this method:
Remove all the humidity; strengthen the incisions with linen and feathers; apply oil and bandage it for five days, remove the poultice and cure the wound with ointments and cauteries, hold the head in balance; feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is comfortable and healed.
And another method of incision is to consider the size of the abscess and the collection of water, because sometimes it is larger in the occipital region, or in front, or on the left, or on the right; therefore, pay attention to the incision where the abscess and the accumulation of water appear, and do what is most possible for you.
And observe that you do not incise the artery and that fluid blood flows out, causing the death of the patient by this flow of blood with the evacuation of humidity.
Second Chapter.
When the cataracts or tumors occur on the eyes or feet, and it is an old custom that does not confer healing through medications, then the last resort in this case is the incision of those two auricles (arteries).
And therefore, when you want to incise those arteries in the head of the patient, first cool the area with rough cloth to make the arteries appear, and hold the neck of the patient with some cloth; consider where the vein is pulsating; and press on the locations above each of the areas near the auricles, and they will only become visible in some men.
And hold the artery with tweezers and incise each one with a sharp spatula that enters into the bone along the incision, and this should be done for the length of the head.
And if you want to, insert the spatula below the artery and break it at the incision sites above.
The length of the incision should be two fingers' width, because when a vein is incised, the blood is expelled with a pulsating exit, which jumps out frequently due to its pulsation.
If the hernia does not appear at the waist, then it is necessary for you to measure the amount of space with three fingers and place your hand in that space, and force it back into the bone.
And the quantity of blood to be let out is one pint. and the blood must not be let out less or more than this, and all of this is according to the quantity that appears from the nature of the patient and the repletion of the hernia in him.
Consider the wound, and if there remains any cause of pain on the bone, then cut this to prevent an abscess from forming.
And apply plaster and linen to the wound and care for it with ointment until it heals.
Chapter III.
On the extraction of hernias that are in the temples.
When an old or new abscess occurs in the temples due to unhealthy humidity and quality of the eyelids, or a swelling of similar kind occurs suddenly and is treated with the methods of medical care without improvement, we have been taught in these conditions to perform the extraction of hernias in the temples, or cauterization of them as shown previously.
And the method of operation and extraction of these is to shave the hairs that are in the temples; and understand that the hernia appears on the temple when it is shown by its pulse, and it is hidden unless in a few men due to the strength of coldness.
And if it is hidden, then you should tighten the neck of the patient with some cloth; and warm the area with a rough cloth or moisten the area with warm water until the hernia appears clearly. And then you take the forceps, which has this form: And you should score the hernia with that instrument until you reach it; and then take out the hernia at the upper parts, and remove it from the membranes above until you have removed it from the sheath and exposed it from all sides.
But if the artery is fine, you should tie it with the tip of the scissors and then cut a part from it according to the length by which the ends are contracted, and there will be no bleeding, for if they are not cut, blood cannot come out from all sides.
And evacuate one pint of blood. Until three.
If the hernia is large, it is necessary for you to tie it in two places with strong silk or thread and not cut it until its decay before the healing of the wound and prevent bleeding.
And remove the excess between the linen; do it at that time or another time.
If you wish, cauterize it with a cautery into the bone using a cautery knife until the ends are incised, and remain in place of that procedure.
It is better to perform the procedure if the patient has fever or complete heating, for cauterization helps in drying humidity and thus it is more beneficial.
And it is appropriate for the extraction of arteries which the ancients called the groin, and they should be punctured properly, and let them be cured with dry medicines that make the flesh swell and warm until healed.
And if during another examination, bleeding from the artery occurs, then you should attempt to stop the blood, either with a cautery or by compressing it, and press your hand inside until the bleeding stops. And if the cause of the bleeding is not present, then place your finger on the area until the blood clots, and irrigate the area with very hot water until the inflammation subsides, and bind it as needed.
What is easier in the extraction of arteries is to cauterize the vein with this two-bladed cautery, as you have marked both locations and waited for them to appear at the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that the section between the extremities may be lengthened, since it is not consolidated by this cautery.
This is the shape of the cautery:
Let the heat of the two blades be equal. But if the heat of one blade is sharper than the other, it is better because if they are both hot like two close fires, they will not cut the flesh with speed.
Therefore, since there is some thickness in these cases, the heat of the fire should be kept in them and the flesh should be cut easily.
This operation is better than any other and more convenient.
Let the space between the two blades be equal to the thickness of the finger.
Chapter Four.
Of the treatment of sharp and sour throats in men.
When sharp throats occur and the veins that are above the head of the testicle do not have any cause for healing with medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient swells and they walk as if they had a form of ants, and their throat becomes extended, moist to such an extent that their skin is known, and their scrotum is scalded by the acidity of tears, the ancients treated this condition with this operation, and I name this treatment as "spassa".
And it is that you command the patient to raise their hair on their forehead, and then make three incisions equally distant according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the eyelashes which are near the tear duct, and the third on the other side.
And be careful when making the incisions of the arteries which are in two places, and stretch out your hand from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space of each incision is adjusted to three fingers.
And if you have a sponge soaked in vinegar or dry cloths with which you extract the blood.
And introduce the spatula into two sharp edges, of which this is the shape of the incision: from the part between the temples to the second incision. Remove the entire chain that is between two incisions with the saw which is on the bone, and do what remains of the median incision to the second incision. And use this spatula again and enter the first incision with another instrument which is called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
Pause the incisions of that sharp area, the attached flesh should be bound, and the latches of it the bone, and push it into the gaping fissure, and bind all vessels that descend from the head to the heels with it.
May it continue uninterrupted along the attached flesh and bind it into the other gaping fissure. (This line refers to continuing the suture or stitching process)
And when the correct amount of blood has flowed out, press the places of the blood clots with a cloth. (This line refers to applying pressure to stop any bleeding)
And bind each gaping wound that is not fully healed, and bind over those pus-filled blisters that have been soaked in wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that no abscess forms cautiously. (This line refers to dressing or bandaging open wounds)
On the third day, remove the linen and administer large infusions of hot water or tea, and treat it with basil oil and rose oil, and others until the sores are healed. (This line refers to changing bandages and using medicinal oils)
Chapter V. (This indicates a new section in the medical treatise)
On the treatment of abscesses by purges and the sores that descend from within the head. (This line indicates a new topic, specifically treating abscesses and sores originating in the head)
When an acute and persistent catarrh or a series of small sores in the patient's body occurs, and their weakness is noticeable, and the eyelids are ulcerated and peeled back, and there is sharp pain at the front of the head along with extreme pressure, then you should know from these symptoms that the matter and catarrh do not come from any other source than the veins in the brain. (This line provides additional information about recognizing when a catarrh or sores are coming from the brain)
And the best treatment for these is as follows: command the patient to shave their forehead, and make an incision in that place at the midpoint of the forehead, a small one along its length (and begin from the left temple to the right temple; and let the incision go through the bone; extend your hand from the temples which should be avoided due to masticatory muscles), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth, and fill between the two lips of the incision with cotton or dry cloth. And bind over it with pus-filled blisters in wine and oil to prevent abscesses from forming cautiously. (This line refers to dressing or bandaging the incision to prevent infection)
When you remove the dressing and see that the abscess has decreased in size, then it is necessary to cauterize the bone starting where the muscle tissue begins, and treat it with an astringent remedy that promotes healing, for example if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, make a plaster from it and administer it to these sores in order to promote healing of the native tissue. (This line refers to cauterizing the bone to prevent infection and using an astringent remedy to promote healing)
Chapter VI. (This indicates a new section in the medical treatise)
On the treatment of that which catarrh occurs in the ears. (This line indicates a new topic, specifically treating catarrhs in the ears)
The entire cause of catarrh in the ears is one of four types: either it is a mineral poison or similar to poison such as iron and lead, or it is from plants such as cheese or beans, or it is from fluid-like substances such as water and vinegar and their likes, or from animals. (This line provides information about the various causes of catarrh in the ears)
Therefore when poison or another substance similar to these causes that do not fit the ear, and if the poison is visible, distill it in some volatile oil such as oil of roses or sage, and administer the extraction of it, make him sneeze with appropriate conditions, and open the nostrils to promote sneezing. (This line provides guidance on treating catarrh caused by poison or other substances that do not fit the ear) And bind the circumference of the ear with some fabric or wool patches and stretch the ear open at its edges, since many times it is forgotten with these causes. (This line provides additional guidance on treating catarrh caused by poison or other substances that do not fit the ear)
If it is not forgotten, then administer the extraction of it with the instrument called gesti epicicarios, which has the following form: (This line indicates that the next lines will describe the specific instrument used to extract the poison or substance causing the catarrh)
If it is forgotten with the gesti, that is good; otherwise, administer the extraction of it with an instrument called the uncus subtil, which has a small double bend. (This line describes the specific instrument used to extract the poison or substance causing the catarrh)
Therefore if it is not forgotten, make a cannula of silver and insert the end of the cannula into the opening of the ear and close the environment of the cannula with wax and softened oil to prevent any leakage except for the cannula. (This line provides guidance on how to use the uncus subtil instrument to extract the poison or substance causing the catarrh) And draw it out gently with your breath and strong attraction, since many times it has been reported that this helps. (This line provides guidance on how to use the cannula instrument to extract the poison or substance causing the catarrh)
If it is not forgotten in this way, then take some alum or white lead that has been prepared with the apparatus used to catch birds, and place it at the end of the ray, and bind it over that area decently bound. (This line provides guidance on how to use a different instrument to extract the poison or substance causing the catarrh) Approach the ear canal gently with ease, and then carefully remove the earwax from moisture.
And therefore, if you do not forget all the causes that have been mentioned, then you should seek to remove that which is causing abscess or cramp.
The method of removing that is to first lance the patient from the saphenous vein and draw blood as per its virtue, then hold the instrument between your thumb and index finger and turn the earwax towards the upper parts, making a small hole in the base of the ear canal where the pressure should be applied. The incision should be in the shape of a crescent moon that reaches the bone, and, once the bone is broken, remove it if possible with suitable instruments; then sew up the incision at that time with speed, and heal it until it is healed.
If the cause is in the earwax is one of the fats that grows and swells, administer treatment and removal of it; but if you do not succeed with your efforts, then you should take thin cotton wool according to this form: and administer the aspiration of that fat that has formed in the earwax.
And do not perform this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the earwax, and wait for it to settle into clumps, and then remove them with scissors or fine tweezers, or with such an incision as I have described, because the removal of it will be relieved.
But in water that enters the earwax, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze at the beginning and fill his ear with old cotton, and rub over the ear where the water is, and if this is done, good; otherwise, take many small pebbles thin and long according to the length of the finger, heat them in the fire a little, and have the patient insert one of these into the canal of his ear and jump on one foot from that side and strike another pebble on the pebble that is inside the ear. So do not stop with pebbles until all the water has been removed.
So do not stop with pebbles until all the water has been removed. And once the water is removed, take paper or gauze. and put one end of it in the ear and stretch the other end towards the fire until the cotton burns as much as possible.
Then put another piece of gauze and perform this many times until all the water has been removed, and strain it through a canal as described above for the pebble extractor.
But in the removal of a foreign body entering that earwax, if it is small, this can be done easily and similarly, treat it as described in the division; but if it is large which causes the swelling of the eardrum, administer the removal of it with forceps and scissors, and the cause of this is easier to deal with than all other causes that occur in the earwax.
But in the removal of worms generated in the earwax, when you treat it as described in the division and in the treatment of distillations and do not achieve success, then you must observe the ear towards the sun.
And if any cause of worms appears, remove it with forceps or fine tweezers, but if no cause is apparent, take a canal that is narrow at the bottom and wide at the top in this form: Insert the narrow end into the ear according to the amount that the patient can bear; and carefully suck it out with a strong suction, and perform this many times, until all the worms are removed.
But if you do not succeed with your efforts, you can use oil and stop up the circuit of the canal with wax as described; administer distillations which have already been tried in the treatment of worms, and apply it in the treatment of distillations.
Your effusion with which you infuse the medical oils into the ear with this instrument, its form is: Make it of silver or brass, narrow at the bottom, with a small hole in the center and flat on top.
And ensure that it is curved to fit the concavity of the infusion canal where it will be necessary. If you wish, take the rod and cover its end properly with a suitable cloth, then pour oil or juice from any herb, or whatever medicine you want into the infusion canal - this is in the ear -, and insert the rod with the proper pressure and compress it gradually until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the eardrum and the patient feels the oil inside.
That which is infused in the ear should already be heated slightly with fire. And be careful that the cause you will distill in the ear is not too hot, because the substances of the earwax do not tolerate this.
Title VII.
On the treatment of auricle excision (removal).
Some warts grow out of the bellies of the elderly men without perforating, and this condition sometimes occurs in some men, an excision in the auricle's tissue due to a wound or lack of tissue at that site; and this excision is sometimes performed in the area before the ear lobe that does not heal, and sometimes it is outside of the partitions.
The one that occurs in the area before the ear lobe that does not heal is more difficult to cure.
And in the one where healing occurs, you should keep the patient's wart on the sole and watch it. Therefore, if an excision is observed to have healed, open that with a thin spatula in this form:
If the area to be excised has a small width and one side is sharp and the other is not; and the spatula should be two leopard lengths wide so that it does not damage the wart.
And if the excision is due to tissue born in the auricle or its surrounding area, then make a shallow and wide incision, cutting through the tissue as quickly as possible while leaving all the tissue intact.
And if the excision is in the area before the auricle, take a thin wire a lion's length and heat it slightly with fire, then place it in the auricle tissue.
And if you observe an excision with what the patient experiences relief, because of pain, release the pressure on it with ease; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the auricle.
Then you place a linen cloth on the excised area according to the size of the wound that you have wrapped in Egyptian balm; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound; or take some herb and place it in warm water and grind it, then apply it as a poultice and use it; and if you see the excised area already healed, then you must remove the herb and replace it with another that you will wrap in beeswax that has been made with rose oil, until the cauterized wound is healed; and take care of it until it is cured.
But if there is bleeding, immerse sponge or cloth in warm water and place it on the excised area, and use the other treatment that stops the bleeding, which is called in the distillation treatise.
Title VIII.
On the care of athazel, which affects the eyelids.
Athazel is sometimes moist and other times dry in the eyes.
Therefore, you must have them with tweezers or scissors, and cut them with the spatula of their roots, and place a poultice on them as described above.
But if pain with bleeding occurs, you cauterize them with a fine lancet cautery.
The best cauterization is near the incisions and when the wounds heal properly, they do not return; and when cauterized with fire, the roots are burned and they do not return.
Title IX.
Treatment of swelling that occurs in the eyelids of humans.
Some causes that resemble swelling in the eyelids of humans are characterized by their intensity and duration, and because of this swelling, they are called swellings.
It is an accumulation of thick moisture in the eyelid above and below.
Therefore, the operation is that you examine if the swelling is increasing in the area appearing from the eyelid and spreading all over; and the cause of it is light.
Therefore, make an incision in the swelling with a scalpel and remove it from all sides with ease until it drains, and then suspend it with a hook and cut off the affected area.
And if the figure is large, then adjust it with stitches; and take care of it until it heals.
And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from the puncture since the heat of it restores and fills it in.
And if the swelling is decreasing within the eyelid, then shave the area inside the eyelid, and lift the swelling with a hook, one that you do not need to incise, and press it from all sides, and if the eyelid is elongated due to an incision, you will not notice any effect.
Then make the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and take care of it until it heals.
Chapter X.
Treatise on the cure of an eyelid abscess.
An abscess occurring on the eyelid above, which is generated in the tunica of the eyelid, especially in children, worsens the eyes of those and contributes to their catarrh more; and they cannot look at the light of the sun because tears flow into them.
And you often find them on the cheeks all the time, and they sleep with their faces on their cheeks; and the underside of their eyelids is moist, which has already been inflamed, and the imminence of infection is apparent in the eye; and whenever you press the area with your fingers, you feel pus coming out into them.
And there is some method of operation in the one where the patient bends their head towards you and lays a piece of cloth over it, and boil water, and make a circle according to the amount that contains arsenic on all sides, and place that over it and press it with your fingers all around so that pus is accumulated in the middle of the circle, and then make an incision in the middle of the moisture at the wound and the wound should not be larger than the wound made during a lanceotomy.
But in the former case it is necessary that you cut open the wound completely until you reach the pus, because in the most serious cases, pus will be drained through an incision according to the shape of white cheese.
Therefore, you remove it with cloths that you have wrapped between your fingers on the sides and turn it between your right and left hands until it is dispersed.
And be careful not to close the incision because with pus you will not reach the eye and damage it.
But if pus does not appear at the beginning of the incision, but you notice that it is present in the incision, then close a small part of the incision with ease until pus appears; and remove it as I have said; submerge cloths in water and wipe it and place them on the area and tighten them with powders.
And also, those who suffer from salt and wipe it in the concavity of the incision to remove what remains of the moisture.
And take care of it until it heals.
But if an abscess occurs in the cauterized area, then take care of it with approved plasters until it heals.
Chapter XI.
Methods of touching the eye.
When in the eyelids of eyes that are caused by tightening of the natural eyelashes and are ancient, you should apply them to the eye and make methods of diseases such as persistent tears and softening of the eyelids and cloth inside until it causes destruction of the eye which is called touching the eye; and it is cured in four ways: either with cautery by fire; or with acute medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization; or it is treated with touch by incision and suturing; or with canes as I will say.
And therefore it is necessary that you turn the patient's head towards you; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, that is good; and if not, insert a needle into the area where there is pus behind the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through the area above it, and what is - near the edge of the eyelid where the lashes are - near the lashes, and pull the thread above the eyelid with your right hand, and turn it towards the ray.
And make an incision in the corner of the eyelid behind the lashes, and drain the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor; and remove the thread and place it beneath the eyelid with small powder or cloth, and then sew it over the eyelid like a fig leaf of myrtle.
However, it is necessary for the figure to be shaped according to the degree of swelling of the eyelid, because it has been diversified among men, because there are those who require incision of the eyelid in a large quantity according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
Then draw an arch over both lines that you have marked, and start from the greater lacrimal to the lesser one. And if your incision is near the natural furrow as is the thickness of a coin.
Then place the coin in one of the two corners of the wound, and scrape off all that layer, then adjust the incision with a thin scissor or fine needle, wash the blood away, and make excess hair on both eyebrows adhere to each other using some sticky substances, if you wish to do so, otherwise do not treat it.
Stitch the hairs together within three or four days and take care of them.
If you wish, leave the wound unsutured, and treat it with something that dries and constricts, because the eyelid is swollen due to the sealing of the wound and its accumulation; however, stitching is better, and therefore the ancients preferred this.
However, it should be cautioned for the patient, and it is a good action, and there is no need to fear.
Another method of treatment is to draw a figure on the eyelid like holly leaves, and then raise the eyelid with three separated and joined needles according to this form:
If it is not possible to do this, hold the needles and do not let them touch each other, then take a needle with thread and insert it in the middle of the figure, and put the other needle near the greater lacrimal, and the third needle near the lesser one, adjusting them between the two as evenly as possible, and lift your hand with that elevation, lift the entire wound area above which is marked in the way we have recommended.
Then adjust the two sides of the wound with stitches and take care of it until it heals.
If an abscess should occur in your incision or wound, treat it with hot irons and similar instruments, and with warm water.
Sometimes hairs grow into the eyelid, so it is necessary to use what has been said about incision; however, stitching is more artificial.
Treat with reeds in this way: and you turn the eyelid and cut the figure inside as I have described; then take two reeds or fine sticks whose length is the same as that of the eyelid and the width of them is smaller than that of the wound. And you have already made incisions at the ends of each divided area, where the threads are.
Moisten each area with a thin solution made of the excess eyelid skin and tighten the reeds of each divided area with strong pressure, then leave it for some days, because the wound will die due to the constriction and become necrotic and eventually fall off by itself.
If it takes too long, then break the reeds with thorns, and take care of the wound until it heals.
Therefore, when the eyelid is raised, the hairs do not penetrate.
And this is the form of two reeds that you will make in this way: and have the length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter XII.
This line seems to suggest a method for dealing with hairs that are causing discomfort or pain in the eyelid, using a needle when the hair is tough. The exact meaning of this sentence may require further context.
When non-natural hairs are tough, harsh and painful to the eyelid, perform the operation by taking a thin needle and placing it on the soft leather or linen thread, and ensure that you adjust the ends of it carefully and gently. The length of the needles should be equal to one span (about nine inches).
Take another thin needle and place it near it for later use, and cut the ends of it if you wish to do so.
Place the patient's head on your lap and position it near the floor so that your work is visible, because this operation is delicate and small.
Insert the needle into the root of the hair that requires surgery and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly but carefully until you extract it above the natural skin.
Pull out the hair above and insert the extracted hairs into alum, and let them be one, two or three but not more.
Pull your hand out with the extracted hairs and put them back into the eyelid with the natural skin.
If the alum has been inserted but not pulled out the hair, pull out the alum at the incision areas with the needle that you have prepared for this purpose, until the alum has been completely removed from above.
And you observe the boil with the eye, then you should incise and lance it, and prick it and press the boil, and leave the pus to drain for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows back on that good flesh.
If the hair is short, then you adjust a long hair from natural hairs, and raise it up with that, or let it grow until it reaches an appropriate space, and then raise it.
Capital .13.
Of the treatment of this eyelid swelling that is above.
When the eyelid swells, and it is contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted on top, either right or left side, due to poor consolidation of a plague or section or burn, and it is called leprosy, and this swelling is natural or accidental, and it is caused by consolidation of a plague or sections or burns, or similar to their bad care.
The manner of operation in it is that you make an incision in that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place a piece of linen cloth between them, and tie them together until they are healed.
And it is not necessary to use treatment for the causes that dry up, constrict; because if you do this, it will cause the swelling to return worse and it will not heal at any time.
Use in that of the causes that soften, such as fenugreek, and wrap with water in which it is cooked and seeds of it, or guaiacol ointment, which is liquefied with one of the oils, and immerse the cloth in it, and heal with it.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you pierce everything that is not consolidated according to the form that it was at the beginning.
This operation that we have mentioned is not any correction of swelling that does not return the shape of the place according to what it was before.
Capital .14.
Of the treatment of swelling that is made in the lower eyelid.
This swelling that is made in the lower eyelid, which is truly called swelling; and it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is caused by a plague or section or burns or similar things.
And the method of operation is that you take a needle with double thread and pierce it in the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
And stretch the skin to the upper divisions with the needle and sew it with the needle, and incise with a broad spatula. And therefore, if it returns the shape of the eyelid as required, it is good; otherwise, take the root and place it in the divided figure, and with that turn the eyelid, and make two splits on the side of the lower eyelid.
And the ends of both splits are two angles of the incision, which you made until they converge, and make an angle between them until when they come together is formed a figure of their ends.
And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
And stretch the skin that much to the width of the sharp angle below it, so that the eyelid is opened.
And adjust the separated parts and sew them with thread of wool; and heal that with what we have mentioned about the softening medications and poultices until it is healed.
And if the swelling develops due to a split or suture or burn, then it is necessary that you make an incision with a flat cut on the skin of the eyelid as before. And separate the poultice between two lips as we have said.
In summary, in the treatment of swelling that is above or below, follow the operation as prepared according to the type of swelling, and that is in the form of diverse motes (small rounded masses).
And the skilled craftsman always prepares means in every way that is possible to return the shape to its natural form or as close as possible, and the patient according to what is appropriate for the operation and tools in the best possible conditions.
Capital .15.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in many men whose eyelid is solidly attached above the albumen of the eyelid, and it is prohibited from the ease of movement and its natural workings, then it is necessary that you cut off the external edge of the lower eyelid, raise it up, or stretch it with oil.
Approach and incise the adhesion with a thin spatula, which should not be too sharp for the operation, as it has a blunt tip so that the patient is not disturbed by the procedure, and remove the spatula carefully without causing pain to the area.
Let your incision be made gently enough so that the eyelid can return to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
Then apply salt water to the wound, or distill it in oil of rosin dissolved in water.
Approach separating the eyelid from the wound with cold water and place wool soaked in alum of hog on it, and after three days apply healing agents to consolidate it until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On incision of nails and removal of the prominence of caruncle tissue.
Know that nails are of two types: either they are nervous and resemble hard, subtle matter; or they are non-nervous, similar to white, congealed moisture. When you touch it with a probe, it collapses and is separated from the probe without being implanted in it.
And both types do not start until the larger tear duct covers part of the vision and prevents light and movement of the eye.
However, the method of working on the incision is that the patient bends their head towards you and opens their eyes, and you lift the eyelid with your hand, collect the nail with a probe of moderate length and extend it to the incisions above. Then take a needle and pierce through a hair from the horse or ox or cow, or similar animal, or strong iron, or double the tip of the needle little by little and insert it into the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and remove the nail; extend it to the incisions above, and excise the hair around the edge of the nail that touches the pupil. And in this way, you follow the hair towards the end of the incision.
Then you incise the remnant of the tear duct at its root with a thin spatula or small scissors, and excise the natural tissue of the tear duct so that continuous flow of tears is not caused by the incision of it.
And at times the nail with only the tip extended or removed, as mentioned above, should be excised with a lion's hair spatula, which is its shape.
And take care that the spatula does not touch the corneal tissue and causes a rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
Make the incision in the eyelid with a little bit of salt or lime made from cinnabar, and leave it for a day, and take care of it with water that should be applied until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle into it or it collapses with the probe, this type of nail should be cured with medications, and healed in the same way as described above and recommended in the division.
And if you want to incise it, you open the patient's eye and take a thin lion-shaped spatula with sharpness as follows: with fineness. And if it is rarefied and contracted and enters the tear duct, you distill your own oil of rosin made from sulphur or rosin or salt-water, and place it in the eye for another day.
And approach the operation repeatedly until everything that is from it has passed, unless the counter-abscess appears in the eye, in which case you should excise it, and treat the abscess at the beginning until it is healed.
And approach your operation repeatedly over it with reason until it is healed.
The prominence of tear duct tissue, if noticed in the eye due to harm, should be stopped with a probe; and incise it from one side, without extending the incision so that tears do not flow.
And approach distilling oil of rosin made from sulphur in the eye until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On incision of ingrown hair and what is born of skin attached to the eyelid.
Sometimes in the heels of some people, raw flesh is born and swells up until it covers the pupil or approaches or presses on the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids at the outer corners and resembles a rose-bush balustrade.
The procedure is that the patient holds his head between your hands; and you open the heels of that person and collect all that flesh appropriately with scissors or a knife; and you begin to cut the flesh from the beginning until it is finished with the knife, and be careful not to cut into the heel while you perform the operation.
Use the incision that you will make or use the spatula that we have recommended in toenail incision, or small forceps with which you can grasp the nail as appropriate according to this chapter.
Since your incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, you fill the heel with saltpeter or distill it into red powder similar to that of corrosive medicines, and place it on the heel covered with alum until it is certain that the wound is cauterized.
If there is any cause of inflammation and the wound cauterizes blood, and you fear that it will become cauterized, you must lance the heel and treat the cauterization with whatever causes it to subside, and then apply the operation until it heals, and do the same for the surrounding skin affected by this type of inflammation.
However, you must ensure that the healing of the heel occurs naturally or by accident, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member has suffered enough from this operation.
Chapter 18.
On collecting knowledge in the heel.
Knowledge is gained from red veins that are hard on the heel and forbid clothing to apply any pressure on it, and uncover the heel for days.
Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the heel in which knowledge is gained is strong and there is no other disease except for knowledge, and then you collect that knowledge.
And it is that you command the patient to hold his head between your hands and suspend those veins with a thumb or a finger according to your discretion; and the thumb should be of subtle doubling in this way:
or two thumbs gently in the body like this:
Gather those thin veins carefully and gently, and repeatedly clean the blood that appears, until you see them become congested with blood and swollen.
Keep yourself away from the heat of the sun and if your operation is in the middle of the day, be firm in your actions, do not make any incisions except for those veins.
When you have completed [the procedure], then distill in the wound the green or red vinegar to dissolve what is congested with pus.
If it is not possible for you to gather everything at that time, then collect all the pus and cover it with something that eases the pain of the wound, and leave it for several days until the pain is alleviated and the abscess is securely cauterized.
Then repeat the procedure as necessary until it heals.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Capital XIX
On the reduction of arising nosebleeds.
When treating a nosebleed with cautery or acute burning medicine as described earlier and it is not healed, do not be deceived but rather make an incision on the abscess when it matures, and extract all the humidity that is in it and pierce the bone until it is exposed.
Therefore, when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, scrape it with an instrument that has this form:
It is called a sharp-headed instrument, made of iron and rounded like an ass's head that is pierced by a punch with a small hole (such as shown in the following form).
Place it on the corrupt area of the bone, and turn it with your fingers until it is rotated, and press gently until you know that the corruption has been removed.
Let it be done for several observations, and then restore the area with drying and stiffening agents.
If the area is consolidated and good flesh has grown there and it is separated from the body for 40 days without being renewed or developing an abscess or any accident happening, then you will know that it is healed.
If not, do not be deceived but rather reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and proceed as follows: First, you should discover the bone using forceps or acute medicine, and when the bone is exposed, you take three pieces as shown below:
The handle of the forceps should be triangular in shape and its shaft should be extended to the tip as shown sometimes.
Place that one on the bone and it should be the lacrimal piece; extend your hand a little from the wound, and turn your hand with the three pieces until they penetrate the entire bone, and the patient will feel pressure as the vent closes when you apply your hand to it.
Therefore, you should restore the area with drying and stiffening agents as directed.
Once the flesh and area have hardened, you should return the material that was flowing from the incisions to the nose, as this is lighter for the patient.
Capital XX
On the reduction of the swelling of the nose.
When the nose swells completely and no harm or diminution occurs from this, you should make the patient lie down and follow these instructions: keep them quiet without strain or injury and use good suction; apply a linen poultice to the swelling that is made of catnip, aloe, elder, and colocynth, and strengthen the bandage over the nose without powder.
The method for the powders is to take fourfold strips of lion's wool and make powder from them.
Then place one on top of another according to the amount that the patient needs. Strengthen one over the other with a thick and strong binding, then apply cupping glasses with suction without cutting, and remove the cupping glasses and let the wound heal during the day and night.
But if the ligament becomes softened in the meantime, then it must be tied more tightly.
Then return the ligament during the day and night as previously stated.
If the wound has already been reduced (healed), that is good; if not, continue applying the plaster, powder, binding, and cupping until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the incision of the prominence of the uveal tunica.
When there is a disruption in the uveal tunica and it becomes prominent, proceed outside the eyelids as if with a grain of sand, shape it like a man, and if you want to incise (make an incision), perform the operation as previously recommended, by entering the needle into the uvea from the lower part towards the upper part, and then place another needle in the area where there is double thread (the lacrimal duct) and make it penetrate and leave the first needle in place according to its position; then incise the area of the double thread and lift the part of the uvea around the needle, and tighten that area.
Then remove the needle and place it on the cotton wool soaked in oil and wait until the thread comes out with the grape.
And then care for the wound with something that supports it until the ulcer is healed.
After some time, put a circle of fabric around the entire wound and adjust it to cover the prominent area, then perforate (pierce) with a thin spatula that reaches the underside of the wound and let the whitish substance (the aqueous humor) flow out and descend immediately.
Then tighten until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On treating conjunctivitis.
This disease that is called conjunctivitis is not only an inflammation, but it is also an infection similar to water flowing down (running) and not just that.
But the method of working on it is that you have the patient sit with their head straight and properly supported (reclined) on a seat or bench, and then take hold of the head with both hands from two sides and bring it towards the affected side to see the infection reach the opposite side, and make sure it dries up and does not descend, and keep the eye open, and have the patient watch the process as they used to.
And if it does not descend, know that it is water (discharge).
But if the descent of the discharge is not prepared with what has been said, then have the patient sit between your hands and take a thin spatula and place it on the conjunctiva near the cornea at the cornea's edge (the limbus), until the discharge is pushed out.
Therefore, when the discharge is expelled, you distill (distillate) in the wound water that has been mixed with honey or water in which fennel and honey have already been boiled.
And it should be treated with other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On treating watery discharge from the eye.
We have already said the types of water and which one should be used to puncture with a needle according to the declaration in the division, so you should do it according to the health condition.
You must have the patient sit between your hands on a chair and hold their head steady, keeping it straight.
And place your left hand near the eyelid of the eye that has watery discharge, or with your right hand if the eye is on the right side.
And take the almada (a thin piece of wood or bone) with your right hand if the eye is on the left side; or with your left hand if the eye is on the right side.
Approach the limb near the crown due to the swelling of the bone in the eyelid area from the lesser lacrimal, and approach with a plaster and rotate your hand towards it.
Enter into the eyelid and feel that the limb has already penetrated due to swelling.
Determine the measurement of the path of the limb to the puncture, which is from the pupil to the end of the black part (cornea), and this is the crown of the eyelid; for you will see the pupil with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the cornea tunica.
Approach the limb inside the place where the water is located, and approach it again with your hand below, so that if the water descends quickly, then you immediately put the patient under the knife to cut their eye quickly, and in the same way into their eyelid.
Approach it again after a short while; therefore, if the water has descended, then you pause that other hand below to prevent the water from being spilled out.
And when it is dry and does not descend, then you extract the limb easily, and rotate your hand slightly at a time, and dissolve a small amount of clear salt gemma and water in it, and wash the inside of the eye with this; and apply outside the eye cotton or stopper or infused wool and oil rose and alum and ligature with water the eye.
However, we of our time apply this mixture of alum and rosin to the eyelid.
And if the limb does not enter the eyelid due to its hardnessfor some men have a very hard eyelidthen you must take the spatula, which is called alberid, whose shape is:
Therefore, pierce that junction, and do not go too deep with your hand, and it is not the case that you make a hole in another place nearby.
Approach the limb as previously stated.
And you must prepare the work of the patient, a bed placed gently made in which they sleep on their back in a dark room, and it is forbidden from any movement.
And place the patient facing north to calm their nature, and do not turn their head to the right or left in any way.
And let them remain in the same position for at least three days.
Approach the patient in that dark room and expose their eye, make them see some causes, and return them to their bed on the seventh day.
It is not necessary for you to do this during the hour of cure or as soon as possible with an injection. However, it is necessary to remove this because water can easily and violently flow out due to great and strong gazing.
However, if there is an abscess, you must remove the eyelid after seven days and correct it with something that dissolves abscesses.
You then wipe the eye of the patient and place it on their face so that they can rest for several days in a dark room.
Approach the patient gently from that room and converse with them about their causes.
And know that in the hospital, the disciple is not allowed to see anyone for several days, and you then dare with the operation.
And now it has come to us of one of those who are called "The Physician", and another said that they made fire in the eye socket pierced by which water is drained.
However, we have not seen this done on our land, nor do we find it in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that it is new.
These are the forms of the species of limbs that are unknown to the one who does not know them:
These are made of ivory or iron specifically, and they have the tips with this subtle triangular subtleties, the sharp tip being in this shape.
Capital XXIV.
From the healing of flesh, do not take anything in the nose.
When various fleshy growths are born in the nose, some of which are caused by the type of scorpion motez pes or polyp feet; and this disease is called polyps because it resembles that foot represented. And from this is cancerous flesh, called "lepada" of a dark color; and this is the origin of flesh that is not dark colored as a lion.
Therefore, in that which is not fraudulent or cancerous, the patient must be made to lie face up, expose the affected area to the sun, and dig into it with your finger at the point where these non-dark colored fleshes are found. Then extract that to the incisions made in front and make an incision with a sharp pointed spatula under the one partition that you know has all the flesh exposed; for if it remains due to some reason for which abscission is possible, then take care to do so with one of the subtle tools with ease until it no longer remains for any reason. But if the lord has an abscess or a pustule, you pause there; or if it is malignant pustules, you cut and cauterize that area after it has been drained of pus and all the cavities are left open.
And apply a poultice to the nose near the incision with vinegar or water. But if the nose is open and moisture enters the palate, you know that it has been healed.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, you know that inside there is no flesh in the blisters or bones of the nostrils where abscission has not been achieved.
Therefore, you must insert a clean probe with some thickness into it and move it in and out like a needle, pausing between each thrust the amount of finger or inch, and gently guide the patient and introduce one end of the probe into the nostril with the rod or another possible method.
And so that it will happen, you must draw the patient's odorant into the nostrils and let it sit on his forehead, because many observed children at school do this, and it is an easy cause for those who want to do it.
Then pause the two ends of the probe, one end that protrudes from the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and apply a surgical instrument for cutting meat with needles that are on the probe, and do this until you know that the flesh is around the probe's needles.
Then extract the probe and pause in the nose near the drainage of pus, and do this for three days or more until the sore on the fleshes is completely corroded.
And at the end of the cause, pause in the nose a lead pipe for some days until it is healed.
But if it needs further treatment, use it.
And this is the shape of the instrument used by the snuff maker who distills oils and medicines into the nostrils.
Make it of silver or brass, similar to a small open lamp, like a small cavity, and the metal should be similar.
And if you want, make a closed tube like a cane, and the cannula of the snuff maker's instrument should be flat, open; to which you have access at the rear end, with which you will hold it when you scoop oil or any liquid substance and extractable substances.
Chapter XXV.
Of teeth that are at the ends of the nose.
Many observed that a tooth is located at the ends of the nose, and it is magnified and mentioned in some days before it becomes law regarding its observation.
And for this reason, you must incise that at the beginning of its appearance and remove all of it. Then pause over the location or burn or medicine to cauterize it where it is located.
But if its incision is delayed until it becomes magnified, consider whether it is hard, dark colored and of little sensation; in that case, do not touch it with iron because it is a cancerous abscess; for many observed that the one who incises this cancerous abscess suffers greatly from it.
If the abscess is touching the lion (meaning a large abscess) and not of dark color, and at times it can be drained completely, then drain the patient and incise it without fear, heal the wound with anything that drains and binds it tightly until it heals.
This seems to be the title of a chapter or section in the treatise, numbered as the twenty-sixth.
This is about stitching the nose, lips, and ear when continuity has been lost due to a wound or similar issues.
Know that when continuity is lost in one of these cartilages, such operation should be performed only in certain men.
Therefore, when dealing with that part, consider whether it is a fresh wound with its own blood, and then adjust the two lips of the wound using stitching, and place a dressing over it until it heals.
And if the lips of lost continuity are already separated and each part is healthy, then you should carefully remove each part of the skin that appears outside until it stops bleeding. Then adjust the two lips using stitching and tighten them, and on top of that sprinkle dragon's blood powder (or triturated), place a piece of diaphanicon ointment or another consolidating ointment over it, leave it for two to three days, and then remove it and replace the ointment, leaving it until the flesh separates itself, and care for it with saliva until it heals.
The method of stitching is to add the lost continuity or with needles as we have recommended in abdominal surgery, or to use sutures with skin as you have learned.
This seems to be the title of a new chapter or section in the treatise, numbered as the twenty-seventh.
This is about the extraction of causes that occur within the two lips during divisions (surgery).
Observed in many men during divisions of their lips, there are some hard abscesses resembling goose fat, and some are smaller while others are larger.
Therefore, you should fold the lips and incisions of each hard area completely, and apply sulfa powder to the abscess site until the blood is stopped, wash it with vinegar, and care for it with astringent water until it heals.
This seems to be the title of another new chapter or section in the treatise, numbered as the twenty-eighth.
This is about incising the meat adjusted in the gums (teeth).
A large sore is often observed over the adjusted meat (gums), which was previously called albulus. Therefore, you should suspend it with a thread or hold it with forceps and make an incision in it to drain the pus or blood.
And apply sulfa powder or another astringent or caustic powder to the site.
And if the meat returns, make another incision and cauterize it because the cautery will not return.
This seems to be the title of another new chapter or section in the treatise, numbered as the twenty-ninth.
This is about tooth abscesses with iron.
When on the surface of teeth during divisions or openings, and between the gums, there are sharp, rough, and sometimes black sores that become citric or green before causing decay to the gum and making the tooth loose.
Therefore, you should hold the patient firmly and grasp their head with your hand, pull out the teeth where these sores appear, removing all causes until there is no further cause, and remove the blackness, citrinitat (yellowish discoloration), and other impurities.
Therefore, if it remains what is at the beginning of the reasoning, that is good; otherwise, you must repeat the reasoning on another day and on the second and third day until it reaches the last statement in what you want.
Know that teeth have a need for resorptive (reabsorbing) mechanisms of various shapes and forms according to what is prepared for your operation. For this reason, the razors with which the tooth is extracted from inside are different from the razors with which they are ground between the teeth according to other shapes, and these shapes of razors should be prepared by you, which you will soon see.
Capital thirty (XXX)
Extraction of teeth.
It is necessary to care for the tooth from its pain with all care and patience throughout the entire extraction process, because it is not a good thing that you leave behind the root when it is extracted, as it is a superficial substance until it is excavated during the extraction process.
Furthermore, when the patient is to extract that tooth in pain, it is important that you are certain which tooth is causing the pain, because many times the pain deceives the patient and causes them to believe that the healthy tooth is causing the pain, and you remove the healthy one instead of the painful one. The pain will not cease until the diseased and painful tooth has been removed, as we have already seen in barber surgery.
Therefore, since you must be certain which tooth is causing the pain and know it well, you should then score around the tooth with a spatula containing some medicine, until the tooth is dissolved from the gum on all sides, and apply it gently using tweezers or fine forceps, starting with a small movement, continuing until you have reached the desired goal.
Apply oil or ointment with strong holders and large tweezers for good grip or strong structure, and support the patient's head between your thick fingers so that you do not hurt it, and carefully move the tooth in a manner that does not break it or cause the patient more pain.
And therefore, if the above steps are followed, you should then take one of those instruments and place it near the tooth with ease and effort, removing it as was done at the beginning.
However, if the tooth is broken or corroded, it is necessary that you wrap it with cloth and tighten it at the root end using fine wire to prevent it from being crushed during your compression on it.
It is necessary that you work carefully with scoring around the entire circumference of the gum and use caution to avoid breaking it and leaving it fractured, and return to the patient for the worsening pain that may be greater than the initial pain they had.
And remember that you should not do what some ignorant barbers do in their procedures and audacity with tooth extraction, because they do not administer what has been recommended; for many times they cause great pain in the sick person, which are difficult to be relieved, and all or some of the roots remain, or the tooth is extracted along with bone fragments from the jaw as it has been shown in many cases.
And during the extraction process, wash the mouth with warm water or saltwater.
If bleeding occurs during this procedure, such as in many cases, you should first apply some vinegar or vinegar-soaked cloth to the affected area, and if it does not stop the bleeding, cauterize.
The shape of the fine forceps and tweezers used for extracting the tooth at the beginning should be long in length, short in width, and thick, to prevent them from being bent when working with them.
They should be of such a size that the handles are not bent when gripped firmly, but rather have short lengths.
Iron bands of India, properly made and correctly applied on the outside, have teeth on them that enter into each other and tighten with strong constraint. Sometimes the area where these bands are applied has the shape of a stork's beak, which is called "guanta," and they exert great constriction.
The following sentence seems to belong to another section or chapter, so let's start translating from this point:
On removing teeth and extraction of broken bones in the jaws.
When you need to remove a broken tooth, it is necessary that you place something soft over the area and bind it for one or two days until the area is softened; and insert tweezers or forceps with the tips shaped like a stork's beak called "guanta" or "ciconia," the shape of the forceps:
The dislocated joint's edges should be smoothed out with a file or alum.
If the broken tooth cannot be removed with these forceps or tweezers, it is necessary that you cut through the gum and insert an instrument called "atali," which is a small lever shaped as follows:
Make a small incision in the affected bone with a scalpel or knife that is not too deep; then use a chisel to break the bone into several pieces.
If the incision is made in the wrong place, it may cause complications or make the treatment more difficult. Here are some guidelines and shapes for the instruments to be used in this procedure: The first instrument's shape should be triangular with a notch or groove on one side for guiding the scalpel or knife during the incision:
The shape of the second instrument should be triangular and have a thin pointed end.
And now help yourself with this instrument, which has two slopes, the shape being as follows: And for other instruments that I will mention in the context of dental work, it is useful to have this one, which resembles a large onion and has the following shape:
with a rounded or short, triangular tip that is somewhat thick, but not too thin to avoid being broken.
You should also know that dental tools are similar to other medical instruments.
Wise and skillful artisans, however, find for themselves the appropriate tools according to the operation and various diseases, since some diseases were not previously identified or treated with specific instruments due to their various forms.
If the jawbone or other bones in the mouth are fractured or if they are pulverized, place a cold compress on the area with the appropriate instrument and forceps as discussed in the extraction of teeth, and assist the person using this procedure, which is as follows:
Gradually reduce the swelling, and hold it in place with the mouth to prevent it from escaping or spreading until the fracture has healed completely. Then, restore the area using appropriate medications.
If there is a small pitting in the bone, remove that pitting and its surrounding blackness, and treat it until it has healed.
Chapter 32.
The care of teeth is more important than that of other body parts.
If a tooth is not properly aligned with its natural shape and cannot be repaired or treated, it must be extracted. However, if the tooth is not connected to another tooth, you should cut it out with this instrument that has the following shape: resembling a pig's trotter, made of Indian steel with a sharp point.
Make the incision with this instrument in several days according to the hardness of the tooth, and ensure that it does not affect other teeth.
If the tooth is excessively prominent, file it with this Indian steel file that has the following shape:
It should be made entirely of Indian steel and have small, sharp points like a file used for making needles. The tooth should be filed gradually each day with ease to avoid damaging or affecting other teeth. Straighten the tooth at the end, and remove it with another instrument.
If part of the tooth is broken off and attached to the tongue, you must file it until the fractured portion is removed and filled in so that the tongue does not get hurt and speech is not impaired.
Chapter 33.
On repairing damaged teeth with gold or silver foil.
If teeth are damaged by impact or removal due to blows or accidents, and the patient cannot withstand eating, and you have treated it with specific medications without success, then as a last resort, use gold foil instead of silver, since silver becomes tarnished and should be changed every few days. Gold does not change over time.
The first sentence translates to: "The file (instrument) should be as delicate and thick as the quantity that can fit between the teeth; and the shape of the reccio (a medical tool, possibly a probe or forceps) is such that you grab the file and take double its length between two healthy teeth, and near where it curves towards two bad ones, or if one or more, enter until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side." Then push the suturing thread into the division from where you started, and hold it with ease and skill until it is not harmful.
And your string (used to secure the file in place) should be strong enough to hold the file between the teeth without escaping.
Then cut off the excessive parts of the file with forceps or scissors and place them at each location where they are needed, and twist them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the diseased tooth to avoid injuring the tongue. Then tie it tightly with thread like a Roman knot.
But if it becomes loose or broken, strengthen it with another file in such a manner at all times.
And this is the shape and figure of the teeth and the form of the reccio (probe or forceps) between two healthy teeth and two diseased teeth, as shown in the following illustrations:
When a tooth or teeth return to their respective cavities and grow back as we have recommended, they will remain healthy and strong.
And this is the work of skilled and wise craftsmen.
Sometimes, cow bones are used as a replacement for teeth in certain cases, shaped like teeth and placed where the tooth has failed, tied and strengthened as we have described, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the incision of the ligament that is found in the tongue and prohibit speaking.
This ligament that is found beneath the tongue sometimes is natural and which man is born with, or accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already consolidated.
The operation consists of opening the patient's mouth and lifting their head so that their chin is on your chest; raise their tongue, and make an incision in the ligament nerve at a width sufficient to release the tongue from its recent position.
But if there is any hardness or denseness and that is due to consolidation of an injury, then you throw water on it and cut through the ligament at a width sufficient to release the nodule and relieve the pain.
Ensure that you do not make a tear in the skin and that you cut through it arch-shaped and bring forth bleeding.
Then wash the incision site with water or vinegar or warm water, and place a clean cloth on it; this is what will keep the patient from re-injuring their tongue every night.
If bleeding occurs, place a piece of vitriol gauze on the spot; if the bleeding persists, then cauterize the spot with a luminous cautery that is suitable for this purpose. Approach that cure with other causes until it is healed.
Chapter 35.
On the removal of frog wart from the tongue.
Sometimes, the tongue swells up like an abscess resembling a small forbidden fruit that hinders its natural operation; it becomes inflated until it fills the mouth.
The procedure is to open the patient's mouth wide before the sun and examine the abscess.
If you see it black or dark, hard, to which the patient does not feel pain, do not touch that one, for it is a cancer.
If it turns white, with moisture in it, you put onion in it and incise it with a thin spatula from all sides; if blood comes out during your operation, pause over the area with this bandage made of vitriol until the bleeding stops.
Then return to your work after you have removed it completely, until it is washed with vinegar and salt; treat it with the other remedies until it is healed.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the extraction of abscesses with two ears and those that are not in the auricle, and other abscesses.
When a boil appears in the auricle, it is glands that resemble cheese, which appear outside and are called two ears; when you treat them with what has been said in the division and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, black in color, with little sensation, do not touch that one with iron.
If it is red in color and the root is thick, do not touch that one with iron due to blood flow; leave it alone until it matures, and then you can either drain it or let it burst on its own.
If it is white in color, round, and the root of it is thin, that one must be incised.
The procedure is to consider whether the abscess has already rested after being cauterized or if it has diminished with some reduction; then bring the patient before the sun, place their head in your lap, open their mouth wide and the servant holds their tongue from below with a noble instrument of this form:
It should be made of silver or iron and be thin like a knife.
Therefore, as you press the tongue and the abscess is shown to you, catch it with your instrument and place it in the opening; then pull it out from all sides as far as possible. If some cause of the membranes is pulled, then you should incise that with an instrument of this form:
If some cause of the membranes is pulled, then you should incise that with an instrument of this form: and is similar to forceps, but the extensions of it are curved so that the orifice of each one is opposite the other, very sharp; the handle should be made of iron but covered in ivory.
But if this instrument is not at hand, then incise it with a spatula of this shape:
And after you have incised one abscess, incise the other according to this method of incision, and then immediately apply warm water to protect the patient from cold.
But if blood flow occurs, apply water of the boil of milkwort or leaves of myrtle and similar to those of cauterizing agents until the blood flow stops, and then treat it until it is healed.
Sometimes in the auricle other abscesses appear besides these two ears, and you incise those according to what I have said about the incision of two abscesses equally.
I have treated a woman with an abscess that was born in her auricle, which abscess turned black, had little sensation, and had already closed the auricle of hers; the woman breathed with difficulty and had already prohibited herself from eating or drinking water, and would have died within one or two days if she had stayed like that.
The abscess was already so swollen that it had been three months before it burst through two openings.
Therefore, I cut it fistularly and placed the instrument in one of its openings, pulled it out and took out a large part of it; then I incised the other opening where I could find it, and closed the mouth of it, compressed its tongue, and placed the instrument back in that abscess.
And I incised a large part of it, but only a little blood flowed from it. Therefore, the woman's auricle was completely healed, and she began to drink water immediately and took care of her diet; therefore, I did not continue incising that abscess for a long time, and an abscess appeared in its place, which I incised until it prolonged the previous one.
And in this way, I cured the woman's auricle and cauterized it so that it healed; but I did not know what God had in store for her at that time.
Chapter XXXVII.
Incision of ulcer when it is opened.
When the catarr in the ulcer becomes opened and is long, it is called a perpendicular incision; and if it is in the thick and round part, it is called a bubble.
But when it is cured with what was said earlier in the division, and does not respond to your care, and often an ulcer cautery is still present there and is subtle, then you must incise the one that has grown round; and if it is long, and is blood-like or black, and is not centered, then you must be careful with the incision, for in this case there is fear for the patient.
And when you see the ulcer according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, that you hold the patient down and press their tongue with an instrument for shaping its form and then insert your thumb into the new opening, and pull it out and incise it with one of two instruments mentioned in the incision of the two boils.
It is necessary that you do not incise it except where it is adjusted according to the natural border, for if you incise more than this, you damage his speech.
And for the incision, use what was recommended in the incision of the two boils, and care for it until it is healed.
But if the patient is frightened by the incision, it is necessary to use an instrument in the cauterization without fear, and the method of cauterization in him should not be with anything other than sharp water, and hold his head on your lap, press his tongue with the instrument that was said, and take some of the sharp water mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and apply it to the living part, and let it stop there neither thick nor thin, and fill the concavity of the instrument of this shape:
Let the exterior of the cavity where the medicine is placed be like the concavity of a spoon, and let the instrument with the medicine be placed on the ulcer, and the patient coughs on his side so that saliva or nasal discharge from the mouth goes through the internal medicine, so that this does not happen because of any cause on the neck of him and that it does not infect this.
And place your hand with the medicine and press it on the ulcer for about an hour until you see it become darkened and soothed by the biting of the medicine.
And if you want, take care and wrap that around the tip of the ray, immerse the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray into a cannula so that the cloth adheres to the cannula, and do this as many times as you want for the cauterization of the grape, and then let it dry and fall off about three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and let the cauterization be cleansed in the circuit of the grape with a cloth wet in vinegar, and clean it with what is in the circuit of it from the medicine, and let it be washed with warm water, and healed outwardly with an embrocation, and inwardly with ointments until it is healed.
And this kind of treatment is safer than incision and deeper fear.
Sometimes the grape is cured with something subtle that cauterizes and incises, for it is healed by subfumigation in this manner: prepare carefully, hyssop, orgean, rue, scordium arabicum, camomile, crushed leaves similar to these, and adjust all of these ingredients or some of them in a pot, immerse them in vinegar and cook; and let the pot be boiled gently with a lid on it, and on one side of the pot place a hollow instrument of iron according to this manner; make it out of silver or iron.
And let the tip be inserted into the mouth of the patient until the steam reaches the ulcer on the cannula, until the ulcer is somewhat obscured.
And let this treatment be repeated many times until it dries, and take care that you do not apply this treatment at the beginning of the onset of ulcers, for it would tighten in the ulcer, and it is not necessary to do so, but rather the declaration of cauterization of the ulcer.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then take a cane and make a hole in the end of it with yew wood, so that the mouth of the patient is narrowed, for the yew wood closure prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter 38.
On the extraction of thorns and what adheres to the neck, and on other causes.
Sometimes a thorn or splinter adheres to the neck or foot, or some other cause.
Therefore it is necessary that you extract what appears from those, looking at it carefully, because you press the tongue with an instrument before this, so that it may be clear to you what is in the neck.
And what is not apparent and is hidden in the neck, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before food becomes softened in the stomach, for this causes annexed to the neck will be forgotten by vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of soap or lye of linseed oil, or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of sea sponge and press it firmly with alcohol, and then make the patient swallow it, because when it reaches the place where the thorn is hidden, it will be forgotten. Take a eel and boil it well with a faithful ligature, then remove it from the pot; or take a pig's bladder and put it in and squeeze it out.
But if those causes are not forgotten, then use a lead instrument in this way:
Make the instrument larger than a finger, and in its extremity there should be a concavity which you enter easily into the opening.
Lift the patient's head upward, and ensure that you touch only the bone of the jaw, so that it does not harm the gullet or the bones or spine, or that the doctor touches it with his hand.
But if the patient enters into that state, it is better, according to his knowledge of the location of the associated cause and pressing downwards, to grasp it with his hand and pull the instrument upward, all this according to the quantity prepared beforehand.
Chapter 39.
On the extraction of a bloodletter attached to the jugular vein.
When the bloodletter is treated with the remedy mentioned in the section on treatment with medicines and it does not improve, consider the following in the jugular vein of the patient at the neck, as you have compressed the tongue of it with the instrument that you have recommended.
Therefore, if you see the bloodletter, extract it gently and carefully with small or delicate instruments.
And if it is not possible for you to extract it, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the jugular vein of the patient, and place your hand over the concavity of the cannula with an ignited iron tip. Do this as many times as necessary (until the bloodletter has died and is removed from the jugular vein) and keep the patient away from water for the entire day.
Then take a vessel full of water, open its mouth in that place, and wash the mouth with it; do not let any cause pass through it or change the water for an hour, because the bloodletter will soon feel the water.
But if what has been recommended is not forgotten, then fumigate the patient with camphor or asafoetida using the instrument that you have recommended for fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, where it has fallen down.
Another method of operation in sufumigation of that, is to take an oil in which charcoal has been ignited and the oil should be covered with a cloth in the middle of which there is a hole, and the extremity of the instrument should be compressed in that hole; and place it near the subfumigation; and hold the patient's mouth at the end of the cannula, and clamp down on their mouth so that the subfumigation does not escape before you know that the subfumigation has reached the blood, because the blood will soon fall.
And if there is no catarrh, then you should repeat the subfumigation many times, and keep the patient from drinking, and make them eat salty foods and almonds, and not drink water, and it is necessary that this regimen be strictly followed.
This is the shape of the instrument used to treat the blood in the gullet when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps like this, but with some curvature. The end of the instrument should be placed in the gullet, and its extremity should resemble a stork's beak, which is hollow, and polished with a file, so that when it compresses something, it does not let go.
Chapter XL.
This is where the summary of the sermon on abscesses and their incision comes to an end.
Abscesses are of many species, in many ways, as remembered from their occurrence, and each is described in this book.
And they are diverse in the perforation and incision of them through two ways, of which one is by the species of abscesses themselves; and by pressing on the humors.
And the second method is for those places where accidents of the body occur, because an abscess that occurs in the head is another than one that occurs in the anus; and the abscess that occurs in the flesh is another than one at a joint; and to each of them there is its own treatment by operation.
Furthermore, some abscesses require that they are not perforated unless the pus matures in them or their completion occurs.
Other abscesses require that they be drained when they are hard and have not matured according to their completion, such as the abscesses that occur at joints, because an abscess that is near a joint extends until it reaches the surrounding tissues or nerves of that joint, which causes contraction of the affected member; or is an abscess on a main organ and if you delay the perforation of it until it has matured it will damage the main organ; or is one in the anus, therefore you should not perforate an unripe one; and you should not perforate hard ones unless there is no digestion completed, but rather the one that is on the anus, because if you do not perforate it soon enough it can penetrate into the cavities inside the anus and become a fistula or be made near its edge so that it does not heal. Furthermore, you must know the time for draining the abscess, and this is when it has matured.
And you know that it is matured when the pain subsides and the fever ceases, and an increase in the swelling and pulse decrease, and the sharpness of the abscess head, and other signs.
And because you must know that draining should be performed in the lowest place near the abscess and from where the pus flows during treatment of the swelling.
And draining is sometimes through the length of the flesh or body if abscesses are in the armpits or feet, and in the joints, ligaments, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all places that are not reflected; because in those where it is reflected, use the method according to that member.
Furthermore, when the abscess is in the flesh, it is better to perform draining after confirmation of digestion of it according to its completion, as we have said; because if you perforate it before, the body swells and is full of pus, and the lips are hardened and deep.
Other abscesses should be drained according to the depth of the flesh or body depending on the need, or according to what the affected member requires.
And you must make a small incision in the abscesses, and a large and wide or many incisions according to the variety of the size of the abscesses.
And other abscesses are those in which the wound must be concave and incised when it is done in such a way that bread and cheese can be placed on it, like one that occurs in double or bubo tumors.
And of those who are incised with a section, there are three angles; and of these is the one that is incised similarly as a figure of myrtle leaf, as in abscesses from gout.
And of those who receive round and crescent sections, they are similar to these.
But for one who is not like shallow lion abscesses, you must perforate it with a superficial perforation or just plainly.
And when the abscess is large and has collected pus, perforate it but do not be hasty to remove all the pus in that moment; having removed part of it, leave the abscess for another day, then remove a larger part, and apply warm poultices according to the degree until it is forgotten.
Moreover, if the patient is a child, woman in labor, or an elderly person in decline, for their animal spirit moves frequently and resolves pus with its exit, and the patient may die quickly as a result, so treat them carefully.
Be careful with this chapter, and when you perform the perforation for these abscesses, make sure to clean the wound and consider whether the wound of the abscess is small or a simple incision; in that case, use one of the remedies from ancient times. But if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, you must be careful not to push too hard until they meet.
If a part of the skin is detached from the abscess or you have created a concavity in its circumference, you must close it with old linen or thread made of cloth similar to when you treat bread or razors, without moisture; and leave it for three days; then process it and care for it with remedies that require gargling until it is healed.
But if bleeding occurs during your operation, administer warm water and wine on a cloth and place it over the area of the blood flow for a while until the bleeding subsides.
But if the bleeding persists, you must administer treatment and care and apply powders that I have recommended in multiple locations of this book and section.
But if it is winter, and the location of the abscess is near many nerves, you must apply powder in vinegar and hot oil and leave them on the area.
And if it is summer, and the locations are fleshy, you must leave powder in warm water or vinegar and oil, and all of this should be heated until the third day as we have said, and then you must remove the abscess and clean it and provide care for it with remedies suitable for it until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses universally, but as I have already said in a different way, according to the distinction made for each type of abscess, the cure for it will be described in separate chapters.
Chapter 41.
On sectioning abscesses that occur on the skin of the head.
Small abscesses on the skin of the head, which have specific types that contain tunics made by them; and these specific ones are more numerous.
And among them are blisters, and of these are those that contain moisture similar to lime. And from those [substances] that contain moisture similar to powder and resembling them, and from those that are stone-like and hard.
And in this section, and in the removal of those [substances], there is no fear, as you should not counteract archery when extracting them.
And the procedure in extracting those is that you shall examine them with an instrument shaped like this, which is called entromesso, until you know what they contain.
But if it contains moisture, then cut it with the section as shown in this form, along the length and into a shallow section.
Start the incision along line B to line G. Therefore, when the moisture is evacuated, then scrape off that part which contains the moisture, and do not leave any cause of it, because too many observed returns if there remains any cause of it.
Then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment if present, or in water and salt; fill the wound with it and leave it for another day, because with this it will dissolve everything that is broken from that skin layer.
And apply Egyptian ointment on the wound repeatedly and clean it if necessary, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that skin layer; then care for the wound with ointment until it heals.
And if an abscess contains fatty nodes, then incise it according to this form: The incision should have a cross shape and make an incision between the two lips of the incision and cut it through from one side, and exert your strength in extracting the membrane that contains it.
But if your archery is counteracted, then do as I have told you first.
And do the same with the lapisated abscess, both incision and care, as I have told you; incising an abscess is easier because it contains little blood and little moisture.
And sometimes these abscesses are ulcers of this type found in the head in some men from whom there is no moisture; the cause being that I made an incision on an abscess in an old woman's head similar to a stone-hard, rough, white one, which could not be crushed, and if someone were to strike it, it would cause pain.
But in other abscesses that occur in the head, this is not applicable, such as abscesses that come to the heads of children and you must remove the scabs from the ears, but the incision for these should be a shallow one.
Stop the perforation of those from the lower parts, so that the body may be relieved at the lower parts.
And care for them with what is appropriate for their healing.
Chapter XLII.
On the incision of scrofulas that occur in the neck.
These abscesses often appear in the neck and ears and angles; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck are the ones that are generated between them, and every scrofula of these is part of its own membrane, just as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have mentioned before.
The types of these scrofulas are hard nodes, for some of them are stone-like, and others contain moisture, and the malicious ones that do not respond to healing.
Therefore, in that which you see with good arrangement in the incision, of which the color of what is visible is similar to the color of a codpiece, and it is found everywhere except near the nerve of the neck, nor the veins, nor the artery, and it is not an appendage, therefore, you must incise it superficially along the division above to the division below the body from the line of G. to the line of B., and scrape it entirely, and extend two flaps of the codpiece at once, or two flaps as many times as necessary if required by them, just as mentioned in the cauterizations of the head, and extract it gradually.
It is more careful not to incise the vein or nerve.
Let the spatula not be too sharp, that it does not hurt your hand or disturb the patient, and that you incise only what is necessary to incise; for if you should incise a vein or artery and prohibit yourself from your operation, then pause in the cauterization that has been stewed with vinegar or other powders that cause bleeding, and let it dry, and leave it to rest until the acuity of the abscess subsides and the wound becomes pus-like. When the blood is drained.
Therefore, return to your operation when you have completed it.
And examine with your finger whether there are any other small abscesses, therefore incise them and clean them.
And if the large abscess is near a vein, it's necessary that you do not incise the abscess at its root. Then fold it back strongly and let it fall by itself without harm.
Then fill the wound with old lint that you have already moistened with Egyptian ointment, and heal it thereafter.
If you incise the entire abscess, it's necessary that you bring the two flaps of the wound together and suture them immediately without leaving any superfluous opening.
But if you find that there is superfluous opening due to the size of the abscess, it's necessary that you understand to incise the root of it, and remove it and administer suture and what has been said.
And the abscesses that contain moisture, perforate them with superficial perforation at the location of their maturation, and pause perforation of what causes the pus to drain from the body, just as has been said.
And administer perforation, with lard and similar substances, so that it dissolves what has been removed from the decay. And when you see the wound already cleaned, heal it with a generative lard until it is healed.
Chapter forty-three.
On the incision of the aphthae in the throat, caused by gout.
The ancients used to make this incision in the epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone on our earth that has made it.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
But in men with obstruction, it's necessary to avoid the extraction of the epiglottis, for it is not done as a help because all the veins and arteries of the patient are located here.
But in those who have abscesses or tonsillitis or double auricles, when the disease is not in the trachea, it's necessary to make the incision of the epiglottis to avoid the danger caused by suffocation.
Therefore, when we want to do it, we should incise the epiglottis below three circles of the epiglottis, or four with a small incision in the length between two circles according to size, that the incision be in the cartilage, not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for incision, because it is devoid of flesh and the vessels of blood from it are hidden.
And if the doctor is poor, it's necessary that he extends the tongue of the tonsil at once and opens the tongue up to the channel, but avoid the blood vessels if you find any reason for them.
And open the cribriform plate according to what has been recommended, which is about the incision of the channel through the flap that comes from the breakage and the abscess of the voice box.
And let the wound be kept moist for a while.
Therefore, since the hour of perforation is feared, gather two flaps of the tongue of the wound, and sew it alone without the cartilage.
And heal it with medicines that make the flesh grow until it is healed.
Albucasis says that the sum of the sermon that we have recommended is nothing but the veins that some of those with abscesses have already pierced the epiglottis of the patient and the patient has come to death, and the wound is closed, and others go on to incise the epiglottis so that the patient breathes through the location of the wound for any respiration, and he is saved from death.
And for this reason, command to keep the wound moist until the malice of the illness is consumed; and the malice lasts for three days; and therefore, command to sew the wound, and heal it until it is healed.
What I have seen in my experience is that a servant took a dagger and struck it into the patient's chest and incised a part of the lung, and I was called to treat him. I compressed the wound as one would compress a dying man, and I uncovered the wound and drew out the blood which had come out from the small wound.
This means: However, it was not found that the wound had punctured a vein or artery, and the blood flowed out of the wound. I healed it until it was healed.
If the servant did not regret what he had done, and after several days his condition improved, he should return to his duties.
This means: Now I tell you that in the section of the epiploic there is no fear.
The chapter number appears to be 44, but it seems that it could also indicate a title or heading for the text as well. Without additional context, it's difficult to say for certain.
This means: On the section regarding an abscess that occurs in the chest outside and is called a hernia of the chest.
This means: The hernia of the chest abscess is called a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it is a malignant condition in women.
This means: And it can occur in two ways: either naturally or accidentally.
This means: In the case of a natural hernia, there is no remedy to cure it.
This means: The accidental can occur in two ways of which one is similar to fatty nodes, and the other way is similar to an abscess caused by constriction of an artery, and in this case there is fear. This means: It should not be presumed that it is iron unless it is small. This means: And you should examine it with the above mentioned method, and if you find it similar to fatty nodes and not suspended from any vein, then you should incise it in the same way as the nodes and remove it along with the tissue that contains it from the skin and bursa; otherwise, you should explore its entire being and treat the area with whatever is needed for treatment until it heals.
The chapter number appears to be 45, but it seems that it could also indicate a title or heading for the text as well. Without additional context, it's difficult to say for certain.
This means: On the section of types of nodes.
This means: There are many species of nodes, and I have already mentioned all the species in the division.
This means: And it is important to distinguish between a node and an abscess as if there is any doubt.
This means: Therefore, you say that with an abscess there is heat, fever, and intense pain until the boiling of the superfluity subsides; and it is a complete putrefaction that now stops the fever, the pain, and the heat.
This means: But with a node there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a cystic lion that belongs to the same substance as the body.
This means: And according to the color of the body, it begins like a pimple and is formed in the same way as a vesicle, whether larger or smaller, and there are two species of them, either fatty with moisture, and the colors of moisture are many, as I mentioned in the division.
This means: Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a node, expose it and investigate it at the beginning with a probe that is called an intromes, according to its shape which will be described in the following chapter.
This means: And this is the method of investigation of abscesses and all nodes, namely that you take this probe and insert it into the moist area that you find in the abscess, and you rotate your thumb slowly against it until you know that the probe has penetrated the capsule.
This means: And finally, place your hand according to the size of the abscess, and finally extract the probe and observe what comes out as evidence.
This means: And if the running moisture, whatever its color, is missed, you should incise it with a superficial section as I mentioned in the other abscesses.
This means: And if there is no running moisture from the probe, you will know that it is fatty.
This means: Dry over it with a section in the shape of a cross according to this form: This means: As you have been taught, suspend it with a cord, and cut the capsule from all sides with ease, and keep the skin or sac over it if possible, and extract the pus along with the node.
This means: But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract healthy material, and as many times as observed, it should be extracted in pieces until there remains no cause for concern.
This means: Because if there remains any cause, either a little or a lot, the node will return, according to the more.
This means: And if you see that a small part remains, then fill the wound with some corrosive and sharp powders and dress the wound, and treat the remaining abscess with another treatment until it heals.
This means: And if it is a large node, you should cut the two lips of it and treat it with whatever is suitable for it.
This means: But if the pulsating vein is on the opposite side, or not pulsating, you should sew it up and fill the area with zegi trissat (a type of ointment) that contains vitriol and let it stay closed for two to three days until the wound heals and stops the boiling of the pus; and then return to incise what was broken from the node.
Chapter 46.
On the necessary forms of instruments for section and perforation.
Of these are the forms of trepaning instruments, and there are three species, one large, another medium, and another small.
The form of the large trepan is as follows:
The form of the small trepan is as follows:
They should be made of iron, lead, or cut blades properly, to fit the trepan into the abscesses.
These are the forms of probing instruments, and they are called lancets, and one of them is called lancet.
They are of three kinds, one large, medium, and small.
The form of the large probing instrument is as follows:
The form of a more experienced man, form of it:
The method of an experienced few, the method is:
It is necessary to be aware of abscesses, wounds, fistulas, and boils that are related to bones or other causes.
And prepare (or make) redots, large leeches, ashes, in this way with large needles that are sewn to the flesh, and made of lemon juice, or iron, or silver, but the best are those made of lemon juice.
The experienced ones make black plums, which they remember to open the cavities of the fistulas in such a way that the reflections are reflected back with their flatness against those reflections.
And this is done in three ways: some (of the plums) are long, others medium-sized, and others short, depending on the size of the fistula and its constriction.
Method of a skilled large plum:
Method of an experienced medium-sized plum:
Method of an experienced small plum:
The methods of the scissors are of many types, some of which are simple with a single curve, and there are three types: large, few, and medium-sized.
And some (scissors) are sharp, and these are of three types:
And among those (scissors) some have two curves, and these are also of three types:
And among those (scissors) some have three curves, and these are also of three types:
All of these (instruments) are necessary in their place.
Method of a small simple scissor:
Method of a large scissor with two curves: The formation of a unguis major (big toe nail) has two curves: The formation of a small toenail (unguis paucimanus) has two curves:
The formation of a big toe nail (unguis grandis) has three curves:
The formation of a small toenail (unguis paucimanus) has three curves:
These are the shapes of the scalpels with which they cut and scrape knots and abscesses, and there are three types: one is large, another is small, and the third is very small.
Forma de scalpel pauc:
The shape of the middle scalpel:
The shape of a small scalpel:
The edges of those which are cut during surgery are sharp, while the other edges are not serrated, but are performed so that they are made simultaneously in the scraping of knots, to avoid injuring a vein or a nerve. For this purpose, the patient is healed and brought a small amount of peace through the cauterization of the abscess.
These are the shapes of amygdalae (almond-shaped cysts), and there are three types: large, medium, and small, as you can see.
These are made from iron and resemble a ray that is used for alcohol.
And on the pointed edge of the spatula, hidden, it should go to the incision inside and outside, wherever you want, as you see.
The shapes of spatulas (used for perforating abscesses) should be hidden from the patient and there are three types: large, medium, and small. These are the forms of the following:
The shapes of drains used for removing blood flow are of three types: large, medium, and small. The shapes are:
They should be made of iron, round with some length, and thin.
It is necessary that the following types of drains (large, medium, and small) be available to you in order to remove blood flow quickly when needed, and at first, before medication is administered.
However, do not use them to drain blood in any part of the body, but only in fleshy areas such as the armpits and thighs, the elbows, breasts, abdomen, genitals, and their equivalent in fleshy parts.
Some observations are made with instruments similar to small forceps shaped like this: to drain blood when it is performed by phlebotomy or during the insertion of a vein or an artery.
Some observations are rounded in shape, as follows:
Chapter xlvi.
On the treatment of male breasts that resemble those of women.
Some observations show that the breasts of some men are swollen like those of women, and they should be treated with rest, as they begin to itch, and when the breasts are swollen, they resemble the breasts of women, and abscesses develop, which require treatment.
And to those with this condition, it is necessary to incise the area with a lunar section as follows, from line B to line G, and then to excise all the pus, apply a layer of carnation-colored medication, and stitch the edges of the wound together until it heals.
But if the breast descends towards the groin and becomes soft like a woman's breast, then it should be cut in two layers with two lunar-shaped incisions, each of which should contain the other until the end of one reaches the other as follows: the larger line should contain the smaller line according to this form from line B to line G. And excise the gland that is between the lips of the wound, remove the pus, and administer what was mentioned earlier about suturing and powders until it heals.
And if you do not complete the incision of that which must be incised due to the restlessness of the patient and bleeding, then it is necessary to apply a plaster of soft material soaked in corrosive ointment, allowing it to enter where it corrodes the rot, and attend to the area until it heals.
Title: xlviii. (Roman numeral for 48)
The missing line appears to be a continuation of the previous one, describing how to treat an abscess or boil that has not been drained properly:
The abscesses or boils that have not been drained belong to the species of scrofula (a swelling or tumor caused by tuberculosis), hard ones that contain pus: (Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.)
The abscesses or boils that contain humidity must be incised with a lunar section, as shown in the following figure: from line .G to line .B. Once all the contents of the abscess are evacuated and cleaned, you should close it with sutures and leave it open until the next day. (E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.)
Keep the wound closed and treated appropriately until it heals.
If the abscess of the glands or boils is, and of the scrofula, then you cut it according to what has been said in the section on scrofula.
If the plague is spread over such an area that pustules appear, then administer cautery as has been said before.
Capital forty-ninth.
Section on abscesses that occur due to archery or venereal disease.
When the arrow is broken and the sheath consolidated that is on it, an abscess occurs, and signs by which it is recognized that inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or vein: for when the abscess is due to an arrow, it is long and extends towards the front of the body; and if you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel a grating sound.
That which is due to a vein is round in appearance on the surface of the body.
Section on this abscess is incorrect, especially in those places where there are no sheaths, and in the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is large, therefore its cure with iron should be avoided, and that which is at the extremities or head should be avoided.
For that which is due to inflammation of the opening of the arrow, cut the sheath section lengthwise; and open the section with scissors and remove the arrow, and separate the membranes until it is exposed.
And place a probe on that needle and make it penetrate through the other side, and tighten the arrow with pliers in two places, which will cause you to extract two arrows that are in the temples.
And pierce the place between the ligaments with a lance until blood comes out from there and the abscess is resolved.
And administer treatment that causes pus to form until the ligaments dissolve, and treat it with appropriate care until it heals.
And if the abscess is due to section of vein, then you must have at your disposal whatever is possible for the abscess and the sheath, and place a probe next to the site where you have placed your hand, and make it penetrate; and insert the thread double until you extract it from the other side, and tie the abscess with a strong ligament as I told you in the uva4 ligament of two parts and both extremities of the thread.
But if you fear that you will extract the thread, then insert the pliers with the probe next to the entire abscess and make an incision first around the tip of the probe, and tighten the pliers in four places.
Cut the abscess in the middle of it until you remove what is inside it, then cut off the superfluity of the sheath and leave what remains.
And place a cushion over the swelling that you have immersed in wine and oil, and administer the treatment that is made with warm and appropriate care until it heals.
Chapter on abscess caused by twisting of nerves.
In the same way that an abscess occurs in archery and vein, and similarly an abscess occurs in nerves when it occurs due to injury or excessive work, and for similar reasons.
It is done more in the places of the joints or ankle, or in any place where the joints are damaged.
It is a severe abscess, and it is similar in color to the rest of the body, and it is in the largest parts of it, which are located away from the joints and when it is tightened with great pain, the patient feels like he is stunned.
An abscess has not been added at the chest, and therefore the dressing is removed, and it is bad all over and does not go to one side or the other.
Therefore, one who suffers from joint problems should avoid bathing too often, as it will lead to contraction.
But one who has a headache or forehead pain should remove the dressing with spittle. If the abscess is small, then you should squeeze it out and cauterize it with a hot iron.
If it is large, then you should lance it with a lancet, remove the pus, and close the wound with stitches, and heal it until it is healed.
Chapter 11.
On incision of abscess which occurs in the chest or belly.
When ulcers appear in the stomachs or other parts of the bodies of those who are called funguals because they resemble fungi, which have a subtle root and thick head; and the lips of these are covered, and it is small or greatly enlarged.
And I have seen one such case, and in his stomach there were two growths which resembled fungi, and there was no difference between them in terms of color or smallness of the root.
And the lips were turned inside out and split open, and moisture ran from it at all times.
Therefore, you should incise those and attach one in the foot at a depth of 18 lancets. And the other at a depth of 6 lancets.
The operation in incision is that you should consider whether the patient is moist and if the affected area is white, moist, with a subtle root; then you should lance it with a cold lancet, and be present as the cauterization is performed in the fire, for many swellings should be expelled without bleeding; and if there is bleeding, cauterize it.
And if you see the patient is weak and fearful, beware of incision with iron; but take a lead weight made recently, and heat it, using the method we've mentioned earlier; then leave it on for two days.
Then adjust the tightness of the lead wire's loop; henceforth, you must heat the large lead until it is melted and falls off by itself without any effort.
If it is of large size, then any incision at that location should be done with caution and fear, especially if it is in the abdomen.
However, it may be possible to cut off the growth, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
Then take care of it until the wound is healed.
But beware not to incise a blackish growth with little sensation and regular shape, for that is a cancer.
And remember that this is related to cancer.
Chapter 12.
On the treatment of protrusion of the navel.
Protrusion of the navel is caused by various factors; either due to a fissure in the cicaph (which is on the abdomen), with the intestine or hernia protruding as it does in other ruptures; or due to bleeding from a vein or artery, as previously mentioned, or due to compressed ventosity within.
But if it is due to a fissure in the cicaph and the protrusion of the intestine, the color of the abscess resembles that of the body; there is no pain, but it appears in various ways. If it is due to herniation of the intestine, place its location with that which has been mentioned earlier, but with much more diverse symptoms; and when you press on it with your fingers as previously advised, it becomes concealed again; and strong pain occurs at the location itself, and it must be intensely bathed and vigorously massaged.
But if it is due to moisture, there is no pain and it does not become concealed when you press with your hand, nor does it contract or increase in size.
And if it is due to bleeding, the abscess appears darkening in color and descending.
But if it is due to rotten flesh, the abscess is serious, large and hard, and it is filled according to a certain quantity.
But if it is due to ventosity, touching it does not cause pain.
And the procedure is to consider if protrusion of the navel is due to bleeding from an artery, a vein, or ventosity; in this case, you must be cautious about treating it because there is fear and dread as previously mentioned in the chapter where abscesses caused by arteries and veins were discussed.
If protrusion of the navel is due to the intestine or hernia, you must command the patient to lie on their side and remain extended; then grasp around the entire umbilicus, and command them to be facing towards you with their hands on either side; then circle the area around the umbilicus with a thin linen band over the location that you have marked with the probe; then extend the abscess's size towards its upper part using force or a scissors in a suitable manner.
And then cut the middle of the extended abscess on the linen and insert your fingers into it as indicated and try to grasp the intestine; if you have not found or protected it with the linen, then you extract any excrement and force the intestine towards the inside of the abdomen.
And if you have found the linen (or cloth), then take a small amount of oil; cut away the excess from it.
Mays si es contrario al tejido o venosa, entonces rodea ese lugar y regresa a tu operacin; luego toma dos agujas y coloca en ellas dos flejes fuertes y mete dos agujas en el circuito que has hecho alrededor del absceso en manera de cruz, las cuales haces penetrar; luego fuerza el absceso en cuatro partes sobre las agujas.
Ms si quieres, retire las agujas y permite que la carne se extienda y caiga por s; o corta el lugar delgado e permita curarse con un suelo que cubra hasta que se haya sanado.
Si la protuberancia del ombligo es de carne mala o por humedad, entonces debes cerrar el absceso tal como se ha dicho y extraer la sangre o la humedad que se encuentra all, la cual absorbe en el lugar, y luego cura este con un suelo que lo cubra y que consolide la zona.
Captulo XXXIII
Sobre el tratamiento del cncer.
Se ha dicho en el captulo anterior sobre los tipos de cncer y en qu forma es la mejor manera de tratarlo con medicinas, y que es importante cuidar no dejarla ulcerar; se haba dicho que el cncer se produce en la madre o en la cautela de su tratamiento.
Y dicen los antiguos que alguna vez el cncer puede ser eliminado en ciertos lugares donde es posible su extirpacin, como en el pecho o la cara y de all similares en otros miembros, especialmente cuando comienza pequeo.
Pero cuando el cncer se ha vuelto grande y ya no es posible curarlo, no debes preocuparte por l, porque yo nunca pude sanar de este ni he visto a otro hacerlo, ni que lo hayan logrado alguien.
Y la operacin en ese lugar, como se ha dicho, es que debes prepararte y acompaar al paciente y purificarlo de la colera negra algunas veguadas, y luego hervir el sagrado si est contaminado evidentemente.
Y prepara al paciente con la preparacin en la que se haya localizado la operacin, y prohbies los instrumentos quirrgicos que deben estar presentes; y asegura que todo el equipo est bien limpio hasta que no quede ninguna razn para las razones de su ocurrencia. Permtale que fluya la sangre y no hagas abscesiones ligeras de l; presiona los lugares y limpia la sangre gruesa con tu mano o el instrumento con el que puedes acceder a ellos.
Ms si te contrariega el flujo de sangre gruesa en la incisin de una vena o de una arteria, entonces cauteriza aquella hasta que se detenga el flujo de sangre y luego cura esta con otra curacin hasta que se haya sanado.
Captulo LIV
Sobre el tratamiento de la hidropisia.
Se han recomendado antes, en el captulo anterior, sobre los tipos de hidropisia del agua, y las seales de cada tipo, su tratamiento con medicamentos.
Aquella que se puede curar con ayuda no es ms que el tipo nico de alitosis, y no debe tratarse con ayuda para el tipo de timpanitis o el tipo de hiperarquia, porque es mortal.
Cuando ya has tratado este tipo de hidropisia timpanitis con medicamentos y no confirma tu tratamiento, entonces debes considerar si el paciente tiene debilidad o es un paciente con otro tipo de hidropisia como si est en la tos o en el abdomen y similares, entonces debes cuidar que no le trates con ayuda ya que hay miedo a ello.
If you see the patient with excessive thirst and no other illness but dropsy alone, not a child or an old person, then the method of operation for him is that you lift the patient onto your lap, and administer to him the compression of his abdomen with his hand, expel water from below the navel, and take a sponge shaped like this:
It should be of two sharp pointed ends, long and sharp like a sponge, but in some shortness, so that it does not enter the intestine during the operation, and that you remove it afterwards.
Then consider if the production of dropsy is from the intestines, because in that case you must be cautious to separate yourself three fingers below the navel on the right side near the navel.
But if the production of dropsy is due to liver disease, then your separation should be on the left side three fingers below the navel.
If the production is from the spleen, then your separation should be on the right side.
And it is necessary that your separation be over the ribs where you wish to place the patient, so that excessive fluids do not flow to that area.
Then perforate the entire cord with the instrument and enter that separation, lift your hand with the sponge between the cord and the liver, and extract it; if a drop or more comes out.
Then I perforate the liver to where the sponge reaches the location of water. And extract that, then insert an instrument shaped like this: It is similar to a silver thin cannula; it is made of silver or brass or lead, at the lower end of which there is a small hole, and on the sides there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; the tip is inscribed like a feather quill, as sometimes:
And in the exterior part of it, put on the surgeon's apron, for when the instrument reaches the water, then immediately remove it from the instrument, thus evacuating the water in the best possible quantity, for if you evacuate more than necessary at that time, the patient will likely die due to resolution of their animal spirit, or a complication called septicemia approaching death.
Evacuate according to the quantity of its virtue and according to what you perceive about the patient's condition, and the quality of the pulse and their well-being.
Then remove the instrument, and hold back the water that is causing it, as soon as possible seal off the area where you have made the incision, and be careful to follow this procedure.
Then return the instrument to the other day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, do this for some days with caution, and ensure that you do not leave any water but only a little.
But if you fear for the patient and drain a large quantity of water, then care for him with sand baths, massage his body in the sun, and wait a long time; treat him with drying medications until he is cured.
Cauterize the stomach, and the spleen and liver near the water extraction point, as I have previously reported in that which is related to this matter.
Chapter LV.
Of the treatment for infants whose urinary tracts are not perforated. (This line seems to be discussing a medical condition related to infants' urinary systems, but it is difficult to provide a more precise translation without additional context.)
Sometimes, one of the infants is born with a membrane around their belly from the mother and their head's opening is not perforated (or it is narrow or not in its proper place). (This line appears to be discussing a birth defect involving an infant's umbilical cord or abdominal wall.)
Therefore, it is necessary to perform a surgical incision as soon as the infant is born with a thin mouthlike opening in this manner:
Then insert a thin lead wire and tie it in the opening, leaving it for three days or more. (This line appears to describe a method for securing the surgical incision made in the previous step.)
And when the infant wishes to urinate, remove the wire. (This line seems to explain what to do with the inserted lead wire once the surgical incision has healed and the infant can urinate normally.)
And if you do not remove the lead wire, it is possible that the urine flowing over the area will not be able to pass through this opening. (This line appears to caution against leaving the inserted wire in place for too long.)
But if the opening is narrow, treat it with a lead wire as previously described, until it has been widened. (This line seems to provide additional instructions for treating a narrow umbilical cord orifice.)
But in those cases where the umbilical cord is not in its proper place, the infant must be lifted by the tail towards the opening of the vagina so that he can urinate inside it; and this is not for procreation, because semen cannot reach the mother correctly in this position, and this is a serious illness. (This line appears to describe an alternative method for treating a narrow or misplaced umbilical cord orifice, but the translation provided assumes that "partidas" refers to the vagina.)
The method of the operation is that the patient lies on their back, and you grab the tail with your left hand and pull it out with great force, then insert a sharp instrument into the tip of the tail where the umbilical cord meets the perineum (as if piercing a feather), or cut any part of the tail, so that the meconium (the first stool of an infant) comes out like the tip of the tail and the umbilical cord falls into the proper place as needed.
Be cautious in your surgical treatment of bleeding, for this can often happen; and stop the bleeding, and care for the wound until it has healed. (This line seems to provide a general caution about the risks associated with surgical procedures that involve bleeding.)
Chapter LVI.
About circumcision that occurs at the tip of the penis and infections, discoloration, and adhesion of the foreskin to the tip of the penis. (This line seems to describe a medical condition or procedure related to male genitalia.)
Often, this circumcision in the penis results in severe wounding of the flesh. (This line appears to describe a complication that can occur with circumcision.)
One type is malicious and the other is not. (This line seems to distinguish between two types of complications that can result from circumcision, one of which is considered harmful or malicious.)
Not malicious, it is necessary to suspend the wound with a thin thread and drain it until all pus has been removed; then cover the affected area with Egyptian balm; and apply the medication daily until it is healed. (This line appears to provide instructions for treating the less severe complication mentioned in the previous lines.)
If an abscess is malicious and discolored, you must administer cautery near its incision and drain it.
If an abscess is located at the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and one part of the abscess is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, you must incise the abscess from within first, until it consolidates; then take care of the outside part because when you treat the outside at the same time, it's not guaranteed that there won't be a rupture.
And it often happens in the genitals and darkened and corrupted penis, therefore, you must remove all that has been degenerated or is about to become degenerate or already degenerate; then apply linen on it that has been soaked with millet flour and three kinds of powdered and crushed herbs.
Then care for that abscess with another treatment until it is healed.
But if there is bleeding, apply the moon-shaped cautery in this manner:
The moon-shaped cautery can be used in two ways at the same time: for bleeding and for an ulcer when it is rotten.
If the head of the penis is corrupted and completely destroyed at that moment, you must insert a lead cannula into the foreskin so that the patient urinates through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin with the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in one who is circumcised, and it should not be performed on one whose foreskin is healthy; and when adhesion occurs due to ulceration or abscess), you must excise it with a blunt spatula until the pus is dissolved and the head of the penis is released from all sides.
If it is difficult to excise that part exactly, you must excise the head of the penis and foreskin with any cause, because the foreskin, when thin, is easily perforated due to its thinness.
Then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a thin blade that has already been disinfected in hot water so that it does not stick again later.
Then let it heal with a styptic until it is consolidated.
Chapter 77.
On the purification of infants and the treatment of those who have undergone circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution to continuous problems like other diseases: but because it is of our operation and our will, and the need for it is specifically in infants, it is necessary that we assign to it the best operation and easier method to avoid losing health.
Therefore, they did not say circumcision in any of their books because it was not used in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it through experience, the cause being that I have discovered most artisans and barbers use circumcision and mundification with a new knife and with torches; they use soap with water and an incision with the nail.
I have already prohibited all these methods and do not recommend mundification with scissors, soap, water, and an incision with the nail because many times it escapes the skin above, because the skin of the foreskin is double, and one layer remains below, and there is a high risk of another incision and certain pain. And the mundification that is done for alleviating itching and is digital, used by cobblers, is not safe because there is a high risk of incising the tip of the male member.
But in the operation with the nail, you risk injuring and corrupting your operation. The child's belt is naturally short, and it often becomes tight in such a way that it does not require modification, and I have seen that. (or: The child's waistband is naturally small and frequently becomes tight without the need for adjustment, and I have observed this.)
The modifications that are made with scissors and laces on the belt, according to my good experience, because scissors have proportional cuts, so the accuracy at the top is the same as the accuracy below; therefore, when you press your hands proportionately on two accuracies, and cut accordingly in a comparison within a time; and it creates pressure on the belt with the figure containing the entire waist, with which there will be no error from all sides. (or: The adaptations made with scissors and laces on the waistband, according to my good experience, are because scissors have proportional cuts so that the accuracy at the top is the same as the accuracy below; therefore, when you press your hands proportionately on two accuracies, and cut accordingly in a comparison within a time; this creates pressure on the waistband with a figure covering the entire waist, without any error from all sides.)
The method of the first operation is that you make the child remain, especially if it is one who understands a little, that you do not undo his belt except for when you read him into another day. (or: The method of the initial procedure is to keep the child, particularly if he comprehends little, and not to unbuckle his waistband except for when you take him into another day.)
Approach him in every way that is possible for you, to inform him of his condition. Be prepared and remain hidden from sight; hide your scissors in your hand or under your garment so that the patient does not see them nor any of the other tools.
Place your hand on the patient's groin and exhale into the wound, then pull it out when the head of the ingrown hair emerges, and carefully clean it with something appropriate to remove any pus or filth.
The form of the scissors for cleaning, this is its shape:
One of the handles should be non-cutting and the other should be sharp, but they should not touch each other at the joint, and their two cutting edges should have a length equal to that of two hands when closed together.
The mistake in the cleaning is when the wound is forcefully opened too deeply or if you need to make an incision.
Therefore, you must widen the wound gradually with your nail before the incision and make the incision according to the guidelines.
And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it using tweezers and make the incision.
If it persists for more than three days and remains swollen near the ingrown hair, you should wait until the swelling subsides and then carefully remove the swelling with cautery, excise the affected area, and make an incision according to your preparation.
Be careful not to touch the head of the ingrown hair, as it may cause irritation.
And treat the wound with the plaster recommended in the treatment of wounds.
If the incision is made properly and you observe the guidelines, there should be no complications.
And continue to treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter LVIII.
On the treatment of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to stone or blood clot, or tumor or cyst, similar to those mentioned in the section on methods of treatment.
If it is not resolved with the methods mentioned earlier and the condition worsens in the patient, then it is necessary to administer extraction using an instrument called a syringe, whose shape is as follows: It should be made of silver and be thin and long, similar to the cannula of a bird's feather with the same thinness as a finger and a half, and it should have a narrow tube at its end.
The method of emptying the urine with the syringe is to grasp it firmly and place the wool or cotton in its opening for good lubrication; then insert the wool into the area behind the syringe, and if there is any need to cut the cotton, do so using scissors, but insert the cotton into the cannula with force. Then advance the syringe little by little while pushing and pulling the plunger and the stopper at the same time.
Have the patient lie on the bed and apply warm oil to the bladder and groin area, as well as olive oil and garlic.
Approach the cannula with ease until it reaches the urethra opening; then bend the penis upward to the area below the scrotum; and push the cannula into that area; and continue pushing it until it reaches the bladder, which should cause the patient to feel relief from the pain and not be done in this order, but rather have him lie down with his back turned towards you.
Approach the field [area] with fine wool gradually, for urine absorbs the wool.
Extend that area with fine wool gradually for urination treatment, and use a syringe without ceasing to do so until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Chapter LIX.
On the quality of bladder cleansing using a syringe and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
When an ulceration, abscess or congealed blood occurs in the bladder, or there is a hardened stone, and you want to distill waters and medicines in that area, then use an instrument called clampcedra, which has this shape:
If it is muffled on the outside, then it is closed. And in that [bladder] there are three holes: two on one side and sometimes.
At the beginning is a concave area, in which water is introduced according to the amount needed, and when any cause is drawn out of that, it should be pulled out, and when it is expelled, water should be drawn out again, and when it is expelled far, according to the clampcedra used, as is done with a clampcedra made of naphta in naval battles.
Therefore, when you want to introduce moisture into the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the moisture, and pull out with it the water that is pushed upwards, because the moisture is drawn into the concavity of the clampcedra.
And approach the external part of the clampcedra to the perineum according to what we have recommended in the syringe; and push the moisture with water, because that moisture reaches the bladder quickly, and the patient should hold it.
The form of a fine catheter with which the bladder is catheterized, and this is its shape:
And it should be made of silver or lead, the head of which is shaped like a small feather, and below that the cannula slopes gently inward.
And when you want to catheterize the bladder by movement, pause the moisture that you want to catheterize in the bladder, and place it between two with a strong ligature using double thread, and heat up the moisture over the fire.
And approach the external end of the catheter to the perineum.
And apply firm pressure on the bladder with your hand along with the moisture, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
But if the bladder is not present, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; perforate that in its entire roundness; and insert a sharp point firmly into those holes, so that they are turned around; and fill the circle with water, oil and waters as you wish to withdraw from the moisture.
And apply that to the instrument in the same way as you did with the bladder, and express it with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter LX.
On the extraction of stones.
We have already mentioned in the division of stones and their treatment with medicines, as well as the difference between bladder stones and lung stones, and their symptoms.
And we have said that the stone is operated on with the hand and incision.
The bladder stone is precisely the one that is lodged in the bladder.
And we are explaining it with clear and concise explanation.
Therefore, say that bladder stones usually occur in children; and among the symptoms of it is that the urine expelled from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, appears in sand; the patient rubs his penis, moves around frequently, and stands still; and with that, an opening is created at the end of the buttocks.
The healing of children from that is usually within fourteen years; and it is difficult to heal in the old. But in young people, it can be cured with that method, provided.
And if the stone is large and healing is easier, it is favorable to that; but if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we begin the treatment of that condition, first clean the patient with a christening basin which extracts all the fissure that is in their intestines; for that fissure sometimes prevents the emergence of the stone, therefore the investigation of it is necessary.
Then place the patient on their back and make them lie down comfortably, in such a way that the stone descends to the opening of the bladder or jumps out from time to time.
Approach the instrument you have prepared between your hands and the patient's, so that the bladder is fully exposed, descending towards the sides.
Apply force to it and completely open it.
If you feel the stone in the space, then you must cut it out immediately.
And if you do not grasp it all at once with your touch, then it is necessary that you anoint it with oil from your left hand, if the patient is a child, or with flour if they are a young adult, and insert it into their anus. Apply force to the stone as it enters. Turn it little by little into the neck of the bladder.
Then press on it with your hand and expel it outwards through the incision at the bladder opening.
Command the minister to press the bladder with their hand; command another minister with their right hand to extend the thighs to the sides, and with their other hand lift the undercloth that is below the thighs, in the area where the incision is made.
And approach a sharp spatula, of this shape: And make the incision between the anus and the thighs, not too close, moving towards the left side; and the incision should be on the stone, your hand should be in the anus, and the incision should be transverse, so that the incision outside is wide and narrow inside according to the size of the stone that can be removed, but not more, because too much pressure from your hand on the stone causes damage, and it should be avoided with difficulty.
And you should know that some stones have an angle and edges, making their extraction difficult.
And of this stone is one like a peach pit, round, and it comes out easily.
If it is the one with angles and edges, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it is not avoided, then you must press on it or squeeze it gently with a suitable instrument whose end resembles a file against the stone, and do not give up; or insert a subtle instrument of curved end under it.
But if you cannot press on it, then widen the hole a little, and if you see bleeding, cauterize it with distilled vinegar.
But if there are more than one stones, then first press your hand to the bladder opening, and then make an incision; and apply pressure to it little by little; and proceed in the same way with more than two stones.
If the stone is large, ignorance consists in making a large incision, because it harms the patient with one of two causes: either death or it may lead to continuous urine distillation, because the location is not completely consolidated.
But administer the extraction as soon as possible, or introduce forceps into the fracture to remove it in pieces.
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe juice and dragon's blood, and cauterize it. Place a cloth soaked in oil and vinegar, or rose oil and water, on it to promote the cauterization of the wound.
Then raise the patient's head, and do not undo the ligaments for three days.
And when you undo it, wash the area with water and soap, and care for it with antiseptic and diaper salve until it heals.
But if in the wound there is cauterized and corrosive aposteme, similar to if the blood is in the bladder frozen, and because of this urine is prohibited (and that is known as the emergence of blood with urine), then insert your hand into the wound and remove the cauterized blood, since if it remains it causes the bladder to rot and putrefy.
And wash the wound with vinegar and water, salt, and all opposition, using what is appropriate for its healing until it heals.
During the entire course of treatment, keep the patient's thighs together and administer the medication that has been placed on the affected area.
If the stone is small and located in the scrotum and has penetrated into it, and passing urine is prohibited, then cure it with what I recommend before circumcision, because prolonged observation of this treatment is accused of circumcision; and I have already spoken about this, and it is that you take a pointed iron tool, whose form is as follows:
with a triangular extension, sharp, inserted into a stick.
And take hold of a piece of cloth and use it to hold the scrotum away from the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the iron into the scrotum and perforate with ease until the instrument reaches the stone. Turn the perforator with your hand towards the small stone little by little, and you will perform the perforation until the other part penetrates; because the urine is soon released.
And press your hand on the crushed part of the stone outside the scrotum, because it is broken and forgotten with urine; and the patient is healed.
However, if this treatment is not suitable for some reason that prevents it, then hold a cloth under the stone and another cloth over the stone. Then use a hammer to strike the stone in the scrotum between two layers of skin. And then extract it (the crushed part). And then unwrap the bandage and clean the clotted blood from the wound, which is made in the area (around the crushed part).
And there is no need for a cloth under the stone, only to prevent it from returning to the bladder; and the other cloth is not necessary, because when the bandage around the crushed part is removed, the stone will return to its place and the wound will heal.
And in this case, when you remove the cloth over the stone, raise the scrotum above the affected area, or else it will return to its place and cause the wound to heal as I have said.
Chapter LXI.
On the extraction of female stones (or bladder stones).
Stones in women are rarely produced.
But if stones are found in any of these women, their treatment is difficult and forbidden due to many complications.
One reason is that the woman who experiences this condition may be a virgin.
And the second reason is that you cannot find a woman who knows whether she has had sexual intercourse with a doctor or with married women.
The third reason is that you cannot find women who know this art, especially with the operation using an instrument (likely referring to surgical instruments).
The fourth reason is that the location of the incision for removing stones in women is far from the stone itself, requiring a long incision, and this causes fear (in the patient and/or the surgeon).
But if necessity requires it (to perform the operation), then you must take a woman who is well versed in this art and experienced.
But if you lack such a woman, then seek out an experienced and skillful one, or present a mature woman who is well-versed in the art of women's health, or a woman who has divided her time between this art.
Therefore present her and command her to do everything you instruct, from the examination of the stone in its beginning; this is because she should examine whether the woman is a virgin, in which case you must insert your finger into her anus and feel for the stone.
Therefore, if you find that she is a virgin, extract her with your finger, and then command her to insert a probe (likely a thin, cylindrical instrument) over it.
But if she is not a virgin, command the mature woman to insert her finger into the patient's anus and examine the stone, because she should rest her left hand on the bladder and compress it well with good judgment.
Therefore, if the stone occurs in the urinary bladder, it is necessary to gradually guide it from the bladder opening towards the vaginal area with the help of its own virtue until it reaches the cavity of the vagina.
Then insert the probe into that area of the cervix and guide the stone from the cavity of the vagina to a certain position where it is stopped, and place the pointed instrument there without removing it from the hardened stone.
When the incision is small at first, insert the probe into that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the size of the section according to its size, which you know will be broken by it.
And you should know that the types of stones are seeds: for some are small and large, lion-shaped and sharp, long and round, and rough.
So you should know how many types there are for what you are asking about.
And if you want to treat bleeding, adjust the location with vinegar-soaked linen and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your operation until the stone is broken.
And prepare your tools as you have said for the removal of stones in men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
If you want to stop bleeding and know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is pierced, then you pause powder on the spot and press it with plasters and tighten it with a bandage, but do not repeat this, leave the stone alone and do not remove it, for fear the patient will die. Cure the wound.
When the intensity of the bleeding has decreased after several days, and the wound heals over, then return to your operation until the stone is broken.
Chapter 62.
On incision for hernia in the groin.
Hernia inguinal is not simply an accumulation of moisture in the white area below the inguinal ligament that contains the hernia sac, and it is called a hydrocele.
Sometimes it is in the proper abdominal muscle, which is prepared by nature in the inguinal region, until it becomes another hernia; and it is the covering of the inguinal area between the white cyst that we have called hydrocele, but it is not exactly that.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the inguinal region, so that this material collects there, and sometimes it occurs due to injury inflicted on the inguinal region.
And this moisture contains stones that are yellowish, either gradually turning to citrus or blood-red, or red, or black and putrid, or clear white, and it is that which is most common.
And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is located are: if it is in the white cyst that we have called hydrocele, then there is an abscess that is rounded and slightly elongated like a hernia sac, and the inguinal area can be seen, because the moisture contains it everywhere.
And if the moisture is in the proper abdominal muscle, then there is an abscess that is rounded with a part of the hernia sac, and it is considered to be another hernia.
If the moisture is between the inguinal ligament and the white cyst, then make an incision below the center.
In order to know the color of the moisture, you should explore the color of the moisture in the abscess by making an incision through the covering that precedes its shape; and according to the evidence found within the incision, judge accordingly.
Therefore, when we come to the treatment of that with iron, it is necessary to command the patient to be phlebotomized if this is possible for you, and sometimes empty the body.
Then rest on the patient's back for some reason or other, and leave them covered with moist cloths.
Then lie down on the patient's left side, and command the assistant to follow on the right side of the patient, who should extend his arm from two fingers to the inguinal ligament and the edge of the abdomen.
Then take a long probe and divide the inguinal ligament at the midpoint towards the pubic bone.
Make the incision according to the correct angle and distance from the line that separates the pubic bone, until it reaches the white cyst encompassing.
Excoriate that [part], observe, and be careful not to pierce it; and your excision should be made carefully and subtly examined according to the size of the excised area as possible.
Then, pierce the bladder with a wide perforation and drain all the water.
Then separate the two labia of the section with stitches, and extend the bladder at the sides; do not touch the cohana (cervix) or genital walls, and incise the bladder in the manner that is possible for you. Incise that completely or in parts, especially the thin side, for if you do not examine the incision carefully, it is not certain that the water will not return.
But if the wound is processed from outside the cervix at the time of your operation, then when you have completed the bladder incision, return it inside; then sew together the two labia of the cervix of the genitals with stitches, and take care of that wound as with other wounds, until it is healed.
If the wound becomes infected by other disease, it is necessary that you remove the instruments used for suspension and extract the pus, and take care of it with what has been said.
But if the water is added to two parts, know that there are two hernias; therefore incise the part as you did in the other case; and if it appears to be an operation, perform it.
Then you should abstain from blood, and enter into the incisions with wool immersed in oil or oil-soaked wool; then place another wool dipped in wine and oil on top of it, spreading it over two genitals and the abdomen; and place cloths doubled and powdered on top, and let them rest on lint that is made in this way:
and take two cloths and saturate them with wool soaked in lime in this way; and make the ends of these with which you press with cotton or wet wool, and join them with the structure in the belt of the breeches; one end should take the anus from between the thighs, and the other end should take the anus at the perineum, and two ends on each side of the buttocks and two others on the inguinal areas, and the entire incision should be closed with the structure in the belt of the breeches.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cautery in place of incision with iron; and you should take a subtle surgical cautery and incise the cervix of the genitals, and ignite it according to what has been recommended until the white bladder containing water is exposed, and then take caution as follows: and resembles Greek letter.
Then pierce the bladder with it, and let it be ignited until all the moisture is expelled.
Then extend the bladder with stitches, excise it with scissors and excise it with a subtle cautery ignited; incise that as possible until you excise everything; and be careful of the pus that the fire does not touch.
And know that this operation is safer and longer lasting without bleeding than an incision operation.
But if an abscess occurs during the incision or cauterization, or bleeding, it is necessary that you treat the problem that occurs to you according to what has been said.
But if the patient is weak and does not expect a second operation due to its horrifying nature, you should administer perforation as recommended; and when it is certain that you, according to what has been said about the signs, that the hernia is watery.
It is necessary that you place the patient on some raised cesspool, then pierce the abscess in the lower part of it with a thin lance and stop the perforation according to the length of the body.
The opening should be wide enough for all the water to flow out.
And place a cloth on the area and let it lie there, in order for the remaining water to flow out. Take care of that until the wound is healed.
But if there is an obstruction of the water flow when you perforate that: this should not be done unless the white panniculus in the orifice of the wound creates an obstruction and prevents the emission of water, in which case you must put in the wound a pen or instrument with which the water is extracted from the edema, following the prescribed method; or tighten in the opening of the wound a small cloth.
And know that the water returns, and is usually accumulated about six months or later; and when it has been accumulated, you should be perforated according to that method, for the patient will thus pass his days.
Chapter LXIII.
On incision on flesh hernia and its treatment.
Know that in the incision on this hernia there is fear of losing life in the major cases; for which I recommend avoiding it and being saved by another method.
I remember the operation in that [instance] and the properties of abscesses.
The abscesses arise in the bodies that are composed of genitals and are done for various reasons: either due to sudden acute sour fluid being poured into the genitals, or due to injury.
The color of the abscess is according to the body's color, and it does not occur in pain, it is a severe abscess.
A thick-walled abscess is lapified, whose color is dark and not tender to the touch.
Some swellings are made due to the tying of the arteries, and due to inflation of those in such a way that the memory of it is already perceived, or due to inflammation of veins.
However, what is due to the inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your thumbs; it is not necessary to touch it.
However, what is due to the inflammation of veins should not be dispersed by any means due to pressing with your thumbs.
It is possible that on this type of swelling, incision can be made on the flesh and elsewhere; you insert the stitch into the genitals, extend the hernia upwards, extract the white membrane, release the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, tie them, and insert the suspensory stitches where you released it from all parts of the hernia of the hernia.
Therefore, if the hernia is already consolidated with the flesh, then you must extract the hernia and insert it.
If there is an adhesion due to some cause of the white membrane or between the vessels, then you must detach all that adhesion and insert it by round incision.
However, if there is the growth of flesh in the place of the adhesion that is behind it, then you must insert everything that is from it and extract the hernia as we have said.
Once your operation is complete, you fill the wound with wool soaked in warm oil and wine; then you treat it with other treatment until it heals.
Chapter 64.
On the cure of hernia that is due to childbirth.
A hernia due to childbirth is an abscess enveloped by some covering similar to a bladder with the softening of testicles, and it makes difficult exercise, physical activity, and walking for the patient.
In the cure of this illness, there is fear due to which memory is recollected.
However, it is necessary to perform an operation as we did before.
It is necessary that you restrain the patient on an elevated bed; and spread the suspensory ligaments of the testicles at the legs; and hold the genitals with your thumbs near the vulva where they are likely to be found; and have another servant who assists you, and extend them with a strong extension.
And insert a sharp spatula through a transverse incision in the vessels until they are exposed.
And strip all parts of it as we said in the extraction of arteries, which are in the temples.
And insert an awl with double point in that place where the hernia occurs, and pierce it through the first part of the swelling; and pierce the other swelling with another awl at the end of them. And insert the incision again in the same place by a straight incision according to the length of the body and extract what has been accumulated from the foul and rotten fluids.
And treat the wound with treatment for other wounds in which you want healing to be generated so that the veins are not damaged, because it is not harmful for that.
However, if the hernia occurs in all the vessels, then you must extract the testicles or make them blind to the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nutrition through the incision of the vessels, and remain immobile, or made blind so as not to be beneficial for them.
Chapter 65.
On the cure of intestinal hernia.
The appearance of this hernia is due to a tear that extends along the cephalic flexure on the abdomen of the unborn child in the womb, thus causing the intestines from that rupture to pass into one of the intestines.
This rupture is either due to the cephalic or excessive extension of the fetus, and this happens for various reasons: impact, pressure, screams, elevation due to a grave cause, or similar circumstances.
The sign of this rupture, when it is due to the excessive extension of the fetus, is that it happens gradually over a long period and not suddenly, and it is an abscess that forms near the umbilicus because the cephalic presses on the intestine.
The sign of this is when it is due to a tear in the cephalic, as at first it causes intense pain suddenly; and an abscess appears, which seems to be different from the normal one, and this is precisely due to the intestine itself, and the body is swollen near the umbilicus.
And sometimes the peritoneum (the tissue lining the abdomen) is forgotten with the intestine, and this type of hernia is called an entestinal hernia in English.
And sometimes there is a ventosity (gas accumulation in the abdomen), and sometimes the intestine is twisted and retained, and this is very dangerous for the patient, and sometimes it causes bad and intense pain especially when pressed.
And in the treatment of these types of illnesses, caution is required, so it is necessary to avoid hunting in that case.
The method of the operation for that is to command the patient to return the intestine with his hand into its cavity if possible, and support it on his chest and elevate his legs.
Then sew the peritoneum (the tissue lining the abdomen) that separates the testicles from each other, and cut through the entire peritoneum of the testicles along its length; and then insert your fingers into the incision on both sides according to what is necessary to open the incision with them.
And if the incision is large enough that some of it can be forgotten.
Then excise those cephalic regions that are hidden by the peritoneum of the testicles, until the hard white cephalic is exposed from each side.
Then you insert your finger into the testicle, between the white cephalic and the peritoneum of the hernia sac, and separate it from the adhesion that is behind the hernia sac.
Then you grab the peritoneum of the testicles at each side, and with that extend the white cephalic on the sides with your left hand, and elevate the hernia sac to the incision site with the cephalic; and command the assistant to stretch out the hernia sac in front of you and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind it with a complete solution.
And look for any cause of the intestine being enclosed in the hard white cephalic. But if you find a cause for it, then you open the abdomen to examine it.
Then insert through the incision made below the cord of the testicles, where blood and pus will run out as we have recommended in what we have said.
Then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound and wait; then apply the linen bandage that we have recommended (and sometimes a white cord is cauterized, which we said should be placed near the incision to prevent blood flow, since this often happens), and leave the bandage in place until it falls off by itself.
But if the pain persists, then boil water and soak a cloth in it, and place it on the affected area until it falls off as we have said.
Then care for the wound with another treatment for wounds until it heals.
Chapter LXVI.
On Hernia (Swollen Abdomen).
In this hernia, no one has yet been found who has been cured through iron (treatment).
And the first physicians said that it should be treated in this way in the hernia that is visible: you press the vessels near the incision with ease; and you sew up in the same place around the abscess with what opens it, until the vessels fall off.
Care for the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
On the dislocation that occurs in the ankles.
Sometimes there is a rupture in the ankles as we have said, and in that case...
Do not give any cause of hernias to the genitals; and if there is one, it is rare; and it always returns.
But if the time extends with this [treatment], an incision is made in the cord until the hernia returns into the cord; and this happens due to the extension of the cord, which is in the ankles as we have said, causing it to be stretched out, softened, and the area becomes abscessed and protrudes even more.
And the treatment for this is with cauterization, as described earlier.
And sometimes it is cured with iron in this way: and the patient lies on his back between your hands, and you sew up the location of the rupture of the abscesses evenly with a suture according to the width of three fingers.
Approach the white cloth that is under the loincloth where it should be exposed.
Then take the reed and place it on the prominent part of the cloth, and press that area against the abdomen.
Then press both ends of the prominent parts on the edge of the cloth, and fasten them with stitches.
Then extract the end of the reed, but do not incise the cloth from all sides, nor extend the opening, nor create any other cause that you know in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And treat it with the cure of ulcers, and when you incise the wound, clean it and restore the wound to its proper place until it is consolidated; for the hernia is contracted and not adjusted at the site of rupture.
Cauterization is better in this case, as it is near to healing.
Chapter LXVIII.
On softening the scrotum of the testicles.
The scrotum of the testicles in some men is softened by this because the flesh between it is softened, and the treatment is as follows:
Therefore it is necessary for the one who is consulted in the treatment of this condition that the patient lie as comfortably as possible, and incise the entire scrotum which has been softened, leaving only the natural scrotum; then the two labia are to be joined together with stitches.
If you wish, cut away the excess softened scrotum with three or four stitches and a firm suture.
Then make an incision between the stitches; and treat any other wounds until they heal and the sores disappear.
Chapter LXIX.
Castration.
You should know that castration is forbidden in our law, but I bring it up in this book because it is relevant; and its remembrance is only necessary in two cases: the first is when a doctor needs to know about it due to his knowledge of its cure when it occurs; and the second reason is when we have had necessity of castration of other animals for our uses, such as horses, cows, pigs, and similar animals.
And so I say that castration is done in two ways: by strangulation or by incision.
But in the method done by strangulation, the procedure is to restrain the animal in hot water until its genitals soften and hang down. Then grasp them with your hand inside so that they do not reappear afterwards.
But in castration done by incision and cutting, you must hold the animal and press the scrotum of its testicles with your left hand.
Then tie up the suspenders and make an incision through each hole until two holes have appeared.
And then make an incision on those (testicles) that you have cut off. Do not leave any cause for the bladder in it, but remove the bladder that is near the vessels.
This method of castration is better done by strangulation, because strangulation lessens the likelihood that the testicles will be desired by the animal.
Then take care of the wound until it heals.
Chapter LXX (70).
On the cure of hermaphrodism.
In men, hermaphrodism occurs in two ways: one is when there appears a gap between the scrotum of the testicles, where there is a figure like a female vagina with hair.
And sometimes it also occurs that the urine passes from the scrotum of the testicles.
But in women, it is a special case: and it is that the vagina of the woman over the cervix is like two testicles of a man, but much smaller, like the foreskin of a man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three types: two for men and one special type for women. It is necessary to incise the affected tissue and remove the pressure from there, and take care of it with other treatments for other diseases.
In the second type of men who have urine in their scrotum, there is neither cure nor action to be taken on it.
Chapter XXI.
On scrofula (lymphadenitis) and hardened flesh due to female causes.
Scrofula is naturally attached and swells until it becomes large, and in some women it grows so much that it spreads like it does in men, reaching the vagina.
Therefore you must have the excess of liquid from the eye with your hand or oil and be inserted (into it).
Do not insert more than necessary, mainly at the root of the wound, to avoid bleeding.
Then care for that (injury) with its healing until it is healed.
Born flesh is that which grows in the abdomen of the mother until it fills it, and it is called "caudated flesh" by some; therefore we must cut it open like cutting an eye, and heal it until it is healed.
Chapter .lxxii.
On the treatment of scrofula.
Scrofula is when the woman's neck is not perforated or small. And it can be natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to disease that has occurred before, and it is caused by excess flesh or a subtle or thick cyst.
It can be made in the mother's womb, on her ribs, or on the upper or lower part of her body, and prohibit coit, binding, and childbearing, and strongly prohibit menstruation.
The knowledge of that (scrofula) is found by examining the mother, if the opening is obvious, it is palpable; but if it is not obvious, then you search for it with your fingers or the eye.
But if the opening is due to a subtle cyst and it is close to the labia, then you cut and tear it apart.
And place your fingers on both labia, and place your fingers close to the opening, then search for it more deeply later.
The woman should be on her back, her legs extended, and stretch the labia apart with force until the subtle cyst is broken and the opening is open.
And take wool and dip it in oil and place it on the area, and press with a cloth for three days to ensure that the incision does not heal.
But if the cyst is large and thick, then you must cut it open with a lancet or a myrtle leaf.
But if the opening is due to a tumor, then suspend it with oil and cut it open.
And use the medications that stop bleeding without causing pain, such as acacia, dragon's blood, and ennses, mixed with alum of hops.
And provide a wide lead pipe to prevent the wound from healing lightly.
Hold it for several days and administer warm water.
And let it heal with the other healing of consolidation until it is healed.
Sometimes it happens during the mother's delivery of other fleshes, and then you must cut according to this method. But if it is due to cancerous fistula, do not make an incision in any way on the cancerous fistula of the mother.
Chapter .lxxiii.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, of tail and of red boil that occur in the neck of women.
Hemorrhoids are recognized as the openings of enlarged veins from which blood flows continuously; and when old hemorrhoids are formed, they harden.
And I have already said in the division the species of those (hemorrhoids) and the signs of those, and I will say those that receive healing and those that do not receive healing.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and fistulas in the mother's womb and not appearing to the senses should not be healed with iron.
But those that are in the opening of the mother's womb and can be felt, those are the ones that are healed.
It is necessary to put the woman in warm water and stretch her anus with forceps or rough cloth and cut it open with scissors.
And on those you must sprinkle the bleeding of the blood from one of the non-cutting powders without pain, such as acacia and similar to these.
Put your feet in warm water for an hour and hold the area on ice water.
If the bleeding persists, then make a poultice with sumac and milk thistle seeds and walnuts and similar things.
And take barley flour, mix it with honey, wine vinegar, and make a plaster on the patient's back with it.
If the bleeding is separated, it is good; and if not, make it stick with two suction cups, and to the nipples without scratching.
And take wool and dip it in the juice of colandre or the juice of arnagloza or the juice of guarravier with wine and make it stick to the area, and heal the area with ointment until it is healed.
Heal that until it is healed.
Chapter .lxxiv.
On the perforation of an accidental hernia in the mother.
Multiple sores of abscesses happen in the stomach area, such as crabs, abscessed and ulcerated sores, hernias, eruptions, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and other abscesses. And I have already spoken about these diseases and their types and the signs of them, as well as their cures in the division (section).
It is necessary that I say in this treatise about abscess cautery which occurs in the stomach when it comes from abscesses that are filled with pus, and if you want to know what method should be used for its operation with iron (surgery).
Therefore you must consider whether the pain of the abscess at its onset is sharp with impact and pain and fever, and sometimes it swells and if it catches sensation, then do not pierce it, and cure it with what helps in maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms subsides.
Then you must make the woman lie down on a couch that has two couches; and recline on her back and place her feet at the edge farthest from the stomach, and spread her legs apart, and place her arms by her sides, and let each person have what is appropriate to them.
And follow the midwife to the right side and administer the instruments needed to open the stomach opening, the shape of which will come in the circumstances that are appropriate for it.
And it is necessary when administering this instrument that you place the ring finger of the midwife at the opening of the woman's stomach, and what enters the stomach from the instrument should not be more than the size of the opening and not harm the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the opening of the woman's stomach, then it is necessary that you place powder on the texture of the opening of the stomach to prevent the entry of any instrument into the opening of the stomach.
And it is necessary that you stop the flow of blood coming out of the tool of the midwife above and that the person administering it hold the tool and rotate the blood until it is opened the opening of the stomach.
And when the excision is performed, and it is touched with the hand and cut and moistened, then it is necessary that you dry it up with a suction tube.
And when the pus is evacuated, then it is necessary that you stop in the wound a plug submerged in rose oil or oil of roses in which there is some stypticity; and place the cloth in the section on the opening of the stomach.
And cover the stomach and over the penile wool, pure wool dipped in water in which wormwood has been boiled.
And let it be healed for about two days with an enema, which is appropriate until it is cured.
And sometimes the stomach and wound are washed in this way so that it is cleansed with water and honey, and with water in which rosemary or long-stemmed asterisks have been boiled, and it returns to an enema.
And if the wound is deep in the stomach and swollen, then it is necessary that you are forbidden from surgery on it with iron, having a cure for it as I have said in the division (section).
Chapter LXXV.
To teach midwives in what manner herbs should be treated when they are used abnormally according to the figure.
It is necessary for the midwife to know at the beginning the figure of natural childbirth through its signs, and it is that when you see a woman expel at her outlet and desires to smell the air, and above her it is shaved where the birth is from, and she hastens the emergence of the fetus, then you will know that this part is according to natural figure, and it is the top of it on its head, and the second one with it or suspended or hanging from the navel.
Therefore when you see these signs, it is necessary that the woman's belly be pressed so that the fetus emerges easily, because when it emerges on its head, it will deliver the second one, and it should be cleaned of superfluidity with good hygiene.
But if that part is other than natural and unlawful, because when the fetus emerges on its feet and the body of it is born before its head and its feet, and one of its hands or feet is... or it is born with its head and one hand or its stomach, and it turns violently on its neck, and it resembles the figures of those unlawful things.
Therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and discerning in all these matters, and to avoid error and disappointment.
And I am showing the entire figure of these, and what trick is in those for it to be understood and stand for that purpose.
When the birth is on top of its head by natural expulsion, and it is very difficult for the woman and made with difficulty, and the strength of it has already diminished, then you make that incision or what women have, and evaporate the conch of it with fenugreek oil and moist oils.
Approach the hernia between its own small septum and cut it open along the second layer, or dry that one with its nail into where liquid is within it. Push the woman's abdomen until it bursts (or ruptures).
However, if it does not burst, then the woman should be cleaned with chicken broth and fennel water using a scraper (or tool).
Then call for the cleaner (or caregiver), and have them prepare a compress and apply it to make her vomit; and hold her mouth and nose closed for an hour, as the fetus will be forgotten quickly.
If both of the fetuses are forgotten at the beginning, then it is necessary to carefully and gently reduce them one by one. However, if the instrument (or forceps) slips out, then the woman should be placed on a flat surface and her feet raised up, and the forceps should be placed on the ground; the woman must be held so she does not fall during the procedure.
If the masses are not turned inside out and the fetus dies, then incise them and remove the rotten part of the fetus or tie the body to her hand with a cloth and remove it, as it will be forgotten.
When the afterbirth is on the infant's feet, then you should press them upwards, and turn the fetus over, and tie it up, and grab one of its feet and stretch it out little by little.
However, if it has come out between the thighs, then command them to expel it and turn it out with care, as it will be forgotten if God wills it.
If it is not forgotten with the water we have recommended, then you should return the fetus little by little to its natural position, as it will be easily forgotten with a slight movement.
If it is prohibited by everything we have recommended, then take alum water and dissolved resin, grind them well in the mortar, and apply this mixture to the woman's vagina, near the bottom of her abdomen. And place that cedar (or cedarwood) in boiling water until it softens the hips.
When the births are softened (or relaxed), then fumigate it with myrtle and allow it to rest. And when you have fumigated it for an hour, then place it on a flat surface, make it vomit and expel it, and lift it up, and press the lower part of the birth gently with a compress, as the fetus will quickly be forgotten.
Regarding the fetus that hangs from one of its limbs. Either reduce the arm of the fetus, but if you cannot do that, then raise the woman and make her walk around.
If walking is not possible, then place the woman on a bed, and hit her buttocks violently, and provide her with painkillers that I have recommended in the form of medicines (or poultices).
If the labor has begun, then place the woman on a flat surface, and study how to reduce the arm, and tie up the fetus in its natural position, and make her vomit and command her to compress herself until it is forgotten.
Regarding the fetus that extends its arms over the mother's neck and the opening of the birth canal is at the mother's waist. It is necessary that the midwife hold the fetus and turn it little by little with ease.
And when it is tied up, then pause over the affected area using the oil and medicines that we have recommended.
And command her to urinate little by little, and when she has done so, place the cedar (or cedarwood) on a flat surface and have her lean forward on the right side, and command her to compress; and make her vomit with care. Preparation for delivering the fetus on the side.
When the membrane ruptures in this manner (probably referring to premature labor or ruptured membranes), consider it, and then incise the second layer with your nail until it is drained of liquid.
If the person is suspended by the face and neck, then you should incise that area of the navel to ensure it is not retained and does not die.
Then you should gently push the person towards the incision inward until you feel the obstruction stop, and send a woman to hold her a certain number of menstrual cycles, and let him be forgotten easily with God's will.
Birth of twins or many children. You should know that twins are born after a certain number of menstrual cycles, and sometimes three or four are born, but this is rare and difficult to understand; however, it is caused by nature, not by the living.
Count those who are twins, even if they are many, one of them is a premature birth and separated by caesarean section, distinguish between the ligaments in the navel of each of them. And some menstrual cycles are easily forgotten, like something that happens naturally easily, and others are forgotten for an unacceptable reason, as we have recommended.
And if they are difficult to deliver, and you come to the situation we have discussed regarding unnatural figures, then take care of them as we have recommended.
If the midwife is skillful and performs what facilitates and makes subtle and slow, and if she is ingenious according to all figures as she is prepared by the art leading to health.
Recollection that it forms in the womb from embryos and aborts.
Some women give birth every one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and up to ten days, and it must be noted that one woman may give birth to six, another eight, which is caused by the measurement of the wise scholars.
And all this must be in the knowledge of midwifery, for it is a matter of life and death similar to that which we have discussed, and therefore caution should be taken regarding it.
Chapter LXXVI.
On the extraction of the dead child.
When you care for a dead child as we have said in the division of medicine and it is not extraneous, and you are determined to use force, then you must consider if the woman is of good virtue and not among those about whom there is fear of harm.
Then the woman should be laid on her back, with her head lowered and her legs raised.
The attendant should hold one of the two parts or tie them together in the back to prevent the body from extending during the extraction of the child.
Then you should moisten the mouth of the mother with warm oil, aloe vera, fennel, and seeds of rue.
Then the midwife should anoint her hands with those oils and emollients, then insert them into the mother's vagina with ease, and circle around the area where the fingers are inserted in the child.
Choose the appropriate location: therefore you should consider if the fetus is positioned correctly on its head, and then insert your fingers into the heels, neck, mouth, palate, below the beard, at the junction of the spine, or near the ribs, or below the hips (hip bones).
But if it is positioned on its feet, then you should insert your fingers into the crotch or the small of the back.
It is necessary to hold the finger with the right hand, and bend it in the location between the fingers of the left hand, then insert the hand with ease and place the finger into one of the locations that we have mentioned, until you reach the desired outcome.
Then place another finger next to it, or the third if necessary, in order to attract it, but not extend it along its length.
It should be done gently all around, in order that the process is alleviated as much as possible, like when removing a tooth.
It is necessary that in this process the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife should anoint some of her fingers with oil and insert them expertly and rotate those parts that are retained.
If the delivery is forgotten, then the umbilical cord should be tied within a place that is closer [to the baby]; and do this until everything is delivered.
If the navel remains outside the mother and cannot be reduced by traction, then a cloth should be wrapped around it; and draw it out until everything is delivered, and cut the cord at the navel or the umbilical cord.
And in the same way, you must also do this to both hands and feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or there is difficulty in traction on it, or water accumulates around its head, then you must insert a spatula-like instrument called an alundat between the membranes and cut open the head and drain the water, or use an instrument with the name "alundat" to puncture it. The shape of this instrument will resemble those described in the chapter about other instruments.
And do the same if the fetus has a large head by nature: then you must use an instrument such as scissors to cut it, or seize it with the alundat as described earlier; and draw out the bones using forceps.
And if the head is protruding and needs traction, you should break the waters until the moisture in the feet is drained.
But if there are no complications or difficulties, you should cut open the head as soon as it is possible for you to do so.
And if the abdominal wall is protruding or swollen, you must puncture it until the moisture inside it is drained.
But if the fetus is in its pelvis, the traction of it is easy and the direction to the mother's mouth is easy.
But if it is difficult or stuck in the abdomen and pelvis, you must draw it out with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and cut open the abdomen and pelvis until the moisture inside them is drained.
But if the other members remain and the head returns, you must insert your left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is obstructed, you must insert your hand into her perineum, search for the head, draw it towards the mother's mouth, and insert one or two fingers to guide it, and pull it with those.
And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed by an accumulation of pus in the cervix, you must not press on it; instead, you must administer a liquid composed of soothing and moist ingredients. Apply plasters; and continue to immerse the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the fetus is on one side, you should try to pierce it; and administer the liquid mentioned in the living fetus chapter.
If that is not possible, you should cut it into pieces and draw it out.
And do not leave any foreign matter inside the second opening (vagina).
Once you have completed your operation, you should administer the medicine mentioned in the treatment of abscesses that occur in the mother.
And if there is bleeding, you should provide a cold compress and administer the other treatment.
I have once seen a woman in the womb whose child was dead, and over that fire another woman was observed to be burning, and that child was also dead. Once upon a time, there was a man who had an abscess in his navel for a long time; it swelled up until it burst open and began to emit pus.
I was called to treat him, and I treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Then I placed strong plasters on him to draw out the pus, and an object like a bone was expelled from him, and after a few days, another object like a bone was expelled; and I was greatly amazed, because there should be no bones in the belly.
And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead child.
So I healed the wound and extracted many bones from it, but the woman continued to live in this manner for a long time; and then a small piece of arm broke off.
I was not surprised by this, because it is known and helpful in treating what doctors administer with their hands for treatment.
On the forms of the instruments necessary to extract the child.
Form of the spiral with which the mother is opened:
This is the shape of the screw-like forceps in which the fetal limbs are held, with two prongs at each end of two rods. But this instrument should be thinner than a constrictor, and made of wood or bone.
And the diameter of each rod should be two fingers at each end, and the length of each one should be a palm and a half; in the middle of the two rods there are two adjustable rods that have already been fastened, whose length is slightly more than a palm, and the diameter of each one is three fingers or slightly more.
These two additions are meant to be inserted into the mother's mouth so that it can be opened with those prescribed movements.
Make another similar mixture that is more subtle and lighter in texture:
Make it like a plaster of ebony or boxwood, similar to forceps. But on the ends of these two additions, there are to be small holes, and the length of these additions is what equals one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the mother, first press the woman's belly down towards the hanging feet, and open what is between her thighs. Then place your hand on the instrument, like when using forceps, according to the depth you want to open the mother's mouth until it is wide enough for the child to pass through.
The kind of herb that the ancients called...
The kind of stimulant that causes the fetus to move:
The kind of emetic that dissolves large heads (i.e., cysts)
It is similar to forceps, with teeth at the end, as sometimes it can be made long like forceps according to this form, and sometimes short, like the teeth of a saw, with which it is cut and dissolved. The kind of emetic in small amounts:
The kind of unguent with a sharp point:
The kind of unguent with two sharp points:
The kind of spatula with two ends to separate the head:
The kind of two long spatulas:
All these instruments are used, and when many of their species are multiplied and prepared, the craftsmen must make them as light as possible for their operation and as small as possible according to their size.
And do not neglect the use of these instruments, because their necessity is not an excuse.
Extraction of the afterbirth (placenta).
When the afterbirth is retained, you must command the patient to strain, and make them vomit with hot water or some other means, and place your hand over their mouth and nose, and if this is outside, that's fine.
And if not, you take a wave (seaweed) and pierce a hole in the membrane with a sharp tool, placing herbs such as calmant, ruda, anet, camomilla, scicados arabici, cassia lignea e santoreal inside. All these herbs or some of them are soaked in water and placed over the fire.
Then place a tubing made of cane in the mother's mouth and keep it until the vapor reaches the cavity of the mother.
Then make them vomit as I said, and the afterbirth will be expelled quickly.
But if this treatment remains and is not expelled, you command the midwife to immerse her left hand in oil of sizzling or micellage d'alti, then insert it into the uterus and search for the afterbirth, and when you find it, take it out little by little, making sure that the mother does not contract too strongly. It must be bound tightly on both sides (right and left) with ease.
If the mouth of the mother is narrowed (contracted), we have already recommended the cure with a purgative and oil medicine with herbs.
But if all causes that we have recommended are not forgotten, then you must be careful not to repeat the removal of it in the process of extraction (abstracio), but rather that what comes out of her mouth into the woman's cavity should be placed in a cushion and treated with ointment and four-medicine; for this will make it ripe within about 3 days, dissolve it, and it will be forgotten.
But when it ripens, the bad humour rises to the head and stomach, and the patient suffers from this; therefore, appropriate fumigation and suitable remedies should be administered.
But among the ancients, it has already been said that fumigation with cinnamon and dried figs is useful for this.
The shape of the instrument by which the woman is fumigated must be designed to stop menstruation and second flow (postpartum bleeding).
It should be made of metal or wood.
The thin end should be pointed towards the woman and the wide end towards the fire, and fumigation should be stopped over the arms of the fire.
It should have a container within which the fumigation is consumed and another one is placed.
Treatment for an unperforated child's bottom (Rectal treatment).
In children who are not circumcised and whose anus is not perforated, the feces should be softened and lubricated. Therefore, the midwife should perforate this anus with her finger or, if not, perforate it with a sharp sponge and make sure she does not touch the rectum.
Then place a cloth soaked in vinegar and oil over it, and treat it with anointment until it is healed.
But if there is concern that it may become blocked, place a tube (canula) in it for several days and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
It also happens that the anus becomes blocked due to ulcers or abscesses, therefore, the consolidation should be incised, and it should be treated with what has been said about cure and lead.
Treatment for fistula that causes discharge (fistulous discharge).
Fistulas that cause pus-filled nodes (abscesses) near the anus or in the space of one parturition (childbirth wound).
It is a fistula or a mass.
And when that node is old and has turned into a moist, foul-smelling white or subtle pus, some of these fistulas can penetrate.
And these penetrating ones are recognized by what comes out of them through the exit and by their foul odor; and sometimes the patient uses the evacuation, but it is very dangerous to come into contact with the worms that come out of them.
And sometimes these fistulas can penetrate into the bladder space, into the muscle of the vagina, and into the union of the cavity and neck of the bladder.
And that which is recognized as a penetrating fistula in the anus and non-penetrating fistula, it is when you place your finger in the anus, and try to insert a thin probe of wood or iron into the fistula when there is no danger.
But if there is danger in that, then you should insert a thin probe of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair in your finger.
And if you do not feel it at all or do not obtain any cause of evacuation, worms, or foul odor as we have said, then you should know that it is non-penetrating, and you should take care in the treatment.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or muscle of the vagina, the significance is clearly that it is urine from that place, and you should avoid using that area for any treatment.
But if it penetrates into the union of the cavity or into the bone and encounters pain in the area, then the sign is that the probe penetrates into it if there is no danger to the bone; and this causes pain during childbirth, which becomes purulent very quickly; and it is not valid for treatment nor is it consolidated with ointment.
And in all these penetrating fistulas, there is no cure, and the cure of those is hard work and disappointment for foolish doctors on whom it depends.
But in that which is non-penetrating and not old, healing with iron is hoped for as I have recommended to you, and what I have already proven.
And the patient should lie down between your legs and elevate his legs towards you, the thighs should be inclined towards his abdomen, and then insert a probe of lead or wood if there is no danger in the fistula into the place where the probe can be felt.
And if the patient feels pain around the neck, then you must enter your hand into the neck.
If the patient feels pain in your hand and there is a swelling or flesh there, you will certainly know that it is penetrating; and do not work on it, because it is not healing in that way, as has been said.
But some say that it heals in some men after a while.
And the medicine for which healing is expected in that place, you must ignite a cauter with a size appropriate to the fistula, as has been described, and insert it into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; then repeat this two or three times until you know that all the surrounding flesh connected by the fistula has been cauterized and sealed off like a feather from a bird.
Then cure that [abscess] with bandages wrapped around it until all the surrounding flesh connected to it has healed, and then cure it with medications to regenerate and consolidate the flesh; if it is healed, that's good; otherwise, it will not heal within a certain time using other treatments.
If the patient's intestines are inside and do not penetrate the anus, and there is a swelling or tumor of flesh between the intestine and the anus, and sometimes a fistula appears on the surface of the coccyx (tailbone), you should dry the coccyx from the beginning of the fistula, and watch as it dries along with the tumor; and if the drying reaches the location where the end of the tumor is, then the tumor will be freed and can be caught.
Then clean those fistulated tissues that resemble feathers from the quill of a bird and do not remain for any reason.
But if pus flows out between you and your operation while you are cauterizing the tissues, then use a millet (small seed) or a light instrument to cauterize with fire or an acid, because cauterization with fire is beneficial: it seals off the affected tissues, and drains the pus by coagulating the fluid.
Then cure that [abscess] with bandages wrapped around it or with a wooden splint until the wound has healed, and then heal the sore with tough meat to promote healing and recovery.
And use medications that cause contraction and drying; when it is restored, it will be healed and there will be no recurrence (relapse).
But if the fistula has already penetrated into the rectum and is prolonged on the surface of the body, you must enter your hand into the anus and examine it.
And so if you find that the tumor is swollen with flesh or tissue and seems close to penetration, then it should not be operated on but rather treated through faith and hope.
The cause can be treated in one of three ways: either cauterize it as previously described; or cut it open until you achieve a concavity that allows you to enter the area and perform the necessary treatment; do not proceed with cutting unless you are certain that the rectum is empty, and take care not to harm the patient excessively by forcing your finger into the anus against their will; instead, treat it as previously mentioned, for it has a strong tendency to heal; or extend the swelling and clean the pus that has accumulated around the anus, as previously described, or with a sharp instrument of pointed tip, and then clean the infected tissue around the fistula during the incision, and then work on the restoration of the entire sore, and if the opening of the abscess does not heal properly and the fistula remains open at the edge of the anus, it will be more easily disseminated throughout the patient's body. And sometimes the fistula is closed by this method: when you insert your finger into the fistula, it will be on the side of the anus around the surface of the body with the coccyx and at the edge of the anus, you should then grasp a pointed instrument like a needle for preparing the corpse in this way:
He enters into that faithful envelope of veins or around those; and tries to enter faithfully into the fistula until it achieves its cavity.
If you penetrate into the margin of the anus properly inside, then you extract the fistula from that tract thus, entering your finger into the anus; and draw out the end of the fistula and adjust its two ends together, tightening each one, and let it be for a day or two, and when the fistula penetrates more into the flesh, tighten it inside where those fleshes are indented which are between the two ends of the fistula.
Then care for the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
But if the openings of the fistula are not penetrating, then make it penetrate using any means you have at your disposal, except that it should not be too deep, because it is not your task to cause harm; and heal it until it is cured.
The shape of the pointed spatula used to cut the fistula: the curvature of which is sharp on one side and concave on the other, so that it does not penetrate more than necessary, as sometimes happens.
Sewing of hemorrhoids where bleeding occurs during their incision.
Hemorrhoids are of two types: either they are like coal-like (protruding) or they are like fatty tumors (growing outwardly). And some are small and large, and bleeding occurs from them all the time (continuously), and they are single, and some are multiple, and external to the anus, and at their ends.
But those that are external to the anus, follow a period of little humidity, where clear water or a small amount of blood with continuous flow occurs, and their color is determined by the body's condition.
The treatment of those that are inside the anus is to instruct the patient to sit down and wait until the rectum dries out, and the hemorrhoids appear for you. Then you take one or more sutures with the needle and thread you have at hand, and carefully make an incision in them.
But if the stitches are not available due to their humidity and softness, then take those with rough fabric or cotton or wool floss, and draw them out with your fingers, and make an incision in them and sprinkle some healing powders near the incision (to act as a substitute for cauterization), or cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterization. And heal those with other treatments until they are healed.
And if the anus does not obstruct excretion, you cauterize the patient with a small clyster (enema) that is made of a liquid that eases excretion slightly when the patient squeezes.
But if the hemorrhoids are external to the anus, the cause of them should be addressed easily: either you take those with your finger, or you use stitches and make an incision in them; then heal them using the method described earlier until they are cured.
For those who require incision, it is necessary to administer sutures in the following manner: take a pointed instrument and introduce it into the hemorrhoid using a needle; then extract the hemorrhoids at the top, and make the pointed instrument penetrate through the other side of the hemorrhoid with the needle, and wrap the two ends of the instrument around the point below the needle, holding them together (laterally); tighten the hemorrhoid using a strong stitch, and then tie the pointed instrument and remove the needle.
Do this to all of them, and leave one of them open (without stitching), so that the excess blood can flow out from it.
Approach and place a cushion soaked in red oil or wax on the backside; place it on the lower back and command the patient to rest. Approach that which is inside the box; and when it is broken, heal it with medicine or some other cure until it is healed.
And since they are ancient and not worth the medicine, it is necessary that you cauterize those with a spatula or your fingernail into wet areas and hold them in place to prevent the seepage of pus on top, which prevents consolidation; and then heal those when they have consolidated.
Remove those with very strong pus before the first day and let them dry out; then heal those when they have healed.
Know that alamermar is essential, and it is not if the body has a red spot like a nail head, and it occurs throughout the body and especially in the lower parts of the back and the sides, and it must be treated according to the pain.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut the area around the nail and hold it with forceps or oil, and then remove its root; heal that area.
And if you wish to, cauterize the following that are mentioned in your chapter.
A wart is a small, rough, round fistula on the surface of the body, and many occur in children.
The treatment is to extend and incise the wart, or to press it with a file or pumice stone into its cavity. If you wish to, cauterize that, as we have said, with fire or sharp medicine.
A flea is a small, furrowed or large fistula on the surface of the body that does not appear on the forehead, and when it is touched, it becomes like the bite of a flea, and it occurs around the body.
The treatment is to take a hollow reed or cane pen, and it should be strong, and place it over the flea so that it is contained by the circles of the cane on its sides; then rotate your hand with the cane around the area where the flea is, and press it into the skin so that you incise the area around the flea, and press it in the part of the skin, and remove the flea from its root.
And if you wish, do it with an iron or steel cannula in this manner:
The end of the cannula is to be made thin, blunt (not piercing), covered so that its tip can be lubricated and rotated around it.
If you wish to cauterize the worm as mentioned in the cauterization of athlete's foot in the chapter on cauteries.
In the manner of instruments that are administered for incision.
Sometimes incisions are made with silver or lead or melted metal cannulas; and sometimes they are made with small and large instruments according to those who administer them, for the one that is administered in the treatment of infants should be small; and the ones with narrow or painful anuses, the cannulas of those should be small.
The form of a large and shallow incision:
The head of the cannula above, where the bag is tied, should be wide according to this method; and it should have a marking where the bag is tied in such a way as sometimes occurs.
The extremity below, which is inserted into the buttock, should be closed (meaning not open), carefully; and on one side there are two incisions, and on the other side one incision, and the width of the incision should correspond to the thickness of the rays, and the larger the rays, the smaller it should be.
The bag in which the bladder medicine (animal or sheep's wool) is placed should be one handspan in size.
It should be pierced with many small incisions in a rolling manner, and if the space between these incisions is wide, make it thicker (meaning larger).
Place a suture (stitch) in these incisions firmly using strong thread, or around them; adjust the bag to this suture; and when the bag is placed there, it should be tight at the head of the bladder between two distinct points with strong tension, and suture each incision: But the quality of suturing is that you fill the bag with medicine (medication), heated according to the patient's tolerance; ensure it is not too hot or too cold.
Then place the patient on their back, raise their legs and place a cushion under them or a pillow; then anoint the incision area with oil or alum of horehound (an herb) or mustard plaster, or something similar; then gently insert it into the buttock with ease, and have the attendant take the bag and squeeze it twice and forcefully expel everything that is in the bladder out through the intestine; then remove the bladder and the patient raises their legs to the wall.
If the medicine leaks out of the bag, it should be enough; and if it stays there for an entire night, it is more effective in helping.
But if you suture (stitch) it in patients with bowel resolution and the discharge from it fills up, then you repeat the cautery until it heals.
And if there are hemorrhoids or ulcers in the buttocks, make a thick and blunt suture (stitch), which is called a simple stitch for children.
On the treatment of sores.
I have already explained in the division of the treatment of sores what is suitable for the free person, and now I will explain the treatment of those with more severe conditions and medications according to the needs.
Therefore, I say that sores are diverse according to what causes the sores and according to the location where the sores occur.
And the causes of sores are often due to injuries such as falling on stones, or cuts from a sword, or a spear, or by beating with a club, or whip, or arrow, and similar causes.
But sores that occur on the parts of the body are such as a sore that occurs on the head, neck, feet, abdomen, back, and similar to those on other body parts.
And I recommend the treatment of some sores based on this reasoning and rule for other sores.
And I will begin with simple sores on the head, for a discussion of complex sores will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say that when a simple sore occurs on the head, but it is not a fracture, you should consider: if it is caused by falling on stones or something similar and the wound has already been sewn up (stitched) and is large and there is concern about an abscess developing in the patient, then immediately lance (open) the cephalic vein (the largest vein in the head), and do not delay it; and let blood flow out according to the strength of the medicine, unless there is any cause prohibiting venous lancing, especially if the blood that comes out of the sore is scant.
And the lancing should be on the opposite side of the affected area; and ensure the patient is kept away from food, drink, and heavy meals.
But if any cause forbids the patient from eating, then reduce their food and do not give them meat or wine.
Wait on the sore if an abscess forms, cover it with rose oil or wine that has been treated with astringents (a substance used to tighten tissue and reduce inflammation).
But if you are certain that an abscess has formed, then wait on the sore, if it is recent with fresh blood and the air has not changed the powder I will recommend using a small amount of.
And if the air has already changed [i.e., passed], then wait over certain wounds until they are healed.
But if the wound is large or caused by incision of space and not properly closed with lips, then close it with stitching according to what I will recommend regarding stitching them.
But if the wound has exposed the bone and flesh, and is not held in place except for a small support, then incise it and care for the wound with medicines and restore the flesh to its original location, and instruct the patient to eat foods that are rich in groats: oats and similar grains, until it is healed.
And if the flesh decays and does not adhere to the bone, then you incise everything there and clean it, and care for it.
But if in these wounds it is an artery or vein from which bleeding may occur and has not been separated by medicines, then you explore the artery, and if that unincised artery is decayed, you incise it with a lance or a probe; and if it is necessary for what I have said to not conform, then you cauterize until the blood is separated.
And if these wounds are simple and small, their cause is light; therefore, sprinkle this powder on them, as it solidifies before the air changes them.
The method of the powder is as follows: mix one part olive oil, two parts dragon's blood oil, three parts not-extinct herbs; grind everything and sieve it, fill the wound with it, and tightly bind it with good constriction until it adheres to the bleeding, and coagulate it with the blood.
Then apply a thick layer of pulverized material over it and let it dry, and do not loosen it until it is healed, as the medicine will not be absorbed into it before it is healed.
And sometimes you perform cautery alone, when olive oil and dragon's blood are not present with you.
Now perform this method of treatment on large wounds when it is necessary to wait over them and tighten them, and on recent wounds with their blood, which the air has not yet altered.
And if the air has already altered them, especially during the summer months, do not apply this powder to that position, but instead care for those wounds with what I have said, allowing some wounds to heal on their own, or allowing those wounds coated with lime plaster to heal; and treat those with other remedies until they are healed.
But if it is a broken bone wound, which is small, you extract it with forceps.
I will explain the treatment of head fractures that are poisonous.
Treatments for the neck.
But if the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment from the simple head wound.
But if the nerves or artery in the neck have been incised, then if it is a nerve, do not apply remedies that cause violent stiffness, such as zinc and glass, which are harmful to the nerves and contract them. And do not allow anything to freeze the wound, as the substance of the nerves is cold and its continuity is with the brain, which is the most vital part of all members.
And if it is to be treated with light medicines such as being washed with sweet water, occasionally infused in rose oil or not, and also when being washed with sweet water and the other poisons are removed according to this method, and open wounds.
But if the wound is large, you administer stitching or sew the lips of it, and treat it with powder until it is healed.
But if the wound is deep or has occurred in the lower part of the foot and coated with plaster, you perforate it in the most depressed location.
But if the artery has been incised in the wound and bleeding is obtained, then separate or dry it, lance it, or cauterize it if necessary to do so.
But if the tendons of the hock or all of them have been incised, and the veins of the neck are saved, you close the lips of the thigh with stitching on the shinbone and do not touch it; tie a knot there and return it to its natural shape, and tighten it with proper binding, and let it dry for several days; and treat it with poultices that cause stiffness and excitement until it is healed.
But if the wound has penetrated into the bone in danger, you strike it, and if there are fragments of bones, remove all that can be removed; leave what is not accessible to it until the wound festers, and separate it and the pain from the area should be relieved.
And if the wound is recent, sprinkle powder on it as I have recommended. If in the wound a fistula is made, then cure it with what will come to mind related to its treatment, as remembered in its own chapter.
If it is a wound from a lance or sword and at times deep, then consider more if the wound has stench when the patient complains of it; then you should know that the wound is fatal.
If it is not deep and the wound is recent with fresh blood, then you pause in that place for the first hour with powder, and do not press it to prevent the blood from being retained in the depth of it and returning to the heart and causing the patient pain, but rather pause on a soothing attractant, and dissolve it twice a day.
And if the wound is not draining, then you pause on the orifices of the wound with old cotton to draw out the moisture from it; and have the patient sleep on the wound so that the water trapped in it runs out.
But if three days or more have passed since the wound occurred and no spasm, tremor of the heart, palpitations, or other good conditions do not occur in the patient, then you should know that the wound is healed; and then treat it with warm compresses and other healing treatments until it is healed.
But if the healing of the wound is delayed and it remains open for a long time, then you should know that a fistula has been made; so cure it according to its own chapter.
If the wound is from a spear or sword and is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with what comes before stitching (if large) or powder (if small).
But if there is a sign of bone involvement and the bones have been struck (fractured), then you twist the wound and draw out the fragments, if they are separated. But if the fragments are not separated, you should make an incision to open the wound as it makes the removal of the fragments easier.
And for other wounds occurring in other members, the remedy and healing is the same as that which has been said above.
On wounds of the abdomen.
The disorder that occurs in the abdomen may be large, small or medium-sized.
A small disruption is difficult to repair in another way, and it is known that the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not take care of their insertion back into their place quickly, as they swell and thicken making the insertion difficult.
And therefore, the best type of hernia is medium-sized, because in that case it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, unlike the two types mentioned above (large and small).
And you should know that stitching the abdomen is done according to four methods, but two of them are common and are used in stitching other wounds on the body.
And two other methods are specific to other wounds, but they are more specifically used in abdominal stitching.
I recommend that you expose and explain this matter (the treatment of hernias) to everyone.
Thus say that when the wound is small and there is a cause of the intestine due to it, and it is difficult to reduce the intestine, this is in one of two ways: either because of the small size of the hernia as we have said before, or because inflammation of the intestine has come from the cold air.
And therefore, when this is the case, it is necessary that you warm the intestine by immersing a sponge or cloth in hot water only, or taking it in warm water, and cumin, pepper, and bind it with twine into the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes it happens that this [affliction] is found in which there is stiffness, and it is better to use water alone for its resolution.
And therefore you wet the intestine with water containing alum and mallow, since by this the inflammation is relieved little by little.
But if the inflammation is spreading and the intestine is protruding from its place during this treatment, then you should make a small incision with an instrument for this purpose using scissors.
The initial treatment is better when it is not cut, and it is not necessary to make an incision unless absolutely required due to lack of other remedies.
Of the instrument, take its shape:
The sharp angle of the tool should be acute, while the other angle should not be blunt, and the tip should be fine but not too thin, with a slight obtuse angle.
And so when the wound is enlarged and the intestine comes out, its reduction should be in a way that follows its natural shape, in its proper place, if possible on top of it, as this is better.
But when the hernia is wide and located in the lower part of the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs as far apart as their head; if it is in a higher part of the abdomen, you should lay the patient's head down and feet further apart.
And in the same way if the hernia is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, you should direct your attention and consideration always to the side where the wound is located, so that the side on which the wound is located is further apart from the other.
And thus you should treat both large and minor wounds.
And for small wounds, prepare what you need and ensure that the assistant is among your most trusted ones, who will hold the hernia with their hand and adjust the edges of it, and also cover one over the other to prevent any cause of separation during suturing.
This is the common method of suturing: Take an awl, or a needle according to the size of the wound; then hold it with the tip of the hernia, but do not insert the thread into both ends of the needle, instead take one end and leave the other free, so that you do not place the knot on the inside of the edges, until you pass it through the other side; once you have added two ends of the thread and the ends of the skin, it will be four orders.
Then strengthen the thread with a double knot around the needle, sometimes from both sides together, and bring the two edges and the wound together by appropriate tension; then let go of the thick part and insert another needle through it, and tie it in the same way as the first needle; do not stop until all the contraction of the wound has been completed with the needles.
And needles should be neither too thin nor too thick, as very thin needles easily penetrate the flesh; and thick ones are difficult to pass through the skin, so they must be of medium thickness.
And the needle should not be inserted into both edges of the adjacent skin too much, so that the flesh is not easily penetrated and the wound heals before its consolidation.
And do not prolong the suturing to prevent the wound from consolidating.
And insert the tips of the needles so as not to irritate the patient while they sleep; and place pulvils expanded on all sides over the suturing, which will hold the tips of the needles; leave them in until you know that the wound has consolidated.
And this type of suture with needles in the method described is more suitable for small wounds, as it can handle the suturing of one or several needles around them.
But the second method of suturing is common: and it consists of applying four edges, two from the skin and two from the underlying tissue, at once, using a needle that has both ends tied in thickness and fineness.
And when the needle has penetrated these four edges, withdraw it slowly from that side of the wound where you started, to draw out the thread subcutaneously around the wound, so that the stitching is similar to sewing fabric, with the threads reinforced.
And pause between each stitch the amount of thread required for the knot.
And this suture is known to men.
And with this suture, I closed a wound that had occurred in a man's abdomen, who was injured by a sword, and the hernia was larger than a palm, and it was near two palms from the intestine of the same location and was located in the middle of the member; and after 24 hours, I reduced it after the intestine had been out of the wound.
The wound was healed in the space of fifteen days or more, and it was cured and healed; and it lived for many years and was maintained in its condition, and it was preserved according to its dispositions.
Other doctors had judged that it would not be healed; and by miracle, for I did not heal it myself, since it was in a place where neither any remedy nor any medicine was found, but rather you placed a dressing on the wound twice daily and washed it with water of honey until it healed.
But I will tell two types of suture according to the narrative of the Word.
And it is that you begin with the suture of the tendon, and pierce the needle from outside to inside through the cut.
And so, when the needle penetrates the tendon and in this way it passes through the entire body, leaving the tip of the needle in the place where you have pierced it; and make the other end of the needle pass through the other extremity from inside to outside on the other side of the ligament.
And so, when you have made it penetrate (the needle), you should make it pass through the other opening of the ligament from inside to outside on the same side where the tip of the needle is; and leave the end that is in this place, and pierce the needle again on the other side from inside to outside.
And make the piercing pass through with your piercing, which passes through the ligament at the point where it enters into the bone.
And so begin this incision on the side of the ligament and cut it with the point that is at the end of the ligament on the other side, and remove the needle from the tendon which penetrated, and return to the same tendon and close the end of the ligament on that side with this opening; and remove the needle from the tendon on the other side.
And do this once and again, and do it again as soon as you sew everything that is outside according to this example.
The total of this method of suturing is that you sew with suture of skins, in the way that you sew the ligaments, but you sew the ligament once from the side of the tendon, and leave the other side uncovered until it is completed.
But the second type of suture according to Galen, which is from him and is highly recommended, is that you sew as follows: all parts are placed side by side according to their nature; and the ends of one part are applied to the other end of the other part, and this is done as I have advised.
It is necessary that the needle is placed in the end of the ligament towards the outside of the cut, and make it pass through to the inside only at that place, and leave two ends of the ligament; and turn the needle over and make it penetrate from outside to inside on the other two ends of the ligament.
Approach each abscess, and make each of them penetrate from the inner partition to the outer partition into two opposite extremities along the longitudinal axis.
This method of suture is better than common light sutures and is the one which comes before remembrance (remembrance or memory stitch).
This is the sermon of Galen (a famous ancient Greek physician)
This is said to some, the suture of the abdomen is corrected with two needles, so you enter each of them with a faithful one and start with the insertion of the needle from which you are coming out, and make it penetrate into the other side following the suture of those who sew the heart together. (This seems to describe a method for correcting a hernia or abdominal wound using two needles.)
Know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, the suture of it is more difficult than in other places of the abdomen.
The treatment for wounds (plague) is judged like other wounds (plagues). (This suggests that the methods used to treat one type of wound are similar or comparable to treating other types of wounds.)
The cause is that when you acquire the recent wound with its own blood before the air changes it, and reduce the swelling and close the wound appropriately, then you pause over the carnative powder (a medicinal powder). (This passage seems to describe a sequence of actions for treating fresh wounds.)
And if the air has already altered the wound, then you pause over those ointments which are present nearby until they become solid and the needles enter and consolidate, and watch it; and take care of that in this way as is the care for other wounds until it is healed. (This passage seems to describe additional instructions for treating wounds, specifically when the air has already affected or altered the wound.)
And if you are not present with the medications, then pause over that as soon as possible, because it begins to get worse, old flesh, and change it every two days, as you have taught me, until it is healed, for you do not need another medication in most cases when the wounds are simple. (This passage suggests that if a patient is unable to obtain the prescribed ointments, they should still apply a fresh dressing every two days as instructed by their physician.)
And if you fear that the wound communicates injury to the main limbs, then you must submerge wool in boiled oil of quality or rose oil and apply it in the circle of the areas between the joints and leave it there. (This passage suggests a method for treating wounds that may have spread or affected the major limbs.)
And if there is pain or putrefaction in his intestines, because it often turns out to be, then you must cauterize that with white vinegar (or another strong acid) and more so if the pus has reached the intestine and a discharge penetrates into its cavity. (This passage seems to describe a method for treating severe intestinal infections or abscesses.)
You should know that the one from a large intestine has a lighter cure than the one in subtle intestines. (This passage suggests that larger intestinal problems may be easier or less severe to treat than smaller ones.)
It is difficult to heal because the intestine which is called "gegunu" does not receive healing by plague that enters it completely; and this is due to the large number of veins that are in it, and the size of it which is in those areas, and the subtlety of its tissue, and its proximity to the nature of nerves. (This passage suggests that the intestine known as "gegunu" may be difficult or even impossible to treat if an infection or disease enters completely.)
And if the tissue that comes from the wound is linen, and you obtain it recently, reduce it according to your judgment as you sew together the intestines. (This passage seems to describe a method for treating wounds involving linen or linen bandages.)
And if it has passed a long time and it has turned green or black, then you must tighten that with a needle over the area that is discolored by it, to bring out blood flow, because in linen there are veins and arteries. (This passage suggests that if an infection or wound has gone untreated for some time and turned dark or greenish, it may still be possible to treat it using surgical methods such as stitching.)
Then you approach that which is other than the linen, and pause two extremities of the needle hanging from the opposite side of the wound openness so that above it is relieved the attraction of it; for the removal of the tissue and emission of the blood from the wound you cut the linen and the flesh around the wound. (This passage seems to describe a method for relieving an infection or wound by cutting away the surrounding linen and flesh.)
Rememberance of wounds when they happen in the intestine. (This phrase seems to indicate that the text is discussing methods for treating wounds or infections in various parts of the body, with a particular focus on intestinal issues.)
When a rupture occurs in the intestine and it is small, it may be possible to restore it with certain men, because I have seen one who was plagued in his abdomen by puncturing with a lance and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had developed into a fistula (an abnormal passage between two organs), and pus and gas escaped from it. (This passage suggests that small intestinal ruptures may be treatable through surgical intervention, but it also describes a case where the injury has become chronic or complicated with the development of a fistula.)
Then continue the cure of him, since it was not yet confirmed in his healing, but continues to refine that within which fire heals and the place is consolidated.
And when the place is consolidated, attend to the patient who has suffered from an accident in his stomach; and let no one suffer from this unfortunate accident due to improper eating and drinking, and let them rest in bed and exercise as advised by the doctor.
And some experienced ones say that when a hernia occurs in the intestine, and it is small, it is necessary to tie it in this way: take large breadcrumbs; place the two lips of the hernia together and place one of them on top of the lips of the hernia; then, when you grasp the breadcrumbs and tighten your mouth, remove the head from it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
And place another breadcrumb next to the first one and do not stop making more breadcrumbs according to the size of the entire hernia.
And tie the breadcrumbs together and sew up the hernia; let the attached heads remain in the intestine until the hernia is healed; and do not cause harm to the patient in any way.
And it is possible that the intestine can be tied with a thin suture made from an animal's intestine, since it is thinner; and you should take the extremity of these fine sutures from the animal's intestine, and ensure it is well-cleaned, and tie the extremity of it with the suture, wrap it, and sew it into the intestine using needles, and reduce it in the rupture.
This method of sewing with breadcrumbs is not just by faith and hope.
But if the hernia is large and wide, especially in one of the subtle intestines, then it is not enough to simply tie it or sew it up; it is necessary to make an incision and remove the excess tissue for proper healing.
Treatment for abscesses and fistulas.
You should know that every hernia and abscess, when it becomes old and hardened, turns into an ulcer, does not consolidate, and continues to grow without being drained, then in any member, universally, it is called a fistula and we refer to it as an abscess.
A fistula, in truth, is a hardened nodule, white and painless with a cavity similar to the concavity of an ulcer; for this reason it is also called a hardened abscess, meaning ulcer.
And it is in some men that the abscess becomes wet and grows larger; and the humidity is drained in certain hours. And sometimes this humidity is moving, rare, large, and subtle.
I have shown all those causes, their signs, and the treatment with medicines in the division.
And so you should know the cure for a fistula that is made by operation with a knife.
A fistula occurs in all parts of the body, for those are fistulas that reach veins, arteries, nerves, or the ciphac, or the intestine, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or any of the vertebrae of the back, or any of the compound joints made so as by the hand and the foot; and those are the ones that give proximity to the main member and similar ones.
Therefore, the fistula of this type is one of those difficult diseases that does not receive treatment and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
If one of the fistulas is deep and does not reach those places as mentioned before, and you hope for its healing and wish to learn about it, then take the probe or iron, and if the fistula follows the right direction, then follow it with it.
But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a probe of lead, for lead has the lightness of its body and is easily bent to follow the twists.
But if the fistula is filled with moving worms, it is not possible for you to touch it with a probe.
Therefore, cauterize the orifices with a cautery, for the moisture used to cauterize that one should go through the other orifices and run off from them.
Then you must inquire carefully, according to your ability, whether here you have bones or nerves, and whether the depression of the fistula is long or close, or whether it is a fistula filled with moving worms and is entirely on top of the patient's body, and you should compress the pain at the site, and similar signs and causes of an abscess to the aposteme.
And when you have stood over all those causes with true certainty, then proceed to the healing with confidence: and it is that you consider whether the fistula is an apparent one close to a saline, far from a joint, or near nerves, arteries, veins, or one of the places which I told you about.
Then you dry the fistula according to what has been said about its nature before, and remove what is in that filtration and decayed flesh, and what is born in the openings of the skin or similar ones, and treat it inside until it is healed.
But if the fistula is deep and follows the right direction, then you must incise it in the front as much as possible, and remove all its decayed flesh, and apply warm poultices covered with medicines, and introduce them into the depression of the fistula, which you have grasped with iron.
And do that for some time until the acute medicine rots everything in the depression of the fistula due to decay.
And then restore it with juices that produce healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by this, you must cauterize it as we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is a bone and it must be certified that this is so, you investigate it and dry it according to what has been recommended, without prohibiting any cause of vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness in it, you cut into it until the corruption has been stopped entirely; then heal it with that which causes it to regain flesh until it is healed.
And if it is not healed and it discharges pus like before, you should know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; therefore, you dig further and examine it more carefully, reason about it and clean it with your last strength, and then restore it.
Therefore, if it is healed, good; otherwise, you should know that the corruption in the deep part of the body has not been reached, and thus, your efforts were in vain to treat it.
If the rotten bone is small or can be shot out by you, then shoot it with subtle forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
If it is worm-eaten bones, you must extract all of them carefully, without any cause using your strength.
But if any cause of moisture opposes you and there is no fear or error in the incision, you shall incise them openings or flesh if they are here, and free the bones.
But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at your time, then wait on the wound until it heals, and leave it with the flesh and liquids around those bones, and guard the wound so that it is not consolidated, and constrict the incision which you made in your operation.
If afraid, pause on the spot submerged in warm oil or a spot submerged in Egyptian onions or any of the hot herbs, for when those liquids are heated, the limbs' bones will be separated and the swelling will be alleviated from it.
However, if it is a large bone like the thighbone or hipbone or similar, and what is corrupted is only its surface, then remove that with resin only behind as long as the blackness and corruption are removed, and let it heal.
However, if what is corrupt is a large part and the corruption has already reached the bone marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and make an incision into the place where the corruption was reached, and let it heal until it is consolidated.
And I recommend that you take care of this in the patient's body, and assist and advise on your operation.
Examine a young man about 30 years old, who has pain in his groin area, and from the inner parts there is damage to the material inside the body up to where it reaches the groin, and this is a material of an abscess with a large abscess, but it was not caused externally.
Then the time was prolonged with the error of doctors until the abscess had healed, and I added medicinal materials, and its healing was delayed until the thigh became fistulized, and they made small openings in the fistula that were all purulent and the body fluids.
And then the patient was treated by many doctors for about two years, but they were not wise but skilled in their craft, until I was summoned.
And I saw the thigh and the materials that were flowing from those fistulae with great pain, and already the body of that man was completely healed and his complexion was yellow.
And then I inserted a probe into one of those fistulae and reached the bone.
And then I searched and examined all the fistulae, and found them coming from all parts of the thigh.
And then I cut and incised into one of those fistulae until I discovered a piece of bone, and found it rotten, dry and decayed; it was already rotten and corrupted to the point that it had penetrated into the femur.
And then I removed what I found, which was the discovered bone piece.
And I said that it was not in the bone but that corruption which had abscessed and removed, and I had already drained it.
And then I paused the healing of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, but it did not heal.
And then I dug again and discovered the bone for a second time after the first discovery, and found continued corruption with the bone.
And I removed what appeared to me from that corruption, and then I performed the healing and restoration, but it was not restored.
And then I examined again and did not stop cutting the bone little by little specifically and performing the restoration of it, but it was not restored until I cut around an inch, and that extracted with its marrow, and I restored it with medicines, and it healed slightly and became healthy.
And there was no need for examination or section of the operation on him except for the disposition of his frailty and the scarcity of his tolerance and fear of death, since he often suffered from bad fainting due to excessive fluid evacuation.
And thus it healed completely, and nothing remained in the bone tissue; and it was good to dispose of him in his body and restore its vitality; and it was conformed to his dispositions and did not harm him by walking or any harm in any way.
But if the bone is prominent in the body area already fractured, then it is necessary that you perform the following procedure: you take a thread and tie it at the end of the protruding bone, and ask someone to extend it; and stop the first thread with wool thicker than the first one; and apply it over the skin that covers the bone, and stretch the area by pulling the skin away from the sides, so you expose the skin over the place where you want to cut, and you cut the skin without hurting the flesh.
And place a bed or table beside the patient, for when you do this it is not forbidden to use the saw which does not cut corrupt flesh.
The saw must be over the corrupt area gradually, for if it is in the concavity of the corrupted bone and does not appear in its sensory exposure, then perhaps the sawing of that other side will reveal it.
If the bone is corrupt and not visible, it continues with the division to the other side, and the corruption is in one or more parts of that area, then you uncover all the skin everywhere; and place a bed beside, and saw that from the first part where the corruption is contained until the cutting of the other side is continuous.
Let the sawing be according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
If the corruption is at a joint, incise that corrupt joint and saw the bone where it continues to the other side.
If the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then this is not reasonable but rather cunning.
If the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the foot, it is difficult; however, you must find the source of the corruption and open it up, clean it, and treat it according to each case as possible, and with any remedy be corrected if not contrary to veins or nerves.
And you know what cutters and saws are needed to cut these bones, which depends on the position of the bones, their preparation, and thickness, and their fineness or coarseness, and hardness and rarity; therefore, it is necessary that you prepare all types of operation instruments suitable for that operation.
And you know that this operation signifies the type of instrument required from you; when you have extensive experience and knowledge of the various methods in this art, as well as witnessing the methods of diseases, then you will already have for your use whatever is appropriate for the instruments in all cases of illness.
And you should know at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you will use as simple ones, which you will prohibit yourself from using on others based on your experience with them. Form of saw:
Form of another saw:
Form of a large saw:
Form of a ray (beam): The head of this beam (or tool) should be in the shape of a star-headed nail, and the points of it should be in the shape of pointed pegs.
And it is not necessary unless the heads of the joints are broken when they are corrupt or there is a large opening.
Form of smaller knives:
Form of long knives (razors):
Another saw shape should be arched with the blade raised and its sharpness in iron, and the limbs of it made like a dagger handle. Shape of that:
Shape of knives with a concavity:
Shape of other fine-edged knives:
Shape of another knife with a curved tip:
Small rasp shape resembling a tent (or a pointed tool):
Shape of other smaller cutting tools:
Shape of another cutting tool; this resembling a beam, and the end is shaped like a saw, and it is used in many places according to the reasoning of the bones.
Shape of red (painting or dye) suitable for the incision made in the bone.
The end of it is triangular and has a sharp point.
It is made of Indian iron, and it should be noted that all the causes we mentioned about razors, incision tools, and saws.
On the cutting edges and the fastening of bones.
The edges become sharp either intrinsically or extrinsically, or if you have medicated the corruption for its treatment and the cure does not take effect, or sometimes the corruption spreads to a limb that is not caused by any injury, then it is necessary that you make an incision in the affected limb, so that the patient escapes through that channel either from death or from a greater malice that is more damaging to the limb.
And the sign of the one who occurs is that the limb turns black before it is burned, or the rot spreads close to the dark spot before it enters into the affected limb and burns all the body; therefore, be careful when making an incision on it.
Similarly, if the corruption is caused by poisonous strikes such as from a scorpion or viper or ratel and similar.
And if the corruption or strike is at the tip of the finger, you make an incision on the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter the hand.
And similarly, if it affects the hand, you make an incision on the wound of the wrist, and do not give space to the corruption until it enters the wrist of the arm.
And if the corruption spreads to the shoulder, you make an incision on the shoulder near the joint.
And if the corruption passes over the shoulder and sometimes surrounds it, then the death of the patient is imminent; administering another cause as treatment is a waste of effort.
And similarly, when corruption spreads to the foot and affects the heel, you make an incision on one of the toes.
And if it takes hold on the slope of the foot, you make an incision on the entire foot. But if it penetrates into the calf, you make an incision on the leg at the knee joint.
And if the corruption has reached the calf, there is nothing that can be done except for palliative care and letting the patient die.
The method of cutting or sawing the limb is that you tighten one ligament on the part you want to cut, and tighten another ligament at the location; then extend a ligament to the sides, and extend another ligament above it; separate the flesh between the two ligaments with a spatula until all the flesh is exposed; and then make the incision or sawing.
It is necessary that gauze be placed on all sides of the incision to keep it sterile and to bring the wound to the patient dressed and covered with a cauterized dressing.
But if blood flow occurs during the operation, you cauterize the area immediately or apply some powder to stop the bleeding and return to your treatment until it is completed.
And tie the affected limb with gauze at the appropriate place, and care for it until it heals.
And I recommend to you the following remedy for a man in his foot, which I also recommend, which is that you apply this ointment to the dark spot on his foot similar to fire burn ointment.
That corruption occurs primarily within the said intestine and tends to affect the entire foot.
Therefore, prepare that man for surgery as soon as possible, when the cure goes to the affected member with the intensity of its pain and swelling, and incise the foot at the joint, and heat it to heal.
Long time has passed since that surgical corruption occurred in the said hand.
Therefore, it comes to me, and I am performed to reduce the excess in the hand with what stops the swelling on the limb of the medicine, and not let the excess spread and begin in the other said intestine before it begins in the hand.
And I was called to incise the hand of him, but I did not want to do it, fearing the spread of that excess, and moreover, I feared the amputation of his hand would kill him, for the patient's condition was critical.
After he lost hope in me, he returned to his land, and I was informed that the man was prepared and had his entire hand amputated, and he recovered.
And I have not added to this narrative except that it may be helpful in understanding this disease and what can be done about it, and also for the purpose of which it was written.
Of cure for sinews and the quality of clysters with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in any fleshy member and the space of the abscess is prolonged before it collects pus, and it is broken and perforated, and the pus is expelled from it, and the cavity remains empty as if it were a vessel, and the dressing placed over it is like fine linen, and no secondary corruption occurs, and it does not spread to bone or nerve or tendon, it is called sinus, and not fistula.
And if the space remains prolonged until corruption occurs in some member, it is then called a fistula and not sinus.
The cure for it is that the dressing is incised all around in the same way as it is rolled up, and especially when it is made fine like linen, and you make sure it does not stick to the place due to its corruption.
But if you hope that the dressing adheres and that secondary corruption has not yet occurred, and there is a stench coming from the dressing, then you cure it with clysters.
And it is that you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the smell coming from it is fetid, then clysterize it with an Egyptian medicine which consists of oil, wine, and ginger root in powdered form, ground together, and placed in a vessel, and poured over the fire until the medicine becomes hot and reaches a specific temperature for healing.
And you take from it what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey, then clysterize the sinus with that, and tighten the openings of it, and leave the medicine in for two hours.
And you remove that with caution, and do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the stench is gone.
And sometimes it is clysterized with water of ashes when the medicine is not present, and it is that you take the ashes of vinegar, place them in the water, and then let it cool down and clysterize it into the sinus until you feel that the sinus has stopped.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or water of ashes, then clysterize it with water and honey mixed with ginger powder, and clysterize it with wine and honey mixed, because by nature honey cleanses and purifies, and wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is an excess of stickiness and dryness in the wine.
And when you do this for several days and feel that the sinus has been cleansed, then clysterize it with what makes the flesh grow in it.
And it is that you take deafenicon powder and dissolve it in olive oil and white vinegar, or that you clysterize it with certain medicines and other remedies that have properties which I have already mentioned in the treatise on enemas.
And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and the canula of the clyster cannot be inserted into it, then you dilate it little by little with a small iron tool, and pause at each point where it has been wrapped in Egyptian or basilicon oil until it is dilated.
And similarly, if the opening is wide, you sew up the lips of it with suture and leave the amount that the clyster can pass through without addition.
And if the opening of it from which the pus flows out is elevated at the edges, then you dry that in the pus below where it flows so that the pus will flow downwards, because when the pus is blocked by sinus, the flesh grows there.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus near the bone as you wish, then perform that you prepare the limb with the preparation by which the pus flows out lightly according to what you can arrange and so that there is no obstacle for the pus.
However, what is on the sinus orifice should be kept moist at all times so that pus does not form in the arm. In order to know if what flows from the arm is more or less, or digested, or undigested.
Consider the location of the sinus, whether it hurts the patient or not, and if there is an abscess in that area.
Since your medication has been applied in this manner, and you see the material that flows over the sinus orifice already adhering, or gaining adhesion, then on the third day you should remove it. Once you remove the plaster, you change the cloth and renew the lining.
However, if the sinus has an extensive area of subtle growth, do not despair of the adhesion of it, because healing in that area is approaching, since some men have slow skin regeneration in their wounds and others have a reversal of that process.
And if the sinus is not healed in a few days and the arm is indigest, you should know that the sinus does not adhere; if adhesion of the sinus is delayed and is prolonged, you must adjust the medications to drying, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their effect, they dry up as diaphoretic agents do when there is an excess of additives added.
And the later medicine that cures is to take diaphoretic agents and dissolve them in rose oil, have it saturated with an ancient anti-inflammatory agent in its substance, and apply it there, and use that.
And this is similar to that action when there is no pain in the arm, take diaphoretic agents and honey that is thick enough to be applied, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe and grind them all into a powder over the honey that has been heated, and apply the powder over the cloth and strengthen it on the sinus; and apply the powder over the honey that you have heated to thicken it, and grind it into a powder over a cloth and strengthen it.
And occasionally it is administered with long-acting aristolochia and the root of celestial (and this is celestial) and ground erysipelas and centaury, and use those simple substances or compound them, grind them and sift them, then powder over the honey that has been recommended; and use it.
And if the sinus is prolonged and not cured by this treatment, you should know that corruption is in the bone of it, and then you conduct an inquiry into the bones or hard organs or the ligaments; at that point you cure it with fistula surgery, as has been said before.
Treatment for paronychia and removal of nails, incision and amputation of the finger.
Paronychia is an abscess that forms under the nail of the finger or toe, and it is usually more common in other fingers, and if it becomes prolonged and its cure is expensive or it is an abscessed abscess or rotten, it pours pus into the arm and rots the root of the nail, and it ultimately corrupts the entire area, and its corruption spreads to the bone at a foul smell, and the extremity of the finger falls off, and its color becomes dark.
Therefore, when you have the above with what has been said in the division and do not achieve a cure, it is necessary that you incise with iron all the excess material removed from the nail and cauterize the wound near it, because cautery is helpful in this case.
However, if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and you want to apply the ointments on the underside of the nails, they begin to compress the flesh in the folds and puncture them, at that point it is necessary that you make a thin incision below the angle where the nail punctures the flesh, push it upward, and incise the flesh with ease, and apply over the remaining flesh corrosive medicaments until everything has been drained; and treat it with diaphoretic agents until it is healed.
However, if the corruption has already entered the bone, it is necessary that you incise the bone and extract it, because there is no cure for a time as long as the bone is rotten.
If you see corruption and decay spreading in the said (affected) area, then you should make an incision in one of the nodes as prescribed for remembrance, and take care to cure the affected area to ensure healing.
If you strike the nail with percussion or attrition and there is intense pain, then at the beginning you must anesthetize the patient and then cut the nail with a sharp spatula with a transverse section from top to bottom, ensuring that the incision does not penetrate into the flesh below the nail, because you will cause the patient further intense pain and it may lead to the growth of excess tissue in the affected area; take care to cure the affected area to alleviate the pain.
Mentioned is a wart that often occurs in the hands of many men, it has a hard consistency throughout, and it is either hard in the bone or hard in the nail.
Warts are born from the root of the joint or they originate in warts on the fingers of the said (affected) person. A wart that originates from the fingers is not harmful, but one born in a joint is unhealthy.
Of those that are born as flesh-colored growths, the incision should be easy, and when you make an incision, you must remove its root with a lancet.
But the healing of those born from the root of the joint is difficult, so take care to avoid an abscess forming there.
In the case of those born in the said (affected) person's nails, you should first incise the flesh of the affected area with a round incision around the bone, and then use a suitable saw to remove it, taking care to cure the affected area to ensure healing.
Consolidation that occurs in the said (affected) person between their motes observed or by nature of the man who was born thus, or by consolidation of a wound or by fire or something similar, must be incised to return it to its natural form before it hardens too much.
Place a layer of red oil-soaked fabric between their wounds so that they do not consolidate easily, and separate the affected areas or place a thin layer of lead between them to prevent consolidation until it is necessary.
Consolidation in the said (affected) person's palm should be incised according to its preparation and the shape of the affected limb.
Incisions made on veins are varicose veins.
Veins are varicose veins that become large and filled with melancholic waste products, which can cause swelling in the limbs of the body, particularly in the legs, especially among travelers, laborers, and carriers.
Therefore, you should administer strong purges of black bile to the patient several times and draw blood from the basilic vein.
The treatment of varicose veins can be done in two ways: one is to incise and extract the black blood, and the other is to elevate the vein and completely remove it.
The incision of the affected area is as follows: first, wrap the leg with warm water until the thick blood is resolved, which is a foul substance from the vein, then tighten the patient's leg at the upper part of the calf to the lower part of the thigh with a bandage, and make an incision in one or two or three places, but make the incision wide, and lift the black blood along with the surrounding tissue towards the top and bottom of the vein until the desired amount is released and you see it coming out, which will remove the patient's symptoms.
And tie it up and order the patient to avoid foods that produce black bile.
And continue the treatment through bloodletting when the veins are full and the patient feels better.
The elevation of the affected area can be done as follows: first, you should examine the patient's leg and if there are swellings, immerse it in warm water and wrap the leg with warm water until it becomes swollen and the veins become prominent; or exercise the limb with strong exercises if hot baths are not available, until the limb is scalded.
Cut the cord directly along the vein in a long or oblique direction, depending on whether you need to cut the lower end of the vein, or if it is the base of the vein that needs to be cut.
Open the cord with scissors and remove the vein entirely from all sides until it appears to be resolved, and you should recognize when it is necessary to stop cutting because you see that the wound is darkening.
And therefore, if you find the cord white, cut off the cord.
And place the rod beneath it to lift and move it away from the cord, and suspend it with a hook for further treatment.
Place another incision near the first incision, and remove the cord above the vein until it appears.
Lift the affected area and make an incision in the lower part of the vein, remove it and lift it until it is released through the second incision, and then remove the excess tissue above the incision.
And do this before extracting the one from the section that is supreme or unique among all sections, before it is completely exposed; then incise it.
And if it does not obey and rise up, then insert an awl with a strong double-edged blade and tie it in place, or else insert a lancet and rotate your hand all around until it is punctured. Be careful not to cut it; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to lift that member and harm the patient by it.
When the whole thing is pushed out, then stop at the place of the wound where wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil (and unrosed oil) has been applied; cure it until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted and has a twist in which there is an enclosure at the parts, contrary to what was said, then you must make incisions on both sides of the twist and at the points of enclosure; raise it up with sutures until the whole thing is raised.
Be careful to not cut the vein and avoid wounding it, for it will be difficult to lift that part; let your prudence guide you in this matter.
The shape of the incision made on the section where a severed vein is found:
It should not be made like a suture or have a sharp tip so as not to wound the vein; it should be of thick flexibility, for if it is too thin, it will wound the vein due to its thinness; being excessively thick, as we said earlier.
On the extraction of the leg vein.
This vein is born in the thighs in warm lands such as Egypt in Arabian lands and in the warm and dry lands of India where there is little vegetation, and it does not grow herbs or trees.
And the vein is born in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
And its formation is due to rot which comes from the kidneys, such as the poisons that dwell inside the body, snakes, worms, and parasites breeding between the kidney and the flesh.
The sign of the onset of this event is the swelling in the thigh, which becomes very inflamed; and the area is soaked; and the vein begins to appear from the site of that inflammation, as if it were a plant growing there.
Then, when the extremity appears (of the fetus), you should wrap it with a lead weight of approximately one-drachma weight (about 3.6 grams). Insert this and keep it suspended from the bed.
And keep watch for any cause at the parts outside, wrap this in lead and leave it as such. If the part is prolonged, then you must make an incision on it and wrap the remaining part; do not incise that one too deep until it is completely exposed, for if you incise it deeply it becomes contracted, enters the flesh, causes abscesses and pustules in the area and a bad ulcer.
Therefore, it must be treated gently and removed little by little until it is completely expelled from the body without any remaining cause in the body.
And from this vein has come forth in some men whose length is more than five feet and ten inches, and I have heard that one of twenty feet has issued forth.
And if it is incised at the time of its treatment, insert the lancet into the wound and pass it through the body with a long stroke until everything that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putridity from the area for some days with medicines; and care for it as for abscesses.
This vein sometimes has many branches, and particularly when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, it produces many tumors, and it is issued forth from each tumor.
Therefore, treat it as was said before in the division and with what has been mentioned above.
On the section under worms generated beneath the skin and it is called bovine disease.
This illness is called bovine disease in some lands because many cattle suffer from it and the worm is rare among humans, being born between the kidney and the flesh, and moving upwards and downwards throughout the body; it is revealed by the sensation of a member to another until the kidney bursts and comes out.
And its formation is due to the rot of certain fluids such as worms, snakes, and roundworms, and parasites in the stomach.
And it is feared because of the malice of it, for when it moves through the body and reaches the head, and is brought to the nose, you must breathe deeply into it and enter it and destroy the brain, and this brings forth many evils.
And so when you wish to heal that [person] and extract it (the affected part), you must not do so unless you have first examined its movement and appearance for your sense, and then it is necessary that you strengthen what is above it and what is below it firmly and tightly, and then press down on it and extract it.
If it is punctured in the flesh and not healed, then you pause a hot cautery with fire on the area until it dies, and the main cause to be feared is corruption of it that corrupts the place as we have said.
If you find that person coming near the head with a cold wind, then strengthen above the forehead with strong pressure and press down on it, and extract it; it is necessary that the patient use purification of his body with medicines that evacuate corrupting humors, and keep away from foods causing putrefaction.
From section [of the text] about the illness of the nose.
This illness is called the nose in our land, and it is pain that occurs in some members, and it spreads from member to member.
And you have already seen it according to what I advised you. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I found her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and since it had been cut for an hour, I saw the inflammation flow like worms advancing as they would move quickly, but more gently, like living silver moving from place to place.
And then the pain in that area grew and sank into the muscle, and it stayed there for about an hour.
And it corrected itself in the other arm, as it came to the other chest.
And I advised him to rotate the entire body as I had seen, and it was very surprising to me at the exchange of that area and the speed with which the member moved from one to another. And I had already seen that in the most severe cases according to that method, but I have seen some which stopped pain being transferred from member to member. But I did not see that with the most severe cases as in the woman.
And I did not think that it was that, but because the woman was old, her body and veins were dry, and in this case, the windiness transferred appeared to my senses.
And it is necessary that this retroactive cure not appear in those who are delicate and have bodies with softened veins.
And when you want to heal it, and the patient feels that pain, then do not expose it to cold as we have said, instead strengthen it gently and press down on it until the windiness contracted is expelled, and cauterize the area.
But if you do not see it with your severe cases, then cure it by excision of the body and what expels windiness, and make medicine for it with fumigated pills and pills of serapia and similar things.
From the extraction of thorns.
Thorns are differentiated according to species, and according to the parts of the body in which they enter, since their diversity is that some have large points, small, concave, mute, and solid; those that have three angles, and those to which tongues belong; and those which are called astelas.
And of the signs of the servant is when it catches in it (the patient) a splinter, pierces the bone, and exits from the cavity which is above the brain, because this happens due to violent soda, scotomia, vertigo, heat in the veins, inflammation and heat of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, vomiting of bile, and the word is forcefully separated and destroyed, and exits from the wound location a whitish pus-like fluid resembling powder, and eyes from it resemble the moisture of the flesh.
And if these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment and removal of the splinter unless it is necessary.
But the signs of a splinter that has entered the heart, near the left breast, and is firmly embedded, are not in vain; and its movement is similar to the movement of the thumb, and there is bleeding from the wound, oozing black pus, and this heat of the limbs, sweating, and faintness; and therefore, know that death approaches quickly.
And the signs when the splinter has wounded the lung are that there is spumy blood from the wound, and vessels near the neck are congested, and the patient's color changes, and they expel a large spirit, and demand for cold air to breathe.
And if the splinter catches in the membrane that is on the foot and causes pain near the small ribs, it will cause great pain with violent cries and moans, but not all the limbs of the muscles are affected.
And if the splinter catches in the stomach, there will be a lot of yellow eyes of the wound exuding some undigested matter.
And if the splinter catches in the abdomen and is deeply embedded, there will be a fissure or tear of the wound, or intestine or hernia that has been torn apart, and there is no hope for recovery in the removal of the splinter.
And if the splinter catches in the bladder and is discharged through urine, and causes some injury outside, there will be severe pain on the patient, know that it is deadly.
But other members, such as the head, neck, throat, back, shoulders, and adjutorium, spine, furcula, pelvis, hip, thighs, and their similar limbs are saved if the splinter does not touch a vein or artery and is not poisonous.
And I recommend to you that I have seen the nature of these splinters, so you may understand from this concerning your treatment.
The cause is that when a splinter enters the lacrimal duct of a person's eye through the nasal cavity, and it is extracted from the other side, taking care to remove the eyelash along with it, it heals, and no harm comes to the eye.
And extract another splinter from a Jew who it entered his eye in the tear duct, leaving the eyelid aside, and the splinter was already hidden, and could not be found except for a small tip that adhered to his cornea, and it was a sharp Turkish splinter with a lion head in which there were no eyelashes.
And send the Jew away, and no harm comes to his eye due to this accident.
And extract another splinter from a Christian man who it had entered his throat, and it was an Arabic splinter, with eyelashes; and then I inserted a fine needle between the two eyelids, and it was already submerged in the throat of the patient; and then I carefully extracted it, and the Christian recovered.
And I extracted another splinter from a man who it had entered his stomach, thinking he would die due to that; but after thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition due to any of his dispositions, I inserted a fine needle into the splinter and drew it out, and he recovered, and no harm came to him from the accident.
And I saw another man in whom a splinter had entered his back, and the wound had healed over, and after six years, it exited from the opening of the pelvis.
I saw a woman in whom a splinter had entered her abdomen, and the wound healed internally and did not change in any of her dispositions; and the woman did not suffer harm from any of her natural functions.
I saw another man in whom a splinter had entered his face and the wound healed, and the splinter was broken, causing no severe pain, but pains similar to these.
And I extracted the splinter of the man who was the son of the king, which had entered his nose at its midpoint and had begun to decline towards the right side, and the entire splinter was hidden.
And I was called upon for treatment within three days of the insertion of the splinter.
And then I examined the wound of the splinter to see if it was tight; and when I inquired about it with a fine probe, I did not feel it; but I felt a prick under the right eyelid, and so I hoped that the prick was from the tip of the splinter.
Expand the wound with a plaster in the area where there is an attractive and digestive virtue, so that the location may be exposed to me, so that I can cut it open on that spot.
Do not allow the accident happening at the location of the abscess to be mistaken for the abscess having moved; continue applying the plaster over it for several days and do not allow any accident; when the wound heals, remove the patient from the site for several days until they feel the abscess near their nose and recognize this to me.
Then apply an acute corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until pus emerges, and with the probe I will detect it, and cut off the subtle tip of the abscess that is attached to the stalk.
Then align the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine until the tip of the abscess becomes visible to me, and wait for several weeks or up to four months before coming back to me.
And when the wound has been expanded and it becomes possible for forceps to enter the area, remove the pus without causing excessive damage, and then do not stop using subtle and ingenious methods on that area until a day comes when you can use forceps to grasp it properly. Follow the form described at the end of this chapter to extract it; then restore the wound.
And some physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored, and I will restore it and the wound heals, and the patient recovers fully, without any complications.
I recommend that you follow the quality of extracting certain abscesses according to the rule and significance I have not mentioned, because these sections and definitions are not understandable through narrative or reading alone.
The wise craftsman compares much with little; and what is present with what is absent; and in new operations and the use of new instruments, you must recognize unusual causes arising from the art when they occur.
Therefore, I say that abscesses are not neglected in the members where they are located except in two ways: either due to attraction of the location where it is found; or due to the opposite side of the affected area.
And an abscess that is neglected due to the location where it enters or is found in a fleshy area and is drawn out and neglected.
If you do not pay attention to the time when it catches, then you must wait several days until the surrounding tissue can be softened and the abscess's attraction and outflow are alleviated.
Similarly, if an abscess is located in bone and you do not pay attention to it, then wait several days and repeat the process of attracting and moving it every day, and eventually it will be expelled.
If you do not pay attention for several days, then it is necessary that you perforate the abscess in all directions around the bone with a fine instrument until the area is expanded by the abscess, and then extract it.
If the arrow is embedded within the body and causes no pain, then try to locate it by touching, and if you feel it, draw it out with suitable instruments appropriate for extraction.
And if you cannot reach the wound due to the swelling and length of the spearhead, and it is not a bone, nerve, or vein, then make an incision over the wound so that it may be enlarged and the arrow can be extracted.
If the wound is covered by scabs that must be removed, then cut the surrounding flesh in all directions with whatever tools you can use; and apply force to it, if you cannot remove the scabs through the escape of the flesh by breaking the scabs and twisting them until they oblige.
When extracting the arrow from any location, use twisting motion with your hand or forceps in all directions until it obeys; and be gentle but persistent so that the arrow is not broken and extracted as easily as possible for you, requiring minimal effort and force.
If you are unable to proceed at that time, leave it for some days until the surrounding parts have healed, and then revisit it when it is relieved. If blood flow is against you, administer the cure as mentioned in its section.
Be careful of incisions in veins or nerves, or arteries, and provide all possible means for the extraction of the arrow; do it with ease, tranquility, patience, and firmness as we and you recommend.
Therefore, apply counter-pressure to the arrow so that the patient is in a position according to the figure in which you should remove the arrow from him, as this will be more beneficial. If that is not possible for you, administer what is possible according to the figures.
Arrows that protrude from the opposite side or have caused damage to surrounding parts, or gnaw away at the shaft due to the feeling of pain above the shoulder blade and sometimes prominently; then proceed with caution on it; make the incision according to the size for which forceps can grasp; and draw it out easily.
If the arrow is lodged in the bone, twist the blade against it until the arrow enters the bone, and expand the incision, then extract the arrow.
If it is not lodged, leave it for some days, and revisit it when it comes out.
If the shaft of the arrow is in the wound, push it back with something.
If the shaft is broken and you wish to administer pressure, introduce your finger into it (if it is deep), use a concave instrument to enter the concavity of the wound near the end of the arrow and then push it back with something.
If the arrow is concave, push it back with a strong instrument entering it, as the arrow will be relieved by this.
If the arrow is embedded, make sure you flatten all the flesh around it if possible, and care for it with whatever is appropriate.
If the arrow is in the foot, abdomen, bladder, ribcage or back and can be touched with your hand, and it is possible to cut around it, then proceed to cut around it carefully and avoid incisions of veins or nerves; extract the arrow, suture the wound if necessary, and care for it until it heals.
The shape of the forceps used to remove arrows:
The tips of them are shaped like bird beaks which are made with saws when they grab the arrow to prevent it from slipping.
And from these are made various types, large, few and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow and its thickness, and the width of the wound and its swelling.
Like a ray to relieve the entrance of the concave arrow and push out with it.
Of venesection (bloodletting).
The veins used for bloodletting, which usually require 30. from the head, These are two pulsating veins near the armpits, which you call cubital veins; two herbs that are in the temples apparent; and two veins that are in the tear ducts of the two eyes called lacrimal veins; and the prepared vein in the middle of the forehead, and the vein at the tip of the nose; and two jugular veins at the neck; and two veins that are on the upper lip; and two veins that are on the lower lip; and - these are called the cervical veins -; and the two veins below the tongue. Veins that are lanced in the arms are .v; If one of the veins lanced in the arms is a cephalic, it must be allowed to let the wild blood flow out; and the people call this "the vein of the head", which is deaf and is a median vein, and is composed of a branch from the basilica and another branch from the cephalic; and the people name that one "the vein of the whole body", and the basilic is the vein that is punctured in the domestic artery, and is named "citillar", and the common people call it "vein of the abdomen"; and the median cubital, which is punctured above the wrist, and is the one in which blood is drawn, and is the one that appears above the wound with a clear appearance; and the cephalic vein, which is between the mentioned auricular and the lesser auricular, and is found in two branches.
And in the foot and the leg there are three veins: one of these is below the curvature of the wild artery; and the second is saphenous, and its location is below the groin of the domestic artery; and the sciatic vein, and its location is below the groin of the wild artery; and in the leg there are other similar veins.
The assistance of the veins that are near the auricles is beneficial for ancient catarrhs, migraines, and head sores, as well as old ulcers in the head.
The quality of bleeding these veins depends on the advice I recommend to you: it should be scraped on the head of the patient, and the head of the patient should be rubbed at the back in the location of both veins with a large and clean cloth; then strongly hold the patient's neck with a bandage so that the locations of their ears are pressed against the head in two places near the top of the head; and use this technique, and if you feel the pulse of these veins with your fingers, try it.
Then take the surgical lancet and the one that is sharp-edged, and insert it below the vein into the cavity so that blood comes out of the bone. Then lift your hand with the vein and cavity to the incision points above, and make an incision in the vein with the sharp-edged instrument. And make the length of the incision about two finger widths or around that; and let out the blood as much as you want.
Then strengthen the pulse and leave it until it is healed.
And now, at the beginning of the book, I have explained the incision and cauterization of these veins.
However, the assistance of the arterial veins in the temples is beneficial for migraines and headaches, as well as chronic eye disease and acute swelling of the ears.
The quality of puncturing these veins depends on the advice I recommend to you: strengthen the patient's neck so that both veins become noticeable with a clear perception and demonstrate their pulse with your fingers; then try it.
Then lift the cavity over the vein at the incision points as indicated by me, and insert the lancet sharp-edged below it, and raise the vein above; and make an incision in this way as you have done with the other two veins; and let out the blood according to your need.
Then release the patient's neck constriction, place your fingers on the vein for an hour, and hold pressure on that area while strengthening it with strong compression, and leave it until it is healed.
And now the reminder for these veins and their incision and attraction has been given at the beginning of the book.
Therefore, the assistance of puncturing the forehead vein is similar to that of the cephalic vein for ancient facial diseases, migraines, and infected ulcers.
The quality of puncturing it depends on the advice I recommend to you: the patient should strengthen his neck with a bandage until the vein appears; and take the instrument that is called a scoop, which has this shape:
Place the puncture point at the tip of the scoop on that vein, and strike it with force or another cause in the manner of using it, and let out the blood according to the amount you desire; then release the patient's perforation and strengthen it until it is healed.
Sometimes the puncture is made with bloodletting, but it is not necessary that the bloodletting be of sharp extremity like other bloodlettings; instead, it should be of blunt extremity, and make the incision horizontally because the bone is close and strong, so it can easily break during the bloodletting when it is thin.
The relief of the two veins that are at the eyelids of two eyes due to scales on the eyelids from inflammation and pus in the eyelids, and for the illnesses of the face.
The quality of phlebotomy is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage, and you press the veins (phlebotomize them), and you stand over their head.
The phlebotomy should be made obliquely across long and short slightly, because in that place there is no flesh; if the phlebotomy is subtle, however, the extremity of it is broken.
Then let the blood run out as much as is necessary, stop on that spot, and tie it with a new bandage, then release it.
But phlebotomy of the nasal vein is for acute fever and vehement sodium, and for diseases of the face and migraines and inflammation that occur in the face, especially when it is old.
The quality of phlebotomy in that case is that the patient tightens his neck and holds his nose with your left hand, and take a subtle long phlebotomy needle and place it in the middle of the bridge of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein is not felt here, and because the blood begins to flow quickly.
It is necessary that you hold the phlebotomy needle slowly with your hand and make it draw blood according to your need; tie it up with a new bandage, because it heals easily.
But the relief of phlebotomy on the two sides helps with contraction of the eyes, and at the beginning of leprosy, and with various diseases, inflammations, and itchy and painful ulcers like herpetoma (herpes).
The quality of phlebotomy in that case is that the patient tightens both with his neck, and the practitioner stands over the head of the patient, and the patient lies on a couch.
Then perform phlebotomy on the long vein with a wide and shallow needle, gradually; draw out blood in measured quantity or according to what is necessary at that time; make it similar to the other vein.
Then loosen the patient's neck and tighten both veins with moderate pressure to prevent the patient from fainting, and leave them for a few days because the wound is healing.
The relief of phlebotomy on the small veins confers to small abscesses and pustules in the mouth and corruption of the gums, painful ulcers and fissures, and painful ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
The quality of phlebotomy on those is that you should sit the patient facing you, tighten their neck with a bandage, and turn their lips so you can see the two veins, one from the right lip and the other from the left; and the demonstration of each one is by the darkness of each of both, and this is because in the circuit of those veins there are small dark veins; then make an incision in each one with an incision.
But if you are uncertain which one it is, then make an incision into the larger of those, and the one with the most pus.
Make it similar to the two veins in the upper lips.
But the relief of the two veins that are under the tongue is for fainting that occurs in the throat, disease of the uvula (soft palate), and diseases of the mouth.
The quality of phlebotomizing those is that you have the patient sit between your hands and lift their tongue, look below their tongue, from one side of it to the other vein, and the color of each one is darkening.
Then phlebotomize each one; and be careful not to hold your hand too long in phlebotomizing those, because they are arteries below.
And your veins that are phlebotomized in the elbow are those that customarily occur in all men, and the phlebotomy of them is done in two ways, either with the use of a mirtilat or olive oil diluted; or searing it with a phlebotomizing knife (lancet), and applying alum (alum), and this is its form:
The guessed translation for the given line is: "Cut the veins as they appear, and it is appropriate to open the convex, swollen veins that contain thick, tortuous blood."
The guessed translation for the given line is: "And this lithotomy (removal of bladder stones) is smaller and of narrower and more subtle extremity, and it is appropriate for performing a lithotomy on subtle veins containing thin citrus blood."
The guessed translation for the given line is: "However, it is more helpful in performing lithotomy of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: as it drains the blood from patients who are suffering from gout and colic, as well as from the feet and abdomen."
The guessed translation for the given line is: "It is necessary for the lithotomist (one who performs lithotomy), when performing lithotomy on that vein, to be careful and cautious because there is an artery nearby, and if it is accidentally pierced or misaligned during the lithotomy puncture, the artery will be severed, causing bleeding. Therefore, it is not recommended to perform lithotomy with a pointed instrument, but rather incision with a scalpel."
The guessed translation for the given line is: "And if the basilica vein does not appear in a manifest manner, it is necessary that you locate it and move to another or seek one of its branches; or perform lithotomy in the area where the end of the arm is, as this is more apparent; and incise it with a scalpel, as we have said."
The guessed translation for the given line is: "However, if you want to perform lithotomy in the arm, it is necessary before the narrowing of the arm that you touch the area between where you know the location of the wrist, and place a cushion over it; and bring the arm and incise the vein with a concave incision using a scalpel, making sure to avoid hitting the percussion site for the location of the artery."
The guessed translation for the given line is: "And when you feel, as if stretching it (the arm), inflate in the location that you have indicated with a cushion, then that inflation is of the artery, and therefore avoid it."
The guessed translation for the given line is: "And if you see blood flow during lithotomy, like that of a child, and the blood is thin, you should know that it is from the artery; and you should keep your hand still for a long time over it; and remove your hand, and if the blood is severed, as it may be severed repeatedly, you should stretch the arm and let it go."
The guessed translation for the given line is: "And be careful with the patient regarding their moistness (wounds), and avoid moving or disturbing them for several days until they are healed."
The guessed translation for the given line is: "However, if the blood is not severed and you find that you do not have the necessary medicine for it, you should incise the artery if it appears to you; as its extremity will be constricted and the blood will be stopped. Or take a tourniquet, inflate it and tighten it around the location of the vein with narrowing between the arm and wrist, and hold it there for another day."
The guessed translation for the given line is: "And if the blood is severed, that is good; otherwise, take care of it with what was mentioned earlier regarding the location of the powder that stops the flow of blood."
The guessed translation for the given line is: "The stopping of the blood flow in it (the wound) is difficult due to its small size and the flexibility of the arm."
The guessed translation for the given line is: "However, lithotomy of the dark vein is more helpful in draining the blood from the superior part of the head and the inferior part of the body; because it consists of branches of the basilica and cephalica veins, as we have said."
The guessed translation for the given line is: "And it is necessary for the lithotomist to be cautious during lithotomy of that (vein), as there is a nerve nearby; and if it is accidentally hit in the puncture of lithotomy, it will cause paralysis, and healing may be difficult, and partial paralysis may not heal completely. This nerve may sometimes be felt; and if it is hidden from some people and is subtle and not visible, it is necessary that you pause lithotomy with the one that you are performing lithotomy with, using a scalpel incision, and avoid the nerve with your strength."
The guessed translation for the given line is: "And if the vein is between two nerves, you should make an incision along its length."
The guessed translation for the given line is: "The advantage of lithotomy of the cephalic vein is that it drains blood from the head and helps with headaches."
The guessed translation for the given line is: "And it is necessary in this case, if you want to perform lithotomy with oil or with citrus, as all veins are safe, because there is neither an artery nor a nerve nearby."
However, it is often observed in some men that an abscess does not appear if not probed during the first strike, but it will not be noticed until later.
The first thing that must be known is that incision should not be administered except for the preservation of health and with the hope of it and caution for the occurrence of diseases, and that incision should be made in one of the veins that are on the arm, namely: cephalic, subclavian and basilic; and that incision should be made at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter near meals when signs of fullness appear.
And incision should be made on the third day or at least three hours after the evening meal has passed.
However, incision should be administered only when it is necessary or convenient, either at night or during the day, at any time and in every hour.
It is necessary that an infant should not be incised before the age of 14, and a woman who is pregnant should not be incised until the fourth month at the earliest, and old women should not be incised who have passed 60 years.
And when someone wishes to be incised by any means, it is necessary to clean the intestines before the incision with leon cloth, if there is a fissure retained in them, so that the veins do not push excess fluids into the incisions of the intestines, which are pure, and that they do not affect the main members.
Incisions should not be made on those suffering from nausea or vomiting, nor should they have any illness or drunkenness before this has passed, nor a watery disease, and incision should be feared near colic pain, vomiting, abdominal swelling, and multiplication of the genitals and labor and exercise of fasting or vigils and all causes that dissolve virtue, whether corporeal or animal.
And consider in the examination of bodily fluids before this whether the blood is thickened by foods and drinks, and medications if this is possible for it.
Enter the bath if there is no prohibition, or exercise by some exercise to thin the blood.
Pause the incision of that in the feet during the day, for example around the third hour, as mentioned before.
And it should be ensured that the foot of that is protected from all animal and physical accidents during that day, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and all accidents similar to them.
And in the case of the wound, make present the causes in the use of the medicine that humans commonly use with aromatics and fragrances, balms, and similar things according to the possibility.
And follow the one who is incising on a cushion that is higher than that of the person who must be incised.
Then pull out the arm and wipe it with your hand, the one who is incising, two or three times; and tighten the strap around it and wrap it twice.
The constriction should be moderate, for if the constriction is too tight or the constriction is with excess fluid, then you prohibit the flow of blood; or if it is with softening, then you prohibit the heart's blood flow.
Then the constriction should be done with the hands of the one who is to be incised between them until the veins are inflated and declared by sensation.
And the one who is incising should anoint his incision with a little antiseptic oil specifically; and the left hand of the other should be placed on that vein, away from the location where the incision is to be made, so that the vein drains a little, and the pressure should be steady for if the veins are those that contract like cords when they are pierced, then the incision must be made, and it is discovered that the one who is incising; and the incision does not open the vein, and if it opens, that is too tight.
And therefore, the one who is incising should be firm and attentive in all these matters.
Then pause the incision, but if the vein is pierced in one attempt, that is good; and if not, you should try again a little away from that location or quickly, if there are no signs of infection.
And if the location is infected or the patient shows signs of discomfort, you should leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the strap, because excessive force will cause an abscess to appear, nor enter the bath.
And try again if necessary.
If the opening is small and the blood flow is thin and you fear that there will not be enough blood flow as desired, then you should try again in the same place and adjust the opening slightly, and do it quickly before the location becomes infected, because when the location becomes infected in many men you should make few incisions.
But if that (the wound) has already been opened, do not reopen it, for you have no excuse in any case; and place a cloth over some part of the oil wound, for it relieves the body of pus. It is better at that place to use olive oil rather than other oils.
And administer the oil wound in all phlebotomy where you must prohibit the body from bleeding, and do this tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when it is stopped from one of them on the area, for the blood becomes subtle and turns into pus when it is thick.
And if in the phlebotomy site a large abscess is generated, which often happens, and more so in one that has not been kept bleeding since that wound, or at the opening of a small vein, then you should cauterize, and place a cloth soaked in water and salt, slightly scalded, on it and keep it for an hour, as it dissolves.
It is necessary to make this to the scab of the blood of that vein with the completion of it or another vein.
And if it remains in the area for several days with a black or green color, do not notice it; and if you want, place some reason of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or some reason of mint juice or camphor or something similar to it on it.
And often abscesses and elevations require phlebotomy in the basilica (the main artery).
And therefore place your hand on that (the wound), and if you notice softness, you must apply compression to it, since the elevation is bad and harmful; and so take care that you place something on it as I have said, for a large amount of blood will flow from the artery.
Apply plaster with what has stiffness to the area so that it is hardened, and take care of it with the other treatment until it is healed.
It is necessary to draw blood from every person according to the quantity of their virtue and according to the color that comes out as it appears.
For if the blood is black, you must let it dry until it turns red; and similarly, if you see that it is thick, you must let it dry until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, keep its sharpness.
And it is necessary for a person who is full and strong and needs bloodletting in one occasion that the phlebotomy of the vein be enlarged and the phlebotomies be large.
And in a weak person, do the opposite of that, and it is necessary to draw too much blood from him in several occasions, and let the cuts be narrow.
The best thing that can be administered in vein phlebotomy is a cross section, not a puncture.
This method of phlebotomy is free from blood flow and nerve injury, and it is easier and safer than phlebotomy according to the longitude and latitude (coordinates).
And in the one who is accustomed to fainting, you should perform phlebotomy, and it is necessary that you take care of him before phlebotomy with a piece of bread infused in milk of magnesia or simple camphor scalded; and draw blood from him in three occasions or four.
And if there is inflammation of the joints, you should take before phlebotomy a draught of myrrh syrup or scented honey infused with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar ones, or a scented aromatic syrup and a strong odorant (perfume).
And if fainting occurs during phlebotomy, it is caused by too much blood, and therefore you must take before drinking water of meat and a subtle perfumed syrup; and use aromatics with something, and let his legs be bound with it.
And use the other causes that I have mentioned in the chapter on fainting for evacuation.
And whoever wants to weaken his arm and dissolve his blood gradually in one occasion, it is necessary for the person from whom phlebotomy is performed for great evacuation, and let the virtue of him be weak, which gradually lets out a little blood according to the amount of his virtue on consecutive days.
But whoever wants to weaken his arm and expel the blood little by little, and his body is strong, do this approximately seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
But whoever wants to draw blood from the body towards the opposite direction of the wound where it tends, it is necessary that it be weakened on the second day or third.
But in a body with too much warm blood and acute and causes fever, it is necessary to expel that blood from the body in one occasion and a large amount and enlarge the opening until fainting occurs, since you will have kept all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on the pulses of him so that the body does not die from fainting, for too many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And it is not necessary that when you want to loosen the arm and expel blood gradually in one occasion, if the openings of the veins are closed and it is difficult to draw out the blood, that you press hard on it and straighten it slightly, for this is very bad.
The patients should wait until the second flebotomy can be performed; or remain with the acuity of the flebotomy that is coagulated by blood in the vein's opening; or pause on the place of bleeding from a lancet, or leech, and compress it lightly until the blood exits.
If the vein is punctured, then leave it as it is and do not touch it until the puncture site is soothed.
If you need to draw blood a second time, and it is not an excuse, then you should perform venesection on the same spot or on the other arm in another vein.
The vein called "the brachial nerve" is punctured where the cephalic or basilic veins are not constricted or hidden, as it is composed of those.
The quality of the bloodletting at that location is such that the patient inserts their hand into warm water until the vessel becomes noticeable.
Then tighten it with a strap and apply gentle constriction; perform the venesection along the small transverse vein, not longitudinally or along the length of the vein.
Make the opening wide and your venesection on that joint with a small incision.
If the flow of blood is forbidden, then place your hand in warm water and let the blood flow into it until you achieve your purpose.
But if you are in the summer days, then you are excused from putting your hand in warm water, and in winter, the body is cooled by warm water.
This vein is more convenient to puncture than all other veins, as it does not have a pulsating vein or nerve.
The venesection of the saphenous vein on the right hand is beneficial for liver diseases.
The quality of the bloodletting at that location is such that you tighten the hand with a strap or your own, then immerse it in warm water until the vein swells and is clearly visible; perform the venesection transversely; if you incise it completely, it will not be noticeable.
Be careful not to cut off your hand with the venesection, as nerves are exposed there without flesh.
Then put your hand in warm water and let the blood flow out of it, because if you do not immerse it in warm water, the blood will coagulate at the vein opening, and bleeding is forbidden.
Draw the blood according to your need, and then pause over the olive oil and salt vein so that it is not hardened; similarly, you must do this for all branches.
However, the advantage of venesection from the left-hand vein is that it is beneficial for gallbladder diseases.
Perform similarly in the venesection of this as you have done with the other.
The advantage of the saphenous vein venesection is for diseases in the lower part of the body such as abscesses, retention of menstruation, and lung diseases, ulcers, and old sores, and their similar conditions.
The quality of the bloodletting at that location is such that the patient inserts their foot into warm water and performs friction on it until the veins appear; then on the ankle with a strap, and the site of the vein should be pointed out, and from there, it branches out on the sole of the foot multiple ways.
Therefore, make a wide incision at the base or on the side of the ankle, as it is more convenient and cleaner.
If you perform venesection on the sole of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are below it on the sole, and pause your bloodletting where you puncture transversely, as if you wanted to incise it.
Let the venesections be small.
But if bleeding is forbidden, then immerse the foot in warm water and let the blood flow out of it until it is drained.
If the bloodletter is inexperienced on their first visit, then immerse them with a small amount of venesection at that location, as it is clean; do not fear deception but be careful of the nerves as previously mentioned.
Similarly, do this for the saphenous vein on the other foot.
And of the sciatic vein, the site as previously mentioned should be pointed out below the wild-side hip.
The advantage of bloodletting at that location is for lower back pain when it is due to bleeding.
The quality of the bloodletting at that location is such that the patient immerses themselves in water, and strengthens and tightens the lower back muscles from below the waist to above the feet with a long thin bandage, which can only be seen through it.
Therefore, when it becomes visible, then perform venesection on it according to your abilities and transversely, which is better; or incise or cut it, as the location is clean.
The first sentence translates to: "She is in labor with weak men; if you find that, and it does not appear to sensation as a whole, then touch any branch of it, and that which appears on the heel near the ankle and the ear is called phlebotomia."
"Be careful with the nerves, and let the blood flow as much as you want."
"Then unravel the constriction and place your hand over the site of phlebotomy, holding it firmly, because it heals easily."
"Of ventosection and the qualities of using those [instruments]."
"Ventoses are made of horns, or animal intestines, or glass."
"Ventosection is performed in two ways: one using incision and bloodletting, and the other using ventosection without incision."
"And this ventosection that is done with incision has two methods: one with fire or without fire."
"And the locations where ventoses with incision and bloodletting are administered are twelve parts of the body, among which is the site where ventosection is performed, which is the last part of the head; and the middle part of the neck from both sides; and ventosection of the jaw below the mouth; and ventosection using two spatulas; and ventosection using an alohoster [large syringe], on the end of the backbone; and ventosection using two bellows, which are from the elbows; and ventosection using two cups; and ventosection using two cuppers."
"Ventosection does not draw blood from the veins, but from small veins scattered in the flesh, thus it does not obtain its virtue as is the case with phlebotomy; nor should ventosection be performed with fire or without fire in any disease caused by repletion before the entire body has been evacuated."
"However, if there is necessity for ventosection due to disease or continuation, administer it at the beginning and end of each month, and in the middle and at any time."
"Therefore, when there are some causes of those [symptoms], and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, then command that ventosection be performed after passing two or three hours past sunrise."
"And as an aid for ventosection of the neck is that when it causes heaviness in the head and if it causes sinking into the eyes, but evacuation of the entire body should be performed."
"And this ventosection is at the site of phlebotomy of the cephalic [vein]."
"And it is not allowed to use it in one who has a complete cold or one with catarr, because that causes great harm."
"And for this reason, the elderly and those with cold diseases should not use it."
"However, for one who is persistent on it, forgetfulness occurs; and for this reason you should command the ventosector to press lightly on the ventosection at the sites of the incisions, to prevent the generation of forgetfulness."
"However, ventosection at the site of phlebotomy of the vein alveolar and basilic: and for this reason causes asthma, constriction of the alveoli, and scissuring of the trachea, cough, and repletion."
"And the alveolar ventosection should be gently pressed down a little, because if it is left alone, it causes weakness in the body and stomach."
"And the ventosection at the alhagdahan [vein] causes accidental pain in the head and optic neuralgia, and migraines, and presbyopia, and toothache; and it is at the site of phlebotomy of the basilica."
"And you should command the ventosector not to press too hard with the incision, so as not to cut the artery and cause blood flow."
"And ventosection below the chin causes alcohol in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and similar symptoms to oral diseases; and it is at the site of phlebotomy of the alihieric [vein], which is on both lips."
"However, the ventosection that is performed between the two spatulas causes cephalalgia [headache], which is caused by repletion of heat."
"And the ventosection between the two incisions of the bellows [diaphragm] also helps with phlebotomy of three veins, which are the basilica, alveolar, and cephalic; as it attracts blood from all those superficial veins, and those small veins of other large veins until it reaches the attraction of the three veins."
Command the lancer not to proceed too deeply in the incision, for the location is stripped of flesh, and there are nerves and arteries left.
It is a lancing instrument with which one lances the hemorrhoids of the anus and the ulcers that are left.
It is necessary to command the lancer to have a large lancing instrument and one made of iron, because the location requires a deep incision; and sharp, fine lancets should be used for the incision and lancing should be done with incising.
However, the lancets on the limbs should be very small and delicate because they will draw blood from every part of the body, and they will relieve old pains in the lungs and womb, and the bladder; and they will provoke menstruation, and they will bring forth lochia and afterpains; and they are used instead of venepuncture for veins, and they are used in the neck, and at the navel.
On the other hand, it is not good to weaken the entire body, because it can cause fainting in many people.
But the lancets at the navel are very similar to the lancets of the veins.
The quality of the position of the lancets is that one leaves the lancet in place at first and sucks gently for a short time, and does not prolong the position of the lancet, but rather removes it slightly and leaves it in place intermittently, and that the humors come to the location by natural means. And do not cease repeating this and continue until you see the location redden and swell, and the redness of the blood appears.
Then you incise and suck gently, and pay attention to the positioning of the body.
Because that man is of delicate flesh with few pores, it is necessary that you incise once and do not suck because the location will not be ulcerated.
Command the lancer to widen the incision and make a deep puncture, and suck gently.
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary that you incise twice because in the first incision, the passageway for sublimation of the blood and fluid is opened. But in the second one, seek the hard pursuit of the removal of thick blood.
And if the blood is very mucilaginous, it must be made a third incision to achieve the goal.
Finally, when we want to extract little blood or very small amounts, this is sufficient for us with one incision.
And if we want to extract much blood, we incise with many incisions; and if we know that the blood is thick, it is necessary that we incise deeply.
The term "incision" refers only to the depth of the wound.
If the wound is thick, hard, dark and its pores are tight, it is necessary that the locations of the lancets be greased more smoothly and resolved more widely; if it is in summer, for example with oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of marigolds twice, or oil of mustard seed; and if it is in winter, use oil of nutmeg, or oil of lily, or oil of camomile, or blood oil, and similar things.
If there is excessive fluid, fry it with oil of amaranth, or oil of balsam, or oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and similar things.
But if the lancer has wide pores of delicate flesh, it is necessary that oil be prohibited, and instead the locations of the lancets should be washed with warm water or hot water from Solidum, or camomile water, or water of borage, and similar things.
If the blood is very wet, wash the lancets with vinegar, or camomile water and similar things.
If the fluid is thick, wash the lancets with old vinegar, or water of fennel that has been steeped, or camomile infusion, or similar things.
It is necessary that the lancing be kept away from washing; it must be administered immediately after washing for an hour or two, and it should sleep near the lancet.
What is necessary is that the person who performs lancing should be bled before performing lancing.
It is necessary to consider at the beginning: if the person who performs lancing or the one who will perform venepuncture has colic and acute bleeding with inflammation, it is necessary to take cooling measures, such as milgranate, acidic vinegar and laytuga juice, dandelion and similar things.
And pause their food such as peeled vegetables and poultry dishes with bitter flavors, and similar things.
If the person's complexion is dry, take a drink of almond milkshake or a milkshake made from asafetida seeds and sumac, and a slightly odorous herb between thyme and nutmeg; and it should be commanded to use little in drinking and eating, and pause peeled vegetables, beans, peas, mushrooms and small birds and doves.
On the day of venetization (ventozacio) and phlebotomy, the drink should be greater than the food.
It is necessary to give certain men a drink containing tiger balm, or medicines such as musk, mustard, or camphor, before ventozacio (venetization) or phlebotomy, so that the main members are comforted and the blood is made thin; and they should not take this coldness.
But the ventozas (ventosities) that are not incisions are those that are stopped in the liver, on the spleen and gout, on the umbilicus, at the joints, and the pits of the anus, because these members cannot endure incision upon them.
And it is not desired for that purpose except the attraction of blood from a member, as stopping a ventosa (ventosity) on a nipple in a patient with bleeding from the nose or ear; and they use this to dissolve cold, viscous ventosity in a member, as stopping on the stomach and umbilicus; because it thins the member, chills it, and reduces pain, resolving the ventosity.
And a ventosa (ventosity) has been stopped on the throat when it occurs in their obstruction or purulence, because by its strong attraction it draws out the obstruction and eradicates the purulence from its place.
And similarly, when a ventosa (ventosity) is stopped on the liver and spleen, it resolves ventosity that is trapped in those places.
These ventosities are administered with juice alone; and some are administered with fire.
Some are administered full of hot water in cases of spleen disease.
And it is to fill the ventosa (ventosity) and make it larger, with hot water alone or water in which certain herbs are steeped that are appropriate for this purpose.
Form of ventosa (ventosity) administered with fire: the diameter of the orifice should be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the depth should be the width of a palm; and in its length, at the site where it is located in the circuit, it should be the same size, the trauc (?) should be small according to the quantity that fits into it with an awl.
Make it made of lamb's wool or lemon peel, thick edges, lion's wool, and clean and dry to avoid irritating the member in its position on it.
And let it be placed in front of it (the ventosa) a crossbar of wool or iron, where the candle is stopped with fire.
And this ventosa (ventosity) should be much larger than the one we recommended; and a small one, as little as possible, according to the disease and the state of the person who uses it.
And the ventosities (ventosities) of children and women in labor are other than those of young men and thick-set women.
The quality of stopping this ventosa (ventosity) with fire on the member is that it heats the meat with a good amount of wood in front of a small amount of wax candle, and places it on the middle of the crossbar in the middle of the ventosa, so that the fire is lit around the sides so as not to burn the body of the patient.
And let it be placed on the patient's member, and the said candle is placed over the trauc (trough) that we have mentioned, until when we have the ventosities (ventosities) and do not need to hold the candle and let the vapor rise from that trauch, then the ventosity will soon be dissolved.
And burn the meat according to its manner, and repeat it if necessary.
But in a ventosa (ventosity) that is administered for plague disease with water, without a crossbar or trauch, it is not administered but filled with water and placed on the member only.
And this is its form: The larger the ventosa (ventosity), the better it is, because it can receive a large amount of water.
Capital LXVII.
Sanguissugus (leeches) are not administered in many members, but only in those members in which it is impossible to position ventosities (ventosities), because of their small size, such as the nose and its surroundings; or in a member denuded of flesh, such as the genitals and around them.
And the quality of using those leeches that you may find in muddy waters is that they are clean.
And let them lie in muddy water for the day and night until they are hungry, and that no cause remains in their stomach; and let the body be evacuated at the beginning with phlebotomy and ventosities (ventosities); and let the member of the patient be rubbed until it reddens; and let them be placed on it.
And when they are filled and closed.
And if the juice from the location with the ventosity (ventosity) is possible, it is more helpful in aid.
And if not, wash the location with warm water and add hot water to it; and rub and squeeze.
If the duration of the blood in the bladder of the leeches is prolonged and it becomes thickened, let you immerse a cloth in cold water and place it on top until the thickening has subsided.
If the blood multiplies, then sprinkle powdered vitriol over it, or similar substances from stiptic causes, until the blood is drained; or if blisters are made at the spot with cooked favas, and they are laid down until the favas stick to the spot, and the blood is drained.
And if necessary, the repeated application of leeches, when it is possible to change them.
And if the use of leeches is prohibited, then it should be washed with fresh blood or a needle should be inserted into the spots until blood comes out; and they should be covered to prevent them from being felt immediately.
And when you want them to shrink, sprinkle a little of crushed aloeswood, salt, or ashes over them, and then wait for it.
So begins the process of the third part, namely restoration. This chapter is mainly observed in the art of medicine, and it concerns the restoration of fractures and dislocations of bones.
Oh son, understand that this chapter is scorned by the foolish doctors and the common people and those who do not read or study the works of the ancients for any length of time.
And for this reason it is made that this method of the scholars in our land is kept secret; and I have not forgotten this at any time but have only followed it after prolonged reading of the books of the ancients and studying their understanding, until I have extracted the science from them.
And then direct yourself to experiment and study in the long course of your life.
And I have already described in this chapter everything that constitutes the main science and upon which my experience has been passed; here I abbreviate it for you others and relieve you of the burden of lengthy explanation; and abbreviate it at the end of abbreviation; and demonstrate it at the end of demonstration; and form many shapes of the instruments that are administered in it, as has been done by addition of explanation, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Chapter first.
Summary and collections on the subject of bone fractures, from which it is necessary to begin the reminder of fractured members and those of various types of each. Therefore, I must first say in the preamble of this chapter the summaries of the discourse; and the chapters to the understanding of which at the beginning the artist is halted and stands still on the truth of these things; it is for you and those who are quick to know or learn this noble art from you.
And therefore I say that when there occurs a fracture or dislocation or twisting or crushing, it is necessary at the beginning to apply leeches or alum, or whatever may not be prohibited by any cause, such as weakness of virtue, or if it has happened in a weak person, or an old person, or in hot weather, or in cold.
And let it be content with food consisting of greens and meat of birds and fish; and prohibit coarse meats and fill with other foods and all food that fills the veins with blood, until you are sure of a cauterized abscess, and if you do not fear effusion of matter in the member.
And then return the patient to his original regimen as he is accustomed to it.
And therefore when the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with nutritious foods of thick and heavy consistency in which there is viscosity, such as food made from cooked wheat with water, rice, peas, beans, veal, fresh fish, coarse wine, and similar foods; and with this regimen is made coagulation of the fracture more easily and quickly.
And you should know that the bones fractured in young men and the elderly cannot be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying of their members.
Nevertheless, nature corrects and adapts itself in some way to the fractured bone of every part by a certain cause similar to glue, which causes swelling that adheres and strengthens it until it is consolidated and set, until the time of hardness and firmness comes, such as fire at the beginning, unless you prohibit this cause from its work.
And for this reason it is necessary to pause the food of the patient, food that is heavy and viscous and thick, as has been said.
And you should know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the variety of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the thigh is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the hand; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
And I will go on with the reminder of every species of fracture, explained in its own chapter apart from others.
Move diverse types of fracture within itself. The various species of fracture occur within the bones; for example, the arched fracture occurs in the star-shaped bone, and some are fractures according to the length of the bone: and those from the thigh and shin, both occurring and non-occurring, such as when the bone is prepared to write, and it is a fracture with a wound and disruption in the head, and it is a small fissure fracture.
And in all cases, it is painful or tormenting for the patient when recovery comes according to how well they remember their own specific conditions in their respective locations.
Move the sign of fracture of the bone. And for this is recognized the fracture of the bone: it is a twisting, and from that prominence and sensation of it, and only when you press on it does it produce discomfort.
Therefore, if there is no twisted appearance in the place or it does not produce pain when touched with movement of the bone and the patient does not experience great pain, then it is not here a fracture.
Since it is possible that there may be a twisting or small fissure, therefore you must press on it with your hand and with compression in all places; pause over the medicine of which you have remembered its appropriate application at this moment; and apply it tightly by subtle restriction.
And you should know that the place that is arched and not divided in two or any other thing that does not occur in the thigh, such as a large part of its comparison, then it is necessary to start from your time in the rectification of it; because it has developed an abscess cauterization.
And if an abscess cauterization has occurred, then you should leave it for several days until the abscess stops; and apply to it according to each method that can be done with skill and care.
And you should know that recovery of the place and piercing of it is lighter than the bone in which this situation occurs.
And apply strength to it according to the memory that comes up.
But if in the bone there is a fracture, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts, whether it is the arm or the leg; or with your hand if the member is small; or with ropes or with one rope and your hand.
And you should position yourself with the member in which you apply the pressure according to its natural shape, while the parts are extended from the fractured member; then proceed to make the additions return according to skill and in their respective locations.
And be careful not to cause pain or injury on the patient due to your operation, and proceed according to your strength by applying one bone to another in the best possible ways.
It is necessary that at this time you touch it with your hand and if any other cause is found, correct it and apply the required amount of force to it.
And proceed with strong extension and compression, like the foolish doctors who often cause abscess cauterization to occur through their operation or cause contraction in the limb as we have seen through the operation of their foolish treatments.
And the quality of the restriction of the limb in a straight position is what I recommend; because you should know that fractured limbs are diverse according to their size and shape.
And for those that are small, such as the arm, hand and foot, it is necessary that the wrap be made of very thin fabric.
But for those that are large, such as the thigh or leg, it is necessary that there be a broad and strong wrap; because linen is broad and connects the large limb with strength in all parts with tight binding, so that nothing can enter inside of it.
And begin by applying your correct position and pause appropriately on the location of this fracture with three or four wraps or as much as the limb needs, and hold it slightly with strength and linen.
Approach that person to the area above the location of the fracture and speak firmly so that your instructions are not misconstrued regarding the immobilization of the location of the fracture. Approach the fracture area slightly and release the bandage around it gently, loosening it bit by bit until you can grasp a large portion of the area.
Approach the broken area and take another bandage, wrap it around the observed area over the fracture, and approach the other bandages at a distance below the fracture; your operation should be in tightening the bandage and softening it as you did with the first bandage above.
Approach the bandages of wool or fabric that are wrapped around the curvature of the fracture, if there is a curvature, and pause at that point; otherwise do not stop for any reason.
Approach the other bandage, and approach the other bandages of well-made steel needles as soon as possible if there is no inflammation or cauterized abscess at that location; then pause over the abscess site and what is causing the inflammation; leave it for several days; and then apply pressure to the needles.
The needles should be made of cane or hardwood, well-formed; or of reeds; or palm fronds; and their width should be as follows in this form and shape:
However, the needle that is placed over the fracture should be thicker and narrower than the other needles, and the length of the needle should correspond to the size and smallness of the member; apply pressure on the needles with another bandage according to your initial immobilization; place it above the needle with faithfulness as I have said about immobilization, and this should be your immobilization according to the location of the fracture more, and the longer it is from the fracture, the less the immobilization.
The threads should be of medium thickness and fineness, and made of silk; if the threads are thick, as I have seen from the operation of some foolish people using thick ropes to tie them, this is a great error, because when tying the fracture, equality is important.
Subtle threads are not suitable because you will not achieve immobilization with them as desired, and it is not necessary to have a space of one finger width between the needles.
If the patient is injured by the tips of the needles near the immobilization area at those points, then pause with woolen or felted bandages until that does not cause him injury.
Some fractures are with abscesses, and it occurs with rupture in the ligament, and I will remember that in a later chapter about specific cases.
Know that all fractured members should not be tightened with needles on the first day; this is because the member, when it is large, does not require immobilization by needles immediately but after about three to seven or more days, depending on your certainty of the development of a cauterized abscess.
This is the method of plasters that the ancients used to restore, which are applied over fractures, dislocations, and twists.
The common method of plastering for the restoration of fractures is suitable for complicated cases and more so for women and children because it does not require heat or moisture; take powder from milled grain, and this is the marrow of the flour that comes from the movement of the millstones in the mill.
Prepare it as such, unless you sieve it with egg white, and pause the preparation of that until it is neither too thick nor too thin; then use it.
Another method for the restoration of fractures, dislocations, and twists: recipe for aloeswood (agarwood), lapacho (lignum vitae), acacia, eucalyptus, myrrh, and ambergris (ambergris salvage) in equal amounts of one drachma each; add 5 parts of frankincense and 4 parts of aloes (aloe vera); strain and mix with warm water or egg white if the patient is sweating excessively. Use this poultice as it has a good composition and gently restores broken bones, conferring strength to men.
Another method for treating fractures and twists is a poultice made of ambergris (ambergris salvage) and white althea in equal amounts of one drachma each, with myrrh and aloeswood in amounts of five drachmas each, and Armenian balsam in an amount of twenty drachmas.
All are ground in a mortar with crushed herbs and sieved, then mixed with water or egg white and administered.
Method of plastering for joints and separated bones in their places, as well as accidental pain at those places and fissures and fractures: take wool sutures, immerse them in sour wine vinegar and olive oil, and pause it over the location.
In this plaster, there is no virtue of restoration, of cauterized abscess or expelling pain specifically.
Another method of plaster that restores fractured bones: take fig leaf pulp and wild poppy leaf pulp, combine them all to make a plaster from it.
Another shortened method for the treatment of a fracture or solution of the abscess: prepare a remedy from alum, camomile, violet flowers, ground eraser, and everything finely divided. If the member is not scalded, apply ointment and bandage it up.
However, if it is scalded, do the following with either colander water or colander water and its use:
Another strong plaster for abscess resolution when a fracture occurs: prepare a remedy from alum and its seeds, balm of Gilead, clover, melilot, majorana, violet flowers, camomile, everything finely ground and mixed with honey; bandage it all up with water of sage or sweet water or oil, according to the quality of the member and the color of it.
However, Hippocrates does not specify in his book that a pause should be made over the fractured member for its restoration, but rather a mixture of wax and oil and no other cause; he recommends it to be moderately between thick and thin.
However, in Galen's opinion, pausing over the fractured member for its restoration and cases in which there is excessive dryness with little heat, such as myrrh, cinnamon and similar to those cases that have been recommended, should be done.
A method of plaster that relieves injury and pain: prepare a mixture of vinegar, pepper, human shaved skin or rooster pen feathers, alum, salt; grind and sift it, bandage it up, and make a plaster from it.
However, the quantity that is needed to keep the wound from spreading and should be spread out, consider whether there is pain or swelling or if the bone is not broken from its place, then you do not need to undo it for many days. And if there is pain, swelling or inflammation at the site, undo or remove the plaster from it immediately.
Then take linen and sea sponge with leonard water moistened, submerge it in boiling water, and use it to wash the affected area until the swelling and pain stop; allow the member to rest for an hour; then place a woolen cloth soaked in vinegar and oil or rose oil over it for one night to ensure that the abscess is cauterized, reduce the inflammation of the member, and alleviate the pain from it.
Approach that subtle constriction with a thin plaster and do not tighten it with your initial compression, let it heal with subtlety.
If the abscess and the swelling and pain and inflammation and all those symptoms have been cured completely, and you need ointment and bandages, then you should treat it as you did at the beginning of the healing process.
If no cause affecting that member occurs as mentioned beforehand, leave it alone for three or four or six or seven days. If after twenty days the situation is not resolved due to the loosening of the member, as mentioned before, and the fracture does not heal and the flesh does not attach to it,
Then adjust the constriction more than your initial compression in that area, and help the swelling of the patient's intestine, as previously described.
If you see that the location of the fracture is drying out and expanding more than necessary, know that nutrition must be prevented from reaching it; therefore, wrap it with boiling water for all observation periods and keep it like this for three days; then loosen the compression a little, and through this operation, allow the limb to receive nutrients, and it will heal slightly.
Those who restore the fracture of the limb at a later time when it was not restored initially, as is appropriate, and restore it incorrectly due to their operation, this is an error according to the operation of the ancient physicians, and there is great fear, and if they had been correct in what they did, the ancients would have added to their books with what has been done.
And I have not seen anyone do that, so it is reasonable that this should not be done.
Capital II: On fractures when they occur in the head.
The types of fractures are multiple, and their shapes are diverse, with distinct causes, for some fractures occur due to blunt force trauma that penetrates the entire bone, which is then destroyed, as in the case of a club, and this type of fracture is called ascal; or the blunt force cuts into part of the bone and also pierces the skin but does not pass through to the other side; and this type of fracture is called absolute levation.
And the wound of these two types of fractures is either large or small, and whether it contracts or expands; and its cause is due to blows with a hammer or axe on rocks, and similar instruments.
And this type of fracture is penetrating, approaching the muscle layer that is below the bone; or it is on the face of the bone, and the wound of these two types of fractures can be either large or small.
And this type of fracture is when it is narrowed within the bone in its subtlety (tiny cavities), and for this reason, this type of fracture is called capillary fracture.
The fracture that is caused by striking with a hammer or blunt force on rocks, which causes some layer of the bone to split at its joints, and occurs in concave areas such as those found in millstones when they are struck and split at their joints from within.
Furthermore, this type of fracture occurs in bones with a spongy texture, such as those found in infant skulls.
And all these types of fractures are treated as problems similar to separated stars (stars that have moved out of their proper position and require treatment). And you will find a remedy for all of it in its place.
We will recognize all types of fracture by examination on it, and through testing, we will find the substances corrupting them, which are on it.
A hair-like substance is recognized by this that is discovered on the bone, and it is scraped off, and it turns black due to the test, because the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fracture, it is first necessary to consider the condition of the patient, and then if you see by the signs that it indicates clearly by manifestation of fear, such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of consciousness, abscess of the throat, fainting, acute fever, swelling and redness of the affected areas, and similar signs in greater dispositions, there is doubt that it will not heal.
If there are no unusual signs, you hope for health, then you begin the treatment of it.
The cause is that if it has been brought to you at the beginning as it was brought in the days of winter, then it is necessary that you study the removal of the bone on the twelfth day after all preparation.
If it is in the summer days, then it is necessary that you take out the bone on the seventh day, knowing that if the bone is left, it may be corrupt from putrefaction and the signs that I have mentioned will occur.
If the fracture has reached the panniculus covering the brain and is small pieces and stuck together, then it is necessary to cut open the divided piece and separate it, as I will recommend to you.
It is that you reason with the head of the affected patient and discover on the bone according to custom and your ability according to the appearance of the wound, and it should be gentle on the patient.
If you find that there is bleeding or an abscess on the bone, then you must apply what is necessary, and it is that you put compresses of dampened wool soaked in wine and rose oil, and let the wound rest until the abscess is calm, and be sure of the blood flow; and then begin with the circle around the bone and its removal.
And this should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
And the first method is that you make an incision in the bone with a narrow incision tool, and this is the form of it: Place another cutting tool next to it, slightly deeper than the previous one; and this is the form of it:
And place the cutting tool slightly deeper than the previous one.
And it is necessary that you have a number of different incision tools, some of which are longer than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and are at the end of sharpness of their tips, and they may be made of iron or steel.
Use them easily for striking on the incision tool so that you do not hit the head and cut it.
If the bone is strong and hard, then it is necessary to drill a hole around it before administering the incision tools with taravels, which are called non-penetrating taravels.
They are not called this only because they do not penetrate the end of the bone to the test, but rather on the taravel is rounded or curved edge around that which is left of the head of it, sharp like a margin or small circle, which prohibits submerging and passing through the thickness of the bone.
It is necessary that you take a great number of these splinters, each one suitable for the specific bone, until it is present in all parts of the brain whose extremity is sharp, and the quantity in length and width should be according to the amount of splinter needed for this bone.
This is the form of three types of splinters: The quality of perforating in the circle of the broken bone is that you place the splinter on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone is penetrated; and then allow the splinter to move to another location, and place what is between all around the ray or surround the surrounding area with it.
Then insert the splinters with the tweezers between each crack of the bone and make the splinter as thin as possible so that it penetrates to the end of the cavity, as mentioned before, until you pierce the bone, or do this with your hand, or by any other means using various instruments such as tongs and fine forceps.
It is necessary that you keep caution so that the tweezers do not touch any nerve.
And when you perforate the bone and it is continuous with the nerve if it is separated from it, and you have extracted it, it is necessary that you shave and file it on the roughness of it where it is in the bone with another tool similar to a tweezers, but nevertheless it is necessary that it be thinner and more delicate than the other tweezers.
If any small and stubborn pieces of the bones remain, then take them easily with whatever tool you have at hand; and care for the wound with linseed oil and bandages as I have said earlier.
The other method of treatment is easy and far from fear, which is called Guillaume and is highly praised; and this is the explanation of it: it is necessary for you at first to start by discovering the fracture of the bone in the location where it is most violent and manifest, until when you have discovered that part of the bone and have placed a cushion under it, the end of the cautery should be slow and gentle. Here is the shape:
The concave fracture is round and does not penetrate anything, while the acute fracture is from one side to two sides in length, as sometimes happens; that the concave fracture should be adjusted to the nerve with the face of the penetrating acute part of the bone.
Then pierce one part of the fracture with a small hammer until you have pierced the entire bone easily as it is rotated, and you should be certain that no panic occurs in any way, and if the patient was the most foolish and ignorant of all men and the most asleep. Certainly, and if he was asleep.
Then if any nerve is still attached to the bone of the panic in some places of the bone, pierce it with the end of the cautery that is concave and release it easily, because it is released from it without harm and fear.
If the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the nerve, and what has been cut off or remains of the bone is its face, and it remains rough and stubborn in places, then it is necessary that you shave that roughness and remove those stubborn areas with fine razors that you have prepared in different quantities so that it is possible for you to administer them in all places according to the most convenient places and the proper ones of them according to where you lose your operation of the broken bone and its figure.
It is necessary that you administer with the razor that you use to shave the bone at first, and place it close to the most delicate part of it, and do not stop doing this continuously until you reach the point where you can administer the thinnest and most delicate of them all.
But in each of the other small capillary and subtle fractures, it is necessary to administer care according to what you have learned for the correction of it.
It is because not all those who have studied that art are capable of doing this. And it is based on what we have shown in great fractures.
And if the nerve is rectangular when you pierce the bone, then take linen according to the size of the wound, immerse it in rose oil and place it over the opening of the wound; and take another linen folded or tripled, immerse it in wine and rose oil and place it over the first linen gently but not too hard on the nerve; and administer a mild lint ointment over it and do not press it except to the extent that the wound requires.
Leave that in this care for a day or two until you are sure of the abscess forming; and then remove it and administer medications that are excessive dryness, such as linen rind and barley flour, and powdered alum and arsenic, and similar to these.
It is that you make powders of these medications that are powdered over the wound, such as dry ones; and in general, administer all the medicine of properties that absorb and do not cause pain.
Keep in mind that the wound in your treatment should be clean; and it should not be contaminated with linseed oil or any other substance; nor should you leave it to become infected; because when it is pressed against the nerve of the brain, it corrodes it and poisons it, and causes evil on the patient with malicious intent.
And when a tumor occurs at the skull's base, when the bone is modified and especially when its treatment begins, and it turns black on its surface; then consider whether the patient experiences the symptoms we mentioned, know that this is dangerous in all respects.
And if the blackness does not occur due to the medicine that is paused, but it is due to the nature of the medicine that causes the blackness, then you must take a part of honey and three parts of oil. and apply those lines on a cloth and place it over the skull; and apply care with the appropriate medicinal herbs until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that it is not broken in the nose, but rather two fractures together, or one of them is visible, because there are two bones in it, and the fracture is cartilaginous, so it is not broken and does not occur there, but rather an attrition, a curvature, and a narrowing.
But if one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert the small finger into the nose and grasp that fracture with your finger, and push it inward, until the nose returns to its natural shape. Do this for your convenience, but be careful not to harm the patient in the process.
If the fracture is in the superior part of the nose, and it protrudes there, then you must align it with the end of the bone where there is a slight swelling.
If the fracture is in two parts, you must perform the same procedure.
Try to restore it on the first day of the fracture if possible; otherwise, apply caution for the seventh or tenth day after the abscess has healed.
Place a pad of cloth at the end of the nose if the fracture is in one part, or place two cotton swabs if the fracture is in two parts, and fill the cavity of the nose with enough cotton to block it.
Some of the old restorers say that cotton should be wrapped in linen and kept tied for all days, but I do not see this; rather, the cotton must be wrapped in alum-water with ground powder; and keep it there until the bone is healed and the cartilage has hardened.
In some cases, insert a piece of soft lambskin into the nose instead of cotton, as it may be difficult to place cotton because it is wrapped in cloth; and this is if the fracture of the nose is very severe and the patient is not prohibited from breathing through it.
This method is not necessary for you; and if you wish to do so, perform the procedure, and if you wish to use cotton, use it.
And if another abscess occurs, fill the nose with cherry or almond oil infused in vinegar and olive oil, or with egg yolk.
But if there is no abscess, you must fill it with soda flour and ground cinnamon mixed with alum water, and place a piece of soft lambskin over it, and do not let the nose come into contact with anything.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or comminuted fracture, then you must saw through them, extract those pieces with the appropriate instruments; and sew up the wound, and care for it with what strengthens and consolidates it, and apply the appropriate ointments.
And if a wound occurs inside the nose, you must care for it with cotton and administer lead cannula until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jawbone when it is broken.
If the lower jaw is broken but the fracture is not accompanied by a wound, then consider whether the fracture is only on the outside and is not broken in two and curved towards the inside, its treatment is easy.
If the fracture is in the right part, you must insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is in the left mandible, then insert the right index finger; and push gently with that finger toward the inner side of the fracture to facilitate the separation of the broken parts from within, and with your other hand outside of the bone, you should also separate the broken pieces evenly.
If the fracture of the jaw has already been separated into two parts, then you must administer extension of both parts according to right angle until possible alignment is achieved.
If there is a loosening or disruption of teeth, you should strengthen the ones that you hope will remain with gold or silver wire or suture thread; and place cotton on the broken jaw, and double cotton, and a large sterile gauze piece properly made, or a single piece of sola equal to the length of the jaw; and bind it as appropriate according to your ability to apply the binding, until it is no longer destroyed.
Command the patient to rest and eat sweet lemons.
If you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, then examine and remove it on the third day; and correct what has already been altered and apply it with powder of milled pearl, egg white or rice flour, as you will have removed the cotton from it, and place over the applied linen a piece of lion wool.
And then, when the plaster is attached and adjusted on it, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it, as it should not be removed until healed and strengthened; for most often this fracture heals in three weeks.
If another swelling appears as an abscess, administer what was mentioned earlier in its treatment until it is healed and the abscess is removed.
If the fracture is with a wound, consider if it is a separated bone or a splinter; then carefully remove those splinters with what is appropriate for removing them from the wound using instruments.
If the orifices of the wound are narrow, you should enlarge them with a flebotome according to your need.
When you have removed the splinters and there is no pus remaining, you should close the large orifices of the wound; and if it is small, place one of the dressings that is appropriate for it and apply a dressing to it until it is healed.
Capital V.
On the restoration of the clavicle when it is broken.
Most often, the clavicle is broken at the midsection through the muscle, and that fracture can occur in one of three ways.
Because it is broken, separated or split into two parts without splinters, it is easier to restore; or it is such that there are splinters present and difficult to restore; or it is such that the fracture is with a wound.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture is without a wound, is to have two assistants present; one should support and hold the broken clavicle while the other extends the neck on that side.
And align the fracture with your thumbs until its form is restored according to what is necessary, and neither protrude nor concave.
If additional extension is needed, then you must support the patient's head with a cloth or wool and its size according to your need; extend and raise the clavicle and hold it in place with your hand until you align the fracture as necessary.
And if you cannot extend the end of the clavicle to the outside parts, because it is blocked by a protrusion, then the patient should be reclined on his neck; and place one hand in the middle-sized size on the muscle there.
And the assistant presses the muscle on that side towards the outside until the end of the clavicle is raised above the protrusion and then you correct the fracture and align it with your thumbs.
But if you feel splinters in the clavicle and they are harmful, then it is necessary to break and remove those splinters with ease.
If it is held in the bone, then you must make an incision in it with one of the instruments that you have prepared for this purpose, as you have placed the chisel under the clavicle; and this tool has a wooden or iron handle, which takes the following form:
And is similar to the shape of a cauldron's concavity; and its width should be according to what you need for it, depending on the size of the bone or the depth of it.
But the length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; as it often has two ends, one end should be large and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when extracting the splinter from the bone is wide and you are sure of an abscess, then you should adjust the two lips of the wound with suture.
If the rupture is small, or you fear an abscess, then you fill the wound with cloths and powders according to the size of the wound's cut.
If an abscess is feared, then you pour boiling vinegar and rose oil onto it and leave it.
And be careful that the splint does not harm the fractured bone; and for this reason, you must check the patient daily to see if their pain is lessening or if the splint needs to be removed. When the wound has healed, then you should reset the fracture and strengthen the cast.
The author advises placing the patient's head on their chest and keeping them awake for a short while to elevate the affected area and help raise the shoulders, which in turn raises the fracture of the collarbone to a higher position. Alternatively, the arms can be tied to the patient's neck.
Do not remove the dressing unless there is pus or pressure buildup within the first twelve days.
The author advises renewing the plaster if you see any signs of infection or poor healing and making any necessary adjustments to ensure proper alignment and healing of the collarbone fracture. Leave it in place until the fracture has healed completely and coagulated.
The fracture should be strengthened and supported for a period of 28 days, with some men requiring additional time to heal during this period.
Chapter VI.
On the repair of shoulder fractures.
The shoulder blade is fractured at its wide end and not at the narrow tip.
And since the location of the fracture is not visible, it must be diagnosed by touch. Therefore, prepare for the type of fracture and reduce it according to its natural shape in any way that is possible using your ingenuity.
Then place a cushion of fine powder made from milled alum and hull, stop the wound with lion's wool; then place a double-layered powder cushion; then place a cushion on the steel rod of a fine table according to the amount of the whole spatula or a little more.
But if the rod is concave at any of the places on the spatula, then you fill up that concavity with lion's wool, and adjust the rod to be level.
Then apply strong and warm liniment along with a suitable constriction and secure the rod firmly into its place so that it is not protruding from its location.
Consider the liniment daily; and whenever it is softened, apply another layer and adjust the rod if it is protruding from its location.
And be careful not to press down on the patient's wound.
The spatula is healed in 20 days or 35 days (depending on the individual's condition).
And when this period is completed, you dissolve the liniment, and be certain that the bones from which it began will not be feared or their dissolution.
If the bone protrudes from the location and you remove the bandage, then you break it, take it out, and proceed as described in the treatment for a broken furculum or an abscess cauterized with care.
Chapter VII.
On the restoration of broken bones (in the foot). This text appears to be continuing or starting anew, as the previous treatise seems to have ended abruptly. It discusses the healing of a broken bone in the foot, but without further context it is difficult to determine the specific method or treatment being described.
The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but the ends move and become twisted or crushed.
And when the middle of the foot is broken, it often descends into compartments and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, fever, headache, and vomiting; and it becomes visible within the fracture cavity and cannot be hidden from sensation.
The restoration of the foot is to place the patient on their back, placing a cushion between their shoulders; then pressing the muscles and adjusting the costal arches with the hands so that they are level with each other, being careful in the operation and alignment according to all possible means and what is appropriate, until the figure of the bone returns as it should.
Then place an adhesive and stopper, and place a thin steel rod of willow or poplar on top of the fractured bone, making sure it is level; then wrap that with fabric; be careful not to injure the surrounding tissues as you apply the adhesive; make regular checks on the alignment, tightening it appropriately; consider the alignment at all times, and when it becomes softened, tighten it again.
If necessary, you may need to perform an incision or drainage of the affected area if pain, abscess, or inflammation occurs there, then cauterize and remove that tissue and correct any problems caused by it using methods of healing; be sure to remove the adhesive, if needed, and tighten it appropriately until it heals.
Chapter VIII.
On the restoration of fractured ribs. This text appears to discuss a treatment for fractures in the ribcage area, but without further context it is difficult to determine the specific method or technique being described.
Know that rib fractures do not occur in thin locations, but rather at the junctions of the two ribs; and from the ends of the junction near the front, there is no contraction but because they are cartilaginous. And do not hide this knowledge from sensation; make an examination of it using the senses (touch, sight, etc.).
The restoration is to fill the fracture using the senses as possible, until it is healed; then apply adhesive and tighten the broken bone with a steel rod if necessary.
If the rib fracture descends into compartments, this causes severe pain for the patient and requires puncturing, as with puncturing for pleurisy; then cover the bone with a dressing; and this causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, fever, and vomiting of blood; and this is difficult to heal.
The Ancients were very clever in treating this condition with many ingenious methods. This statement suggests that there have been advanced techniques for treating medical conditions, specifically the one just described (fractured ribs), throughout history. It also implies that modern medicine has continued to build upon these ancient methods to develop more effective treatments and solutions.
And as they said: it is necessary to restrict the food intake of the patient to prevent inflammation and bloating, so that the abdomen is inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed out towards the compartments. This statement suggests that dietary restrictions can help alleviate certain medical conditions by reducing inflammation and allowing for better treatment access, such as in the case of a fractured rib.
But we should avoid causing abscesses through cauterization if possible, unless it is necessary; and if it does occur, address it immediately. This statement suggests a cautious approach to the use of cauterization as a medical treatment, acknowledging that it can potentially cause complications such as abscesses but emphasizing the importance of addressing these complications quickly when they do arise.
Some of them said to avoid wind and sucking, and it is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that the wind will draw excess fluids to the affected area due to weakness. This statement suggests a concern for the potential negative effects of certain actions or practices on medical conditions, such as drawing excess fluid to an injured or diseased area, which could exacerbate symptoms and delay healing. It also implies the importance of considering the underlying causes of a medical condition when developing a treatment plan.
And one of them said: Cover the place with wool that has been soaked in hot oil, and place poultices between the ribs until it is filled, let the linen be rolled as round as possible; and treat the patient with a treatment of pleurisy from food and medicine.
And if the patient feels intense constriction and cannot bear it, pierce the skin with a sharp instrument at that location, be careful around the patient, then we must cut open the place, reveal the broken rib, and cover that instrument which contains the splinter (a term used previously), remember its recall, and make incisions in the bone to facilitate extraction.
Then we adjust the two lips of the wound if it is large, stitch them with suture, and treat it with ointment until it heals.
If an abscess occurs inside (the body), then you should press and apply warm poultices on the area until the patient is healed from the inside abscess.
And it should be placed supine (on the back) on the bed until it heals.
Chapter 9.
On the restoration of fractures of the spine and neck.
Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck or the vertebrae of the back. If something happens to someone and you want to know if they will heal or not, consider this: if their hands feel softened, numb, and dead, and you cannot make them move or strengthen them by pulling on them or pricking them with a needle and do not feel pain in them, then you know that they are not healing, and in most cases it is fatal.
If they feel contraction and pain in those areas when pulled or pricked, then you know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will heal with treatment.
If you see vertebrae in the neck similar to that and want to know if they will heal or not, consider their weight (size).
If they are already softened and you see something that happened in the muscles (surrounding tissues), and when you press on their back it produces wind or stool involuntarily, and sometimes is placed supine on their back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is fatal, and do not waste time with the treatment of such cases.
But if no such cause occurs, the prognosis is better and easier.
The treatment is to perform the evacuation of the abscess by applying a hot oil cautery or poultices with mustard seeds on the swollen vertebrae, and apply it for several days until the abscess is drained.
Afterwards, apply a comforting and soothing poultice and strengthen it with linen; and tell the patient to rest, have peace of mind, not sleep on the affected side until it heals.
If it is necessary to perform the removal of the affected bone or any known cause that has been separated from it, we must saw the bone and remove it; then adjust the two lips of the wound, using suture if it is large; and treat it with a soothing salve made from ointments until it heals.
But if the posterior part of the bone is fractured and it is at the end of the coccyx, we must insert our left hand into the anus and move the fractured bone with the right hand as possible by equalizing; then apply a poultice and splint to it, if necessary, and strengthen it.
If you feel fractured vertebrae in the spine, we must perform an opening on that area, remove them, and treat the wound with the prescribed treatment until it heals.
Chapter 10.
On the restoration of the anus.
The bones of the anus sometimes get broken, and if they break, their fracture is nothing more than a rupture in the extremities and are inserted into the length and slope toward the internal parts; and the patient feels pain at that location and the anus becomes numb when it is fractured.
The restoration of it (the patient) is that you extend your hand over the entrance which is above the fracture, its figure (shape).
If the fracture is in the extremity (limb) of it alone, then you press that [part] according to what appears suitable to you by means of splinting inside, which resembles its natural shape.
But if the fracture is in the long bone or that descends toward the joints below, then you make the patient lie on their stomach to prepare for the restoration of that fracture. And when you have splinted that [part], place plaster over it and apply pressure to the wooden or metal splint, and tighten by compression on the area where you do not fear perforation of the fracture or displacement of the splint.
Splint the concave area with something that fills it so that the splint takes the same shape, and tell the patient to sleep on their side or on their back.
But if an abscess cauterization occurs, you cease extending and restoring it until the abscess cauterization subsides, and place something over it as directed; then return to restoring it, and tighten it as appropriate.
If this happens in the bones that are set or shattered, you treat them.
Chapter XI.
On the restoration of the dislocated joint fracture.
The dislocated joint is that which is between the collarbone and the head of the shoulder.
If it is broken, the restoration of it (the dislocated joint) is in one of two ways, of which one is that you take a long flat wooden splint of medium thickness according to this form:
And they are attached at both ends with ligaments, and it should be suspended from a high place.
And the patient follows over a seat; and the broken arm is thrown out over the splint to reach the end of it in the middle of the location where the curve of the splint is attached.
And suspend it for some serious reason or let the minister extend it towards the lower parts; and the doctor and his assistants hold the fracture with their hands until the fracture returns as appropriate.
The other way is that the patient lies on their back with their neck extended and holds their arm above the fracture with a band; and you command two assistants, one of whom holds something over the fracture with their hands; and the other holds the swelling below it; and each extends to their respective sides.
If you want the extension to be stronger, then tighten over the fracture with a band and over it with another band, and each of the two assistants extends to their respective sides.
And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, you must stop halfway along the band over the joint and the other part of the band below the shoulder.
Similarly, if the fracture is near the collarbone, you must stop halfway along the band at that location and at the collarbone.
Splint the dislocated joint with ease and without trouble, and once it is splinted according to what is appropriate and applied well, tighten it if there is no abscess cauterization.
But if an abscess cauterization occurs, you should loosen the splint for up to seven days and place linen soaked in warm vinegar and rose oil over it until the abscess subsides, and then tighten it again.
The method of tightening the splint is to place plaster over the fracture and then cover it with a linen wrap; and adjust the arm above the dislocated joint, and place a cushion under the patient's muscle.
Place the linen and tighten over the dislocated joint the arm to keep it in place without any obstacles due to the broken bone.
Use splints (wooden or metal).
You should place the splint over the fracture that is wider and stronger than the other splints; and place a gap between each splint equal to the width of the finger, and the length of the splints according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers on all sides.
Approach strongly upon the stars with the constriction that was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And that your constriction on the location of the fracture be made stronger. And as much as the fracture has healed, the constriction should be reduced.
And thus, when the patient's condition of the stars and the constriction are as we said at the time you restore the member to its proper position, then you do this.
And if you fear an abscess, leave the constriction and stars until the seventh day as we said.
Then consider the salve on all parts for three days, so that it does not happen in the affected area pain or inflammation; or food is forbidden to reach the member due to excess of constriction; and thus correct everything as we said.
But if you are certain that no cause of this arises, do not unbind the ligature before three days or more.
And let the patient's sleep be on their back, and their hands over their stomach.
Place a cushion full of wool soaked in vinegar over the broken limb, and consider at all times during the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not to be unbound or dissolved; or the ligament is softened, thus correct everything with your skill.
Restrict the patient's food according to the order we gave earlier, so that the food is subtle at first until it becomes stronger; and thus coarse up their food.
Since it is customary for the cushion and the mat of him to be strengthened for forty days; and thus they must be unbound and bathed, and treated with poultices that correct this.
And if the fracture is very deep, you do not unbind that ligament and the stars for up to two months.
Chapter XII.
On the restoration of a broken arm.
An arm is composed of two bones that are called the ulna and radius; one is small, which is referred to as the lower bone, and the other is large and is called the lower ulna, located below the lower bone.
If only the larger bone is broken or if both are broken.
And when the lower bone is broken above, the restoration of it is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the upper bone is broken below, the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
Worse yet if both bones are broken together.
Therefore, if the lower bone is broken above, it is appropriate for the doctor to wait a small extension with ease before binding it.
But if the larger bone is broken, you must wait a more vigorous extension.
If both bones are broken, you must wait for a less forceful reduction.
You must bind the hand of the arm, restore it and extend it on a cushion, and place the thumb above, as we have said earlier, and the auricular is lower than the others, and the patient lies down on a chair with a backrest.
Place a cushion in front of him at his height or incline, so that the patient does not suffer labor.
And extend the arm from below with your hand or ligament, and another servant extends it above in the same way.
And bind the bone until it reduces as well as possible.
If in the fracture of the bone there are shards, you must remove everything from its location with your skill.
If a shard appears separated that penetrates the skin and is not in your hope for its restoration, you must perform surgery on it and remove it as we have said above.
But if the fracture is with a wound, we have already dealt with that in a separate chapter, so take care of it.
If an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, you line up a cloth with a lining made of rose oil and white wax, medium thickness and strength, and apply strong wrapping over it with subtle constriction until the abscess subsides; then remove the lining and place a paste prepared from powdered crushed walnut shells and clay of huou, and cover the stars; and let the star that is placed above the fracture be larger and stronger.
Know that the number of stars in the arm is usually in the major positions, or the fracture in one bone or in two bones together.
And apply your constriction on the location of the fracture forcefully and vigorously, and when more extension is required above or below the fracture, reduce the constriction slightly as remembered in the beginning of the chapter.
The cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or harsh, and the thread with which it is strengthened should be of medium thickness between subtle and coarse as we have recommended.
Consider the member and ligament for several days. And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, such as a swelling occurring in a member, and then it becomes necessary to immerse the member in warm water until the swelling subsides.
Leave the member unrestrained until it returns to its normal state, and then restore the affected area.
And if the swelling has become soft and the bone has been restored to its natural state, then correct everything with your skill.
If the nutrition is blocked from reaching the member due to excessive swelling, then it becomes necessary to soften it slightly and allow it to rest for several days until the nutrition reaches it again, and strengthen it.
If the patient does not experience any of those mentioned causes, there is no need to keep him bedridden for more than approximately twenty days or so.
Suspend the hand of the patient using your skill to prevent it from moving too much, and make him sleep on his back.
Know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or sixty days, or less in twenty-eight days, depending on the complications and the doctor's expertise.
Chapter 13.
On the restoration of a finger or thumb fracture.
Know that when the joint of the hand and the knuckles of the fingers break, it is not immediately apparent, but rather slow movement indicates it.
And when the hand or finger is fractured or sprained, it becomes necessary that the patient remain in a horizontal position and raise his arm so that it hangs evenly, and place a cushion under it to support it.
And the minister should extend the broken bones and the doctor should align them well with good alignment.
Then apply plaster and padding, unless there is an abscess caution required; place a probe over it according to the size of the wound, and you have already covered it with linen cloth.
If the fracture is inside the palm, make a bandage-like covering, and command the patient to tighten it with his injured hand; secure it with long cloth.
And the probe of wool with fabric in which there is a handle to apply it to the palm; tighten it as necessary.
If the fracture is outside the palm, then place a probe and another probe from the back of the hand on the palm, so that the hand remains open and straight; then bind it with bandages as usual by wrapping the hand between the fingers with linen cloth.
If there is a fracture in one of the knuckles of the fingers, if it is a swollen joint, align it as necessary and secure it to the palm; if you wish, place a small straight probe under it to raise the fracture and prevent it from becoming worse.
If the fracture is in one of the other fingers, such as at the base or the index finger, or the ear (auricular) or annular bone, it should be aligned and laid with the appropriate digit; or if all are injured, they should all be treated together, which is better; or place a small probe over it, as mentioned earlier in the swelling.
Consider, in your restoration, the position of abscess caution and opposing it with the appropriate procedure, as well as what is necessary when any of those mentioned causes occur, according to the repetition of the narrative.
Chapter 14.
On the restoration of a femur bone fracture.
The thighbone, when swollen and felt through the skin, is broken and detected by touch where there is pain and swelling above it.
The restoration of it is done by tightening the bandages over the fracture and another bandage below the fracture, and the patient lies on his stomach and face.
And the minister extends all the bandages to the side where the fracture is located in the middle of the bone.
If it is suspected that the thighbone has been broken, the bandages should be placed close to the groin on the side of the injury, so that the extension stretches upward, and another bandage below the fracture.
Similarly, if the fracture is suspected to be at the hip, make the bandage close to the groin and extend it towards the sides.
And the doctor aligns the bone with both hands until it returns to its normal position and the bones are joined well; then bind it with plaster and bandages, unless there is an abscess in the member. If an abscess occurs, leave it alone for several days until the abscess cauterization is complete, and then return to your care.
The bandaging of it should be done as follows: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it over two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap it around the knee to reach the ankle and the groin area.
Insert a long file between the thigh and the knee on the side of the injury, allowing its ends to protrude from the swollen area on both sides; then rotate it around the knee and thigh so that any excess bandage is removed.
Approximately place a cushion on the thigh at the location of that fracture, and place one stick over the bones of the leg.
Approximately apply cloths heavily to the area between the thigh and the leg, in order that the extrusion may be coagulated.
E aprop commencez avec une compression forte du ligament sur l'emplacement de la fracture avec trois  quatre enveloppes ; et plus vous vous loignez de l'endroit de la fracture, votre compression sera moins dure, plus lgre et plus mouille.
E aprop tirez les deux extrmits du filet  partir des articulations infrieures jusqu' la cheville, et resserrez toutes les extrmits des clats de l'autre ct pour que le ligament ne soit pas dplac de son emplacement.
E aprop laissez la compression sur lui, de manire qu'il n'atteigne pas le membre corrosionn, ni l'boulement, ni l'empaquetage chirurgical, et semblable  cela ; et si quelque chose de ce genre survient, alors coupe-le promptement, rectifiez ce qui se produit tout prs de lui, suivant ce que vous avez dit prcdemment.
Mais si la blessure pntre dans l'os, alors il est ncessaire de vous y refermer selon ce qui est possible ; sinon, fendez-le et retirez-le, puis soignez-le avec ce dont la remmoration suit prcdemment jusqu' ce qu'il soit guri.
Et certaines fois cette fracture de la cuisse est plus grave que celles qui sont adaptes aux jambes, comme vous l'avez dit prcdemment dans le supplment et le bras.
Mais sauf  viter une paralysie du malade dans cette mthode de gurison, si seule la restauration est ralise sans application de l'autre jambe, il sera ncessaire que celui qui a t restaur ait un claudication constante.
You should know that the wound will heal in 40 days or a little more than a month or a little over a month, and this is all according to the complexity and other circumstances.
Here is the continuation of the translation:
Here is the continuation of the translation:
Know that a break in the radius of the thumb often heals slowly, but it frequently occurs more in elderly people.
If the break occurs, it should not be left untreated, but rather sutured or splinted, and that is a wound or multiple wounds, and over that it must be treated with care.
The healing process consists of immobilizing that which is broken in the limb, and bringing it into proper alignment as much as possible by traction, ease, and materials.
And apply plaster and press down on that round stone if necessary; and strengthen it with a bandage as appropriate.
And consider all the dispositions that have been recommended in other fractures, such as applying a poultice and similar substances opposite to all accidents as appropriate until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the healing of the fracture of the thigh bone.
Know that in the thigh bone there are two bones of which one is large and is called the femur; and the other is slender, and is called the shaft.
And the types of fracture that occur in the two bones of the arm are treated similarly to the healing of the arm and the surgical treatment is the same.
And if both bones are broken together, the thigh bone is shattered into pieces.
If the slender bone is broken, the thigh bone is shattered in front.
And if the large bone is broken, it breaks backwards and is one of those causes that are not familiar to you.
Then administer extension, traction, and ligature of the tendons as appropriate.
However, if the fracture of the thigh bone is a fresh one with few complications, the extension should be less and more gentle, and relax it with your skill.
In the thigh bone there is one cause for surgical treatment of the arm, and that is when you transect the tendons and complete the entire operation, then you will take pieces of pine wood which are placed on the soles, and they are made similarly to branches of palm; place them on those with minor swelling, and not too large, and the length of these according to the length of the thigh bone from the thumb to the toes.
And cover each piece with a cloth in two layers according to its length, and place one over the fracture of the thigh bone on one side and the other over the fracture of the other side, and they should be from the thumb to the toes at the lower end of the foot.
And tie the two tendons in three places at both ends and in the middle, because with this fixation the thigh bone is prevented from closing on the right and left sides, and it is a good position.
And apply a splint of wood according to the length of the thigh bone; it should be placed where the thigh bone is allowed to move.
Moreover, it is necessary that you do this in a fracture and when the wound is properly infected.
And consider the thigh bone every day and study it further, and protect it from inflammation or swelling or other similar causes; and when any of these occur, oppose yourself to it until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and the toes.
A fracture does not occur in the whole ankle, but certain fractures happen in the foot bones, and only rarely does a fracture occur in the toes of the foot, and this is not common in their setting.
And if the bones of the foot have a fracture and these bones are sometimes raised up between them, then the patient should rest his foot on the ground prepared in this way as he walks.
Then place one foot on what is raised from those bones and press, and step, and hold it until it returns to its place.
Then apply a plaster and bandage over it, and below the foot of the patient place a small table with two flat surfaces.
Then strengthen it with the foot in a downward direction, since you have wrapped it up with cloth and other means that are needed.
When three or four days have passed, you should undo the binding, because you will find that the bones are bound, either broken or dislocated, and the operation on these is as follows.
But if some toes are broken, you should restore these, and bind them as I show you and recommend to you in the repair of hand toes. Then place the broken digit on a ruler according to the length of the digit, and the other end of it should be slightly inclined; and below the foot, place this table that has been recommended to you, and strengthen it with a downward structure.
If what is broken among the bones are two or three or more, you should place each digit on a ruler covered with leather according to its size, and strengthen the table at the lower end of the foot, and stand it upright over one of the table's surfaces away from the belly of the foot so that it has good retention.
And it is important for you not to forget that you should consider all the causes mentioned to you in the other fractures of accidents that I have said, and prepare yourself for any accident with what is appropriate.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the fracture of the hip in women and the pelvis bone and the penis bone in men.
When the hip of a woman is broken, you should cause it to lie down with the leg in an extended position, and incline it slightly towards the side, and keep it behind.
And the midwife should fill the broken hip with cotton, and do it in such a way as she can; and the woman should be shaken, and raise her pelvis slightly from one side to the other until it is in front of the fracture, and the broken bone returns.
And place powder on the side of it, and when she wants to urinate, let her lower the crotch with ease and urinate, and reduce and return it according to the method by which you set it initially, and then return the pelvis to its original position.
Do this for seven days or until it is healed, because it will heal.
And if you wish, take an ovine bladder and strengthen it with a cane tube over the fracture; and insert the entire bladder into the hip and inflate the tube with air until the bladder is inflated inside the hip, because the fracture returns.
And it should be filled with cotton and remain for as many days as I have recommended until it heals.
And when the penis bone in a man or woman is broken, you should administer to its repair and guidance what has been recommended for the hip bone.
What is correct should not be hidden in these near fractures and what little happens, especially to the one who has some study, experience, and understands this my book; because that fracture means a lot to you in greater dispositions regarding the repair and guidance of it, so understand well.
But in the penis of a man when it is broken, take alum, and put it on it; and place it over cloth covering, wrap it, and leave it for three days or until it heals, and it will be cured.
Chapter XIX.
Of the repair of bone fractures when they are infected.
It is appropriate for the one who has a fracture with an infection and especially if the bone is large, such as the bone of the thigh or forearm, or similar to it, that you cauterize and drain it immediately if the conditions for cauterization are present as I have said above.
If the pus flows blood, you should cover it in order to retain it until you powder it with lime and salt if there is no other reason.
And you should begin to repair the fracture on the first day itself, and do not delay it if there is no abscess.
But if an abscess forms cautiously, you should leave the repair of it until the ninth day, until the abscess is released, and do not approach it in the third or fourth days altogether, because you will cause bad accidents.
But if the broken bone protrudes from the skin, you should forcefully reduce it and bind it with your hands with ease and little extension.
If the extension is not prepared and the position of the patient is not with your hands, then you reduce it with your hands using this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight fingers, and the width according to the size of the wound; and it is necessary for the doctor to take one of these three or four, depending on the quantity required in the treatment of any type of fracture.
Let it be round and let there be little swelling to avoid it being doubled over during the operation.
Let it be of sharp pointed end with a margin at its extremities; and let the top of it be thicker towards the sides and from there down to the joints.
This is the form of it:
It is called in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which means it is a small spatula.
Therefore, the end of it should be cushioned and raised above the bone prominence to avoid any injury.
Push that into a position where the bone is returned and aligned with some position or another.
So you must align the fracture's extremities with each other, and if the broken end is delicate, do not use the instrument for good reason; instead, you must incise the bone's extremity where the instrument has the power to do so.
If you cannot reduce the bone with what we have recommended, then incise it using what we have mentioned as cutting instruments; or use one of the saws in whatever way is possible for you.
Bring that which remains rough and small in the bone to light and smooth it.
When the bone is reduced and the patient experiences severe pain gradually, you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural position; and therefore do what you can to give great relief to the patient.
When your treatment of the bone is complete and you are finished with the procedure, immerse a black stiff cloth in vinegar, and in summer especially, do not let the wound be touched by any oil or other cause that could lead to pus formation and corruption.
You administer stitches at the time of your completion of the bone treatment, and leave the wound exposed so that you can incise it with scissors and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
Be very careful not to injure the wound with the fracture, because many times foolish doctors have done such things, causing their patients' death or chronic illness, which is sinful. If her stricture is slight, soft and different from the stricture of other fractures.
If the wound is large or bad, and you fear those evil accidents that we have mentioned, and experience pain in the area, then it is not necessary to use stitches, but instead apply a hard bandage where stitches were supposed to be and strengthen it with them.
When the wound starts to heal after one or two days, which is caused by a bruise, you should remove the cloth that you placed over it with vinegar, and provide warm compresses, according to our custom, we treat wounds using compresses like tetrafarmacon and similar ones.
It is necessary for you to remove the dressing and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and the limb should be prepared in such a way that pus flows from it towards the joints with ease.
If the wound passes many days without being consolidated or draining pus from it, then you should know that this is a sign of the infection and you must examine the wound carefully. And of those signs that are separated and extracted, those that are not separated and make the limb swell and cause pain, force you to incise them according to what is possible for you.
If pus or an infection occurs in the wound, it is a sign of corruption or putrefaction; then you should pause for a while until one of those signs that are mentioned earlier and whose treatment is described in its own chapter appears.
Regarding that which requires the most attention and you should present your case: when a large bone is broken, place it above the limb like the bones of the hip and thigh, and do not attempt to attract or extract it because many times such attempts result in death; leave it until pus can be drained, since a weak person may die within 20-30 days. And you should take care of the wound if it is visible, and leave it alone if not.
Title .xx.
On the treatment of nodules that occur in the traces of some fractures.
These nodules are often found in the traces of fracture healing, particularly at joints, and they are caused by the figure (shape) of the limb; and it strongly hinders the natural operation of the member.
Therefore, consider if the nodule is recent and administer medications that have astringent properties such as alum, wax, and mastic resin; or if necessary, compress them with one or more of these, and bind them with wax, oil, or vinegar and apply this to the nodule in a poultice, and firmly bind it so as to achieve good compression.
Remove the poultice that does not loosen it for several days; then remove it and apply another one, until the nodule is removed; or strongly press on a lead plate firmly placed over the nodule, because lead has the property of causing everything that is inflated in the limbs to remain.
However, if the nodule has already become hardened and requires frequent removal, then cut it along its most superior part, excise the excess and eminence, or remove it with sharp scissors until it is removed; and heal the wound until it is healed.
Title .xxi.
On the restoration of a fracture when it has healed and bind the limb gently, not according to its nature.
When a bone fracture has healed, bind the limb gently, but do not do so except for several reasons: one of which is the excessive loosening of the ligation and the ligature not being tightened according to its need; or because of excess tightness of the bandages before the nutriment is prohibited from flowing into the member; or because of excessive swelling in the bandages; or because of superfluous movement at an inappropriate time; or due to a lack of blood flow in the patient's core and weakness.
Treatment for this is to feed the patient and make his heart tender before the blood is multiplied in him; administer baths, and give plenty of encouragement and comfort over it.
And apply a tight bandage to the limb so that it attracts less nourishment, or continue swelling of the limb with cold water, until the nourishment flows back to its natural shape.
Title .xxii.
In treatment of broken bones when restored incorrectly, prohibit the operation on them as much as possible.
When the restored limb is delayed in healing due to irregularity or misalignment of the broken bone and nodules, and its shape is distorted, but the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, then it is not necessary for you to receive the word that the limb was newly fractured.
Yet there are some mad doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is greatly to be condemned as causing great fear, the sign of which is fatal.
If recent swelling and nodules are present, then they must be sewn with boiling water in which softening herbs such as althea leaves and ragwort, marshmallow, and similar plants are placed; and it should be made into a plaster with plaster of meadow or olive oil, or a decoction of althea root and honey of galangal or camphor oil is prepared and applied; or figs with the flesh of pigeon eggs and similar medicines that are called "amermorce consolidation" are used.
And sometimes it is dissolved with persistent light rubbing that is with the wettest substances, and movement of the limb in all directions at all times is given.
But if the deformity has already gone ahead and is strong and has turned into a stone and necessitates treatment with iron, then it must be drained of pus and the continuation of the bone must be dissolved, and whatever surplus nodules from that member are superfluous must be removed from the bone with fine cutters, and ease should be administered to it by applying solicitude and diligence.
Chapter XXIII
On discourse in dislocation
Dislocation is essentially one of the joints in its place, which is prohibited from movement, and distorts the shape of the limb, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it must be treated as soon as possible by reduction, and the reduction should not be delayed because if it is delayed, the location becomes necrotic and the reduction of dislocation becomes difficult.
And therefore it is not good or comfortable during the time of necrosis because many times brings spasms and prolonged pain.
But when this happens, you must be prepared for the patient's flap surgery, and allow enough time to stop the necrosis; and place the limb in warm water and oil, and reduce it with ease.
And let all members be cured by whatever remedy will come to its place.
And you have already ordered the chapters on dislocation as they were mentioned in the chapter on fracture, from the upper part of the body to the lower part.
Chapter XXIV
On treatment of dislocation of the jawbone below.
If both mandibles are dislocated and not reduced immediately, the dislocation of both is done according to one of two methods: either they are returned to their places with little movement, and are slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated and displaced, until they are softened at the joint junction, until saliva flows from the patient's mouth, which cannot be swallowed and cannot close its mouth, and the tongue of the patient is wrapped in its cheek.
But if the dislocation is slight, then it can be reduced with the greatest care taken to avoid further damage.
But if the dislocation is complete and prolonged, reduction must be administered gently and not delayed for too long.
The minister holds the head of the patient and enters his hand into the root of the dislocated jawbone inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of one part; or he enters both hands together, if the dislocation is of both parts, and the other hand remains outside to help guide it; and the minister orders the patient to stop moving its mandibles and allow them not to move from either side; and the minister guides the jawbone and covers it until it returns to its place.
If the reduction is difficult, especially if both jawbones are dislocated, administer evaporation with warm water and oil until the reduction of both is made easier and do not delay the reduction of both, as has been said.
And therefore when they return and are covered, the patient's mouth is closed and not softened, place them on a pillow of cotton with wax, made of wax and oil rubbed smooth; and cover it gently but firmly.
And let the patient sleep on his side, and his head should be kept between two pillows to prevent it from moving either to the right or left; do not force him to masturbate for any reason; have food brought to him that is forbidden by lion, until the pain subsides and the jawbones are no longer swollen; then let him eat whatever he wants.
And that should be administered gently, and not force the opening of the mouth; it (the food) should be consumed and liquids drunk and sleep, until the jaw is immobilized and healed.
If it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws at any time and they do not return to their places, then watchful waiting often leads to fevers and constant sweating, and the abdomen of the patient becomes bloated, and strong vomiting of pure bile occurs.
And when you see this, you should know that it is a disaster; and watchful waiting often causes the death of him who suffers from this in ten days.
Capital .25 (in Roman numerals)
On the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and the extremity of the muscle.
The clavicle is not dislocated from the back by its continuity with the chest; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outer joint, and this can be determined by examination.
The restoration of it (the clavicle) involves the patient lying on his back and extending his arms. And press the area with your palm with strong compression, for it will return.
And place a cushion over that wound and apply pressure and strength to it.
But the end of that bone which is continuous with the shoulder is not dislocated on any day; therefore, it must be reduced and fixed as I have said, and according to what you are equipped for.
And place a cushion over that wound, apply pressure and compression, and instruct the patient to rest in tranquility until he is healed.
And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capital .26 (in Roman numerals)
On the reduction of a muscle dislocation.
You should know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated at the joint of the elbow to the wrist.
And the second way is that it is dislocated at the joint above the muscle, and this is very serious; and it is not dislocated at the joints behind the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the joints in front of the nerves.
In addition, it is dislocated and protruded at the wrist joints in front, and this is serious; moreover, in those with little flesh, it is easily dislocated; but in those with much flesh, it comes out with difficulty.
And often it occurs in some men due to a blow or fall, and the muscle of him is removed with cauterization of an abscess, and it is healed where it has been dislocated.
Therefore, you should find out what this is and only proceed if you are well equipped for it, and then you can proceed with the treatment of it.
The dislocation of it (the elbow) at the wrist joints is known; therefore, you should distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal one, as there are clear differences among them; and you should locate the head of the muscle by feeling a concavity below the elbow, and on top of the head of the muscle, you should touch it like the end of a thumb, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to its auricle, nor can he move it in any way.
If it is dislocated at the knee or above, you should find a clear touch, and it should not be hidden.
And from this dislocation there is an easy reduction when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
The reduction of it (the elbow) is that the healer raises the hand above the joint and presses his thumbs below the elbow, and lifts the joint with force to its place, and the healer raises the hand, and extends it above; and presses it below so that it returns easily.
But if it does not return with the method described above, and the dislocation has just occurred, many days later, the patient should be bathed in hot water and a poultice made of comfrey, marshmallow root, and honey in water should be administered, like a poultice made from crushed althea leaves, fenugreek, and honey in water.
And the patient should lie on his back and rest below the elbow, waiting for a bandage that is neither too loose nor too tight to be placed; and the healer should place his hand over the shoulder, lift the head of the muscle with force, and pull the patient's hand toward the wrist so that it does not move outward, and another healer should hold the patient's head so that it is not moved outward, for it will soon return to its place.
And if you want to reduce it in this way: and this is that you have a man present who is taller than the patient, and stands on his side, and enters his muscle below the elbow of the patient and lifts the elbow of him up to the joint above until the patient is suspended in the air, and another healer pulls the patient's hand from the joints of the abdomen. But if the patient is lightweight, it is necessary to suspend something else as a counterweight, in order to make it heavier, for the dislocation will soon return.
And it is reduced in the same way: and this is to place a long pole on the ground with its head rounded like a mortar pestle, neither too thick nor too thin, and have the patient rest below; then place a lion's skin cloth over the top of the pole, and the patient should stand according to the length of the pole, and extend his hand from the other side with force, for the joint will quickly return to its place.
And if the reduction [of the intestine or hernia] is difficult due to all the causes mentioned earlier, then use this remedy: take a rod whose length is two fists and its width four fingers, and reduce its thickness at the knob-like end in this manner:
Then wrap a lion's skin cloth around the rounded head [of the rod] to protect the patient from being hurt.
Place the knob-like end at the patient's side and extend your hand or arm around the rod between the fingers, and bind the rod with ropes and hands and the end of the arm.
Then place one arm over a step ladder according to its width, extend the other arm to the sides, and fasten it to the opposite side to join them quickly.
And when the interior [of the intestine or hernia] is completely filled in any way possible for you, then place a woolen sponge soaked in a mixture of ground alum and hulled oats over the entire muscle, turning it around as needed; strengthen the knob-like end with a suitable tightening, wrap the ligament over the paste, and bind the hand to the patient's neck, leave it there, and do not injure the hand for seven days.
It is necessary to limit the diet of the patient little by little until the member [intestine or hernia] is comfortable, as it promotes healing quickly.
And give the patient more food little by little and exercise movement; if it is stopped and does not become softened, then it is healed.
But if the joint [intestine or hernia] is dislocated multiple times due to moisture that happens to it or for another reason, then it is necessary to administer cautery with three strokes, as previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization.
And if all of this is done and the ligament and joint are not tied for seven days, and the paste and tightening have been reduced several times without success and cannot lift the arm to the sides above, then you know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are already injured or stretched or softened, and you know that the joint will never be properly set in place.
From the dislocation of that [intestine or hernia], you must press on the feet and the breast or the sides behind it, and the reduction is done with impulse and extension until it returns.
And another tightening is administered to it, and cure that [intestine or hernia] until it is healed.
And if there is serious illness or delay in the movement of the member [intestine or hernia], then have the patient use baths several times until the illness subsides and returns to its original state.
Chapter 27.
On the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
You should know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and it returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated at all parts, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation of it is not concealed by covering or touching it according to any figure, and when you adjust the displaced shoulder, it is declared clearly that the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or touch the muscle with it.
And you should cut and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before an abscess forms, because if an abscess forms, reducing it is difficult, and the healing is slow; especially when it is at the back, because all other types of dislocations are worse and more painful, and many days can lead to death from that.
The restoration [of the shoulder] when it is possible to reduce it, is that your hand should be extended over two more, and the arm of it should be expanded, and the hands of the doctor should be on the shoulder and under it, and he pushes the joint with his knuckles or the back of his hand until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is at the front, then it returns by bending the hand towards your palm and striking the shoulder with the back of your hand.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer violent extension and strong movement.
Two servants should extend the arm, and another two should hold it so that it is not stretched too much during extension.
Then turn the arm in all directions, as it is wrapped with doubled cloth or rope around the hand of it.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, oil it to facilitate lubrication and movement, then push the joint with strong force until it returns.
And for the reduction of it, it is necessary to place it on a paste made with alum and hulled oats, strengthening it with tightening and wrapping it tightly; then lift the arm from the neck and leave it for some days.
And if the joint has formed in its place, then you loosen the ligament and leave it.
If you see that the joint is not stronger, then you apply the plaster and ointment, and leave it for some days until it is strengthened; and release it (the bandage) afterwards.
If there is a need for the reduction of the joint, and its condition is moving, then administer humectation in baths and subtle friction, and compression (bandage), until it is relieved; or apply ointment to the inflamed joint, so that it may rest on the bones for a day and night. Then remove that (bandage), and immerse it in water; when it has softened, then you scour the joint with tempered friction, and apply ointment over the inflamed area, which is a cough, once, twice, and thrice, Corruption has already occurred within the intestine after bathing, until it becomes limited.
And if you wish, place a damp and warm pad over the wound and bind it tightly around it; do this several times, as the wound is wet and will return to its position.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder (joint between arm and hand)
The shoulder joint of the hand is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of the dislocation is easy, while the contrary is true for other joints; however, speed in the reduction of it at the time of the dislocation is necessary, before it is dislocated or a dislocation caution is applied.
The reduction of the dislocation is that you place the patient's hand on a table and extend their arm, then place your hand or palm over the joint, and push it back into its position until it returns to its location.
However, it is necessary to consider if the palm has already been placed on the stomach of the hand; in that case, the patient should place their two hands on a table for both extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is preceded by the hand, then the position of the hand of the patient should be intrinsically placed on the table, so that the doctor's hand may come over the joint.
And if it returns quickly, that is good; otherwise, you should strengthen it with plaster and allow it to rest; do not apply any more ointment or heat, as it may cause pain or prevent the reduction of the dislocation for several days.
However, the joint may remain crooked; and do not inform the patient of any cause, but make their hand soft and not strong enough to exert any force; then know that the nerves are cut or crushed, and do not be hasty in healing it, but rather strengthen it with a pointed cautery for its recovery and confer no cause.
Therefore, when the shoulder is returned, you should place it on the plaster which has been recommended, and allow it to rest and strengthen for seven days; then release it, let it rest again, and exercise the hand of the patient.
And if the motion is impeded and there are any complications, then alleviate it with warm water and gentle friction several times until it is relieved.
Chapter XXIX.
On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Fingers are sometimes dislocated at various places.
When one finger is dislocated at the base of the palm or in the middle, then hold it and push the dislocation back into its position until it returns.
And support the finger's head, and suspend the affected area, allowing it to rest for two days.
Suspend the finger and stretch it until it is straightened on that day.
When night comes, follow that order, and do not cease to release it during the day and exercise it with motion, and lay it down at night; and do this for several days until it is straightened.
And do the same if it is dislocated in the wrist of the hand, and lay it down at that side and perform the first operation on it, until it is healed.
And similarly do as when it is dislocated in other places.
Here starts capital thirty.
On the treatment of dislocation of the spine bones in the back.
When any of the spine or neck bones are completely dislocated and more than two vertebrae are moved from their places, there is no cure for that, because death approaches the patient.
And the sign of this is that the patient's bowel movement is outside their control and they cannot retain it; and many times some limbs or both legs or one arm, or even one vertebra is moved from its place, because many times it is moved and many times it is made to move to four different directions.
Therefore, it has already been dislocated in the back and is called scoliosis.
But the treatment of it is whether it occurs in childhood, because in that case there is neither cure nor healing of everything.
But in that which occurs by accident or by impact or similar to those, the ancients have already spoken at length about the methods of treatment; but I will abbreviate it from that which has a little excuse for its excessive length, because I want to present and form it with different instruments than the one which I will explain and expand upon.
And only that one which occurs in the back itself with what I will recommend is cured.
And the patient should be extended flat on their back, facing a wall, and should be supported below to prevent pressure on their legs.
And a straight stick should be placed, fixed in the ground at the end near their head, and another stick in front of them to support their feet at the other end.
The attendant should hold the stick, not being anchored in a hole; and another attendant should hold the other in the same way.
And wrap around the head of the patient with a cloth and tighten it firmly with a bandage; extend the end of the bandage to the stick that is near their head, and tie it there; and strongly apply another bandage around their waist and hips, under their chest, and adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other stick which is under their feet.
Approach the minister and extend the linen to the division of the trunk, but do not allow the two trunks and the linens in their places where they are inserted, but rather loosen them slightly.
The doctor places his hands on the spine with strength until it returns, or places a board on top of it and adjusts his feet on the board until it returns.
But if it does not return in this manner, then take a board whose length or width is three feet, and dig a hole in the wall next to the patient, into which you insert the end of the board. Then place the edge of the board on the spine and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and exert pressure until the spine is bent and returns to its location.
And if you wish, turn the patient's head to your hand; and you should place his heels at the end of two trunks, whose length is one forearm each, and his head similarly at the end of two other trunks, with a space between them that is a palm for each trunk. Then make a hole in each trunk and secure it firmly to the ground so that it does not move.
Make one trunk round and place it on top of the two trunks.
And at the end of it is a hole through which the trunk is formed, with a length of one palm and a circle around it. And the other two trunks are similar to this.
Then tighten the linens that you have stretched on the feet of the patient in the hole where the head is to be placed, and the linens that you have stretched on the thighs of the patient in the ring where the legs are to be placed.
Then each turn should have a servant who turns the ring with his hand, and the doctor should insert the spine as stated.
Once the spine is returned and the location is covered, it is necessary to place compresses made of thick plaster with albumen from eggs and stopper, and to place a board over the plaster, whose width is three fingers or more around that area, and the length is the same as the size of the swelling, and on top of the spine's location.
And use the linens that were mentioned earlier for nourishment until the patient is healed.
If there remains any danger in the location at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and soothe it for a long time with the administration of the board, which we have recommended; and already a layer of lead has been applied to that location.
Sometimes there is danger in the lower end of the spinal column due to dislocation; and it is cautioned for that reason that this medicine should not be applied quickly to it because it can lead to death.
Chapter .xxxi.
On the treatment of a dislocated pelvis.
Know that the joint of the pelvis and the joint of the muscle do not dislocate but only displace, and this does not happen to those joints that dislocate slightly and are concave.
And the joint of the pelvis is dislocated in four ways: it can be dislocated internally or externally, anteriorly or posteriorly.
And moreover, it is dislocated internally and rarely anteriorly or posteriorly.
When the dislocation of the joint at the hip is suspected, since you adjust the patient's healthy leg next to the affected one, it becomes longer and the affected leg is more prominent than the healthy one, and the affected leg cannot bend; therefore, it should be straightened, and it is the place where you should apply a cauterized cautery incision, so that the head of the dislocation has been reached here.
The sign of the dislocation which occurs at the hip is that the symptoms opposite to this accident occur there.
The sign of the dislocation at the front of the hip is when the leg becomes extended according to its nature, but does not bend due to pain that is on the inside, and if it is forced to be moved and cannot move inwardly; and the urine is retained and the incision is cauterized, and you should walk with it on the heel.
The sign of the dislocation at the back of the hip is that the inside does not expand, nor can it bend outward which bends the incision, and the leg becomes shorter than the other, and the incision becomes soft, and the head of the dislocation should be there.
But the reduction of these types of dislocations depends on your consideration, if the dislocation is old and longstanding, which has already been treated with approximation, then it is not in its cure; and therefore, there should be no expectation for improvement.
But in the case of a recent dislocation and one of the four types of dislocations, then you should aim to bring the joint together and extend it outwardly on both sides, with the right and left, for a strong pull returns and does not require any other treatment.
But if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare and apply strong treatment and extend the leg from the lower part or with the aid of a lever that is tied above the dislocation; and another assistant should extend the hand above it so that his fingers reach the end of it; and apply pressure firmly on the ligament above the incision, and have another assistant hold the end of the ligament tightly.
And the extension should be either from the inside of the leg to the incision at the groin, or from the back of the leg to the end of the spine.
And the extension of all these should be performed in one move while the patient is raised off the ground and remains hanging.
This type of extension is common to all four types.
And therefore, if the dislocation returns with what has been said, it will be good; and if not, it is necessary for all types to follow what I will say about its own treatment.
In the reduction of its own, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is at the inside parts, it is necessary that the patient lies down on their back; and place the ligaments on the incision in the location between the head of the dislocation and the lower part where the incision is to be straightened; and extend the ligament above the area of the groin to the most advanced part of the spine.
And have another assistant hold the arms of the patient tightly, and grip the large head of the dislocated joint firmly and extend it outwardly by forceful extension, for it will return to its place.
And this type is easier cure than the other types with which this member is reduced.
But if it is excused and you do not obey this type of treatment for all, then it is necessary to tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong, light ligament around both ankles and both soles.
And the length of each should be four fingers, and the affected leg should be extended more than the other by two fingers.
And have the patient suspended over the post, with their head upward; and let the length of them from the ground be two arms.
And command a strong young man to press down on the head of the dislocation, and have another young man support the patient, and the other young man should press firmly on the joint with strong force, for the joint will return to its place quickly.
But in the reduction of its own, when it is a dislocation on the outside parts, it is necessary for the patient to walk with crutches as recommended earlier; and tighten the ligament firmly on the affected leg and on the feet.
And pause two posts, one on the feet and the other on the head; and pause ropes attached to the middle of each post, which damp cloths should be wrapped around, so that the patient is not hurt because the post is between their legs, and so that the extension outwardly is not restricted.
And each assistant should extend to their respective part, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to art.
And when dislocation occurs at the hips, it is necessary that the leg be gently extended, and according to this account on hip; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the affected hip, and with the other hand he presses that one, and with that pressure he holds the dislocated hip back towards the opposite hip.
And if dislocation occurs at the hips behind, it is not necessary that the patient be extended towards the back and raised above the ground; rather, it must be held in place on a hard surface, just as it should be held if the groin is dislocated to the outside of the hips, as we have said earlier about the treatment of such cases. And it must be on its face and the limbs extended, according to what we have said, there is no improvement.
It is necessary to apply a compression with a board to the joint area.
Therefore, as the reduction is complex, as the sign for reduction of that joint is not hidden from you (you spread the patient's legs) and when you see the groins contracted and the patient extends their leg and expands it without excuse, then you know which member needs to be returned - and then you adjust two cushions and pack it with bandages so that the groin is not damaged in any part; and you keep the patient at rest for three or four days.
Then loosen the bandages and the packing, and compare one leg with the other.
Then, if you see that the groins are aligned properly, then you know that the dislocation is now closed, and at that point you can let the patient move about.
If you see any sign of swelling, then return and pack it, and extend it according to your first structure, and let it rest for three days.
Then unbind that one, and make him walk slowly on crutches for several days until he is comfortable.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of hip dislocation.
The hip can be dislocated in three ways: to the outside, to the inside, more towards the back than the front; but it is not dislocated to the front.
And the sign for hip dislocation is that you instruct the patient to apply pressure to their thigh, and then you know that the hip is dislocated.
And the treatment for all types of dislocation is to position the patient correctly, so that they extend their leg if possible, place your hands on the side of it, and hold the foot between your feet; and bring the hip towards you with both hands and hold it in place firmly, and another person extend the foot until the hip returns to its proper position.
The sign for reduction of dislocation is that the leg adheres to the thigh without laborious effort.
Then pack that one and make the leg adhere to the thigh with bandages for three or four days, and then unbind it.
Do not allow the patient to walk for several days until they are healed and comfortable.
But if the reduction is difficult for you, then administer strong traction with the bandages as described in the treatment of the groin that was mentioned earlier.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the treatment of ankle dislocation.
The ankle is sometimes reduced by slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated due to complications, and the dislocation of it is made either towards the inside or outside.
And the sign for dislocation of the ankle is that you see the ankle swollen in the direction towards which it has been dislocated.
But the treatment for reduction is gentle, and it should be extended easily with both hands and held in place until it returns to its proper position.
But in the treatment of ankle dislocation due to complications, it is necessary that the patient be positioned correctly, and have a strong and capable person from behind the foot on the same side of the dislocation.
And place your right hand on the upper part of the foot and your left hand on the lower part of the foot in the area of the calf.
And pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and pull it again with your left hand for two steps, and extend it with your left hand; and push the toes of the foot with your right hand towards the leg without effort.
And do this twice as they have counted.
Then you push the feet of the patient to the bed on the third observation, and you are at the foot-end.
If it returns in one observation or two according to this method, and if the foot appears swollen, that is good; but if not, you continue with the operation, because it will return.
But if the reduction of it is forbidden as they have recommended, then you place the patient on his back on the ground, spread a cloth on the ground and let him lie between his legs, and you are already wrapped around him with a cloth so that you do not hurt the patient.
Then the one in charge of him should hold his legs, and another minister should stretch the foot with his hands or as he lies on the neck of the foot; and each minister should extend their arms opposite to the extension of the patient's leg, and the cloth should be placed between the patient's legs to keep the body from being pulled apart at the sides, so that its extension is not torn.
And the doctor grasps the dislocation with both hands, and another minister holds the healthy limb apart, because the dislocation returns easily.
And when the dislocation returns and the reduction of it is declared to you as good, then you stop plastering and tightly bind the foot on the bed.
And be careful or protect yourself from the nerves that are behind the heel, because the binding should not be violent and hurt it strongly.
And leave it for two days or three; and if the binding is softened, remove it.
Then unbind it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from walking for forty days. But if he must go before that space, it is not certain that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, and this will not receive treatment.
If an abscess is formed by cautery, then you must administer the prescribed treatment for it as in the place of care and binding mentioned earlier, until it is healed.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the cure of dislocation of the fingers of the feet.
It is necessary that the one who is dislocated be reduced with a little extension without strain; and this is not difficult, it is easy to move.
But if the dislocation is in one of the toes of the foot, it is necessary that you place the patient on a stool or table at the site for reduction and be standing as if he were walking.
And you stand on one foot, and place your other foot on the site of the joints, and press it with the other foot with force until it returns, and observe that it has been reduced and does not appear in the prominent area.
And place the foot of it on a table that supports the entire foot, which has two legs; and tighten it with a suitable and firm structure for three days; and then unbind it and let it rest from walking for several days, until it is strengthened and the reduction is assured.
Chapter XXXV.
On the kinds of dislocation that are caused by a wound, or a fracture, or any combination thereof.
When some cause of that kind occurs and you devote yourself to the treatment of it and the restoration of the limb, many observations may occur before death.
And therefore, in the treatment of it, do not be presumptuous or hasty, but rather patient, humble, and compassionate; use remedies that allow abscesses to heal slowly; leave the patient to divine judgment, but treat him who you hope will recover from danger, with alleviation of the disease, and in which you see some hope. And therefore, as soon as possible, make the reduction at the beginning of the cause before an abscess forms.
And if the limb returns as desired, then administer treatment that allows an abscess to form and cures the wound with appropriate drying remedies.
And if the dislocation is caused by a fracture and it occurs in separated bones, then you perform a setting of them, and do what has been said earlier about simple diseases at their sites.
And guard and avoid, according to your ability, the intestine in fearful paths as my preaching has guided you; for that is better for you, and it preserves your creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more healthy to your true body in your time. Thus ends the words of Albuscasim, may God be praised. Amen.
