Therefore, as Albuccassis has completed this book for you, the last of the science of medicine, it is fitting that he conveys it to you through this treatise, which is divided into surgical procedures.
Since the art of surgery has been altogether abandoned in our region and in our times, due to great danger that threatens the science itself and its tools are lost; there remains only a few brief descriptions of it in the books of the ancients, which are altered by many errors and obscured until their true meanings and the power of the art become obscure.
It appears that I will revive this treatise in accordance with its original structure of exposition and clarification and abbreviation; and for the forms of cauterizing instruments and other tools necessary for the work, the explanation and preparation are essential.
One of the reasons why there are few skilled artificers with their tools in this time is that the art of medicine is long, and that its practitioner must be familiar with anatomy, which includes knowledge of the joints and their forms, as well as their connection and disconnection; knowing the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and their excrescence; and the pulsating veins and quiet veins, and the locations for their issuance.
And according to Hippocrates, who has a name that is much in word, but small in deed, and even more so in the art of surgery.
But we have already said about that [Hippocrates] in the beginning of this book; for whoever does not know what we have said about anatomy, is not worthy to be considered a doctor, as I myself have seen many who are ill-informed about this science and practice medicine outside their field and through experimentation, which often leads to the death of patients.
For I have seen a foolish and inexperienced doctor perform an abscess called "escrophilos" on the neck of a woman, and cut some arteries of the neck causing a large amount of blood to flow into it, which led to the death of the woman among those present.
And I have seen another doctor who pretended to pull out a stone from a man's bladder, which was already infected, and the stone was large, and he cut part of the bladder in order to extract it, but the man died on the third day.
And I called for it to be extracted, and I saw that due to the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, it was evident that he would die.
And I have seen another doctor who received a salary from a duke of our land to perform surgery, and then operated on a black slave who had fractured his hip; and with his ignorance, the doctor cut the fracture open in the wound using pulvins and large staples, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And he wrapped it according to his wishes, and rebandaged it, and kept it dry for several days and commanded us not to unwrap it; and thus it became an abscess, and led to its destruction.
And I was called to him, and prepared to unwrap the bandages, but he obtained peace and subsided with his pain.
But corruption was already confirmed in the member, so that it could not be stopped, and the corruption spread throughout the limb until the patient perished.
And I have seen another doctor who pierced an abscess cancerous, and it was ulcerated after several days, to the aggravation of the malice of it by its master.
The cause is that the cancerous tumor is pure of melancholic humor, therefore it does not necessarily have to affect everything, but rather only an organ or part of the body which is susceptible to its hostility.
And therefore, my son, it is necessary for you to be careful with the operation in two ways: one is associated with health, and the other is with danger in greater circumstances.
I myself have already experienced this in many places where there is surgery that involves error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to be careful and to avoid this, so that the foolish do not speak falsely about you.
And therefore take your weapons with caution and the protection of God, and your patients with happiness and firmness.
Use the best method for the grace of God to gain salvation and praiseworthy success, and leave the terrible illnesses with difficult cure, and lay down your weapons from what causes you fear, so that examination in your faith and in your name does not deceive you: for more remains to your glory, and thus it remains in the world and in posterity to your sanctity.
Gualia herself has already said in some of her admonitions: "Do not treat bad diseases, so that bad doctors are not called good."
And I have divided this book into three chapters.
Here begins the division of the book, and it starts with the first part. The first chapter is organized in the head concerning feet, in the shapes of instruments and the ironwork of cauteries, and what is necessary for surgery.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on fistulas and perforations, abscesses and wounds, extraction of foreign bodies and similar things related to them, all catalogued and organized according to the shapes of instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and the cure of twisting and similar things related to them; the chapter is organized in the head concerning feet, and the shapes of instruments.
It is necessary for me to say the quality of the instruments used in that cautery and their side effects, and in which circumstances cautery should be prohibited.
Therefore I will say that the discourse on the quality of the instrument of cautery and its side effects is a long and detailed one, subtle in science, and concealed; and many wise men have spoken about it, and they disagree with each other, and it concerns only a small part of their discourse, fearing prolixity.
And therefore I will say that cautery is generally useful in all cases universally, except for two circumstances, which are circumstances without a material basis.
In the case of a dry and hard matter accumulation in the tail, some say that cautery is helpful for this, while others say the opposite, that cautery is not suitable for the illness which is due to its quality and dryness, since nature of fire is both quality and dryness, it is inappropriate for dry and hard illnesses to be treated with what is hot and dry water.
It is said that the opposite is true for dry and hard matter accumulation in the tail, that cautery is helpful in all dry and hard illnesses of the human body, since when you compare the human body and its humidity to the heat of fire, you find that the human body is colder.
And it can be said by the argument of the above, that I have experienced this several times myself.
However, it is not enough that one comes upon this who has already been exposed and exercised in the chapter of cautery through previous experience, and come to know the diversity of human complexion and the disposition of illnesses in their causes, effects, and the time of those illnesses.
But in other complexions, there is no need to be afraid, and especially in cold and moist illnesses, since all doctors agree on this, and do not disagree on the usefulness of cautery in those illnesses.
And know, my sons, that the secret of healing with cautery by fire and its goodness is that cautery is a burning medicine, since fire is simple and its action does not affect any other member but only the one being cauterized, and it causes minimal damage to adjacent areas.
But the action of burning medicine affects the members that are adjacent to it and makes difficult healing and recovery in sick members.
But fire, due to its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do this; rather it overflows. It is already known through experiment and a long period of study in the art about the truth of causes; therefore I am excused for the length of the speech. And if it were not that it is not permitted in my free will to reveal the secret of fire hidden within it, and the quality of its operation on bodies and the expulsion of illness through philosophical demonstration, which would sharpen your pains.
And know, my sons, that they disagree on the time in which it is appropriate to perform cautery and pause the best time during springtime.
I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, since the damage caused by time is submerged in the benefit of the cauterization, and especially if the cauterization is due to pain or necessary for pain relief, such as fistulas, which cannot tolerate delay because the danger from the illness exceeds the minor harm caused by the time.
And do not doubt this, my sons, or it is only believed by the common people and foolish doctors, since the healing of that illness which is cured by cauterization does not occur at all times, and there are consequences for it.
And the cause is not as they think, because cauterization is only in a place where medicine acts to change the complexion and dry out the humidity which causes pain.
But cauterization is excessive over medicine due to its value, virtue of its operation and greatness of its master.
It is possible that the illness may return at some point in time depending on the complexion of the patient and the location of the illness, its properties, what is prepared in the body due to the aggregation of excess humors in it, and what is ingested by the patient due to causes similar to those. However, if the illness for which cauterization is administered is a subtle one with few superfluidities and humidity, such as cautery of teeth for pain, it is possible that the pain will not return, but only minor damage may occur.
And it is a common saying that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, and this is an incorrect statement, not according to what I understand in it, since I believe that it is not curing with medicine or any other cause that leads to cauterization.
And the reason is the opposite; and my opinion that cauterization is the last resort of medicine is not because we administer the methods of healing in some illnesses, but when those treatments are not effective, we then administer cauterization at the end of the cause, and it helps with that. And therefore, from here on I say that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the opinion which the common people and ignorant doctors understand.
And the ancients said that cauterization with gold was better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this only because of the equality of gold and the loftiness of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not heal quickly, for it is not absolutely true, because I have already proved and observed that it does not do so in all bodies, and cauterizing with fire is better than with iron as they say; however, when you cauterize with fire from gold, it is not revealed to you, because it depends on the quantity of gold used for the size of the wound, and it prepares to receive cold; and if you adjust it over the fire, gold melts due to heat, and in the fire, some layers may come off which the artisan must be careful of.
And because it is cauterized with iron, we should do it gently and then more precisely in the correct procedure.
I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to the chapters, and have ordered those from the head down to the feet, so that it becomes easier for you to ask what you want from him.
The first chapter.
This cauterization counteracts cold and moisture in the underlying cause of which there are two, causing scrofula and many rheumatic flues, called corissa, from the head to the heels and earfluxes, and many sleep disorders, and tooth pain and gout, and generally all illness that comes due to coldness, such as paralysis, sclerosis and apoplexy, and similar diseases in these illnesses.
The method of this cauterization is as follows: First, you command the patient to be evacuated with a medicinal enema for three or four nights, according to the severity of the illness, the age of the patient and his habit.
Then you command him to shave his head with a razor, and then seat him between your hands on a raised bench and place your hands on his feet.
Then you place the edge of your palm close to the patient's nose between his eyebrows. But if the place you indicated is not reached, mark that place with a probe, and then ignite the olive oil cautery, which has this shape:
Then you press it down on the marked place, in such a way that it descends, and your hand should be held tight, little by little, and you rotate it.
Then you lift your hand slightly and observe the place, and if you see any amount of bone being exposed, such as the size of an error grain, then you lift your hand, and if it does not retreat from that iron, another one of that kind, if it is cold, into view until the bone I mentioned to you is seen.
Then take a little salt and dissolve it on the place and leave it for three days.
Then press on the burnt spot in the border and leave it until the scar from the fire is destroyed. And you heal the place with a strong four-part remedy until it is healed.
And they said that when the wound remains open, it gets better more quickly, because it is better and more helpful.
And some of them said that the coccyx should be cauterized to the bone, and the cautery must be kept there until a portion of the bone is burnt off.
And it should be shaved down so that it fits the bone, and then healed.
And others said that the cautery should reach the bone, until strong pressure is exerted on it until the bone breaks, and this is the form of alphecati: They believe that the vapors from the head will expire from that location.
Keep the wound open for a long time, and apply healing until it is solidified.
I do not see these two types of cauterization in every case, but only in some men out of fear; and leave that one, you should, for my better health, when possible; because the head is uncovered by the solution of continuity in this way as we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head is of a fragile nature.
The first type of cauterization is safer and better for me; and from that herb and with that work for my health.
Chapter second.
On the cauterization of the head.
When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs in the entire head of a patient, and they use gears and rakes and combs and bandages and poultices and cords and gauzes and similar things, and especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery that does not improve any of those causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong creation in its nature; and if it is not fragile and the damage is not great, cauterize it again with another cautery after a short time. Then cauterize it on the patient's forehead with cauterization until the scab is separated. Cut the scab and expose the bone quantity that we have cauterized with one cautery in the back of the head in the place called "hole" - and this is the place where pus collects. And loosen your hand in this, and do not expose the bone, for the patient suffers great pain different from the pain of all other head cauterizations.
And say that this cauterization is in its place, for the cauterization at the top of the head and occiput is more subtle than the one used for the middle of the head; and this is its form.
Chapter third.
On non-ancient migraine cauterization.
When pain occurs in the back of the head or is extended to the neck, use medications that are specific for the head, and administer the other cure, which I have said in the provisions for diseases; if this does not improve, then cauterization in this case is done in two ways: either cauterization with acute burning medicine, or with iron.
Cauterization with burning medicine is what you should take a mortar made of alum and grind it, and sharpen the edges of both ends of the mortar. And apply incision in the place of pain in the temple with a sharp lance until it makes a hole below the scab, until it is hidden.
And apply pressure on the area stopped by constriction, and leave it for three hours; and loosen the alum, and leave the wound for two or three days, and place a cushion over the immersed area until the area becomes sore.
And heal that one with mouthwash until it is healed.
And if you wish, do this with some burning medications which I have written in the second treatise of burning medications.
Cauterization with iron in this way: fire for the cauterization, and this is its form:
It is called a nail clamp, because the head of it resembles the shape of a nail with some curvature, and in its middle part there is a small prominence.
Place your hand over the place of pain, and hold it - to prevent the archery from being touched - and rotate the small iron slowly.
And if the quantity of what is touched by the tip of the scab is large enough, lift your hand to prevent the artery from being touched which is nearby, so that there is no flow of blood.
And immerse the area in salt water and place it on that spot, and leave it for three days; and cover the area with a bandage, and heal it with mouthwash until it is healed.
If you wish, perform cauterization with the tip of the scalpel as in cauterization, and be careful to avoid cutting an artery during this non-ancient migraine cauterization.
Chapter fourth.
On ancient migraine cauterization.
When you treat migraine with what I have said about the previous cure, and what I have said in the provisions for diseases, and the cure does not improve, and sometimes because the disease that cannot be treated with what I have said of the first cauterization with medicine or with fire cauterization, then you must heat the scalpel cauterization until it is white hot, indicating over the place of pain with a long line of which the thickness is the same as the finger, or whatever; and after waiting for a while, lift your hand and incise the artery and reach the bone.
It is necessary for you to ensure the continuation of the mandible, which is moved during chewing, that the jaw does not be dislocated and the nerves associated with it do not be harmed, and that there is no spasm.
If it is about the care and caution of the flow of blood from an artery that is being excised, for in the excision there is fear, especially for those who do not know what they are doing and are not skilled; leave the operation to begin with them.
And you will find a reminder of the regulation of blood flow in the event of an accident from an artery according to its method, in its place in this book.
And if you see this illness that does not require this cautery and the body of the patient is tolerable, cauterize it in the middle of the head as we have mentioned before, and heal the wound until it is healed.
If you find (it), administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on constriction of an artery with cautionary having two knives, and this cauterization is better and more advisable.
Chapter 5.
On the cauterization of ear pains.
When there is pain in the ear due to inflammation and it is treated with medicinal causes and other treatments as mentioned in the division, but the pain does not subside, then apply fire cauterization, which is called "point", of which this is the form:
And bring the point close to the fire, and it should be moved around the entire ear as a wheel is rolled, or in the circle of each example if the pain is in one place. Hold the cautery of the ear lancet little by little as you find the spot with certainty.
And if the cauterization of many points is made all over the ear, and what it is, take care of the spots until they are healed.
Chapter 6.
On the cauterization of burns.
Burns that are cured and treated with cauterization are nothing more than the species of substances that come from the sting as we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cauterization of the substance that comes by drying or spasm of a nerve.
When you cure that type of burn with herbs and purges and emetics, do not rely on your treatment, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: the first one is the lancet of the ear, the second a small one in its temple, and the third is the junction of two lips.
Pause your cautery for the opposite side of the sick part, as softening does not occur except in the healthy part.
The form of cauterization is to cauterize it with the cautery on the side of the ear extension above a small amount on top of the head, and in the temple another one whose length should be according to the length of the finger, and then remove your hand from the cautery until the quantity of the wound is burned by the thickness of the substance of the skin.
And this is the form of the cauterization, and it is the type of knife-shaped cautery, the shape of which is like a table. But it is more delicate than that one you find, and it is necessary to have a knife with less excess thickness.
And take care of the place until the process is healed.
Chapter 7.
On the cauterization of old apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it with what we have mentioned and do not rely on your treatment and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize it with four cauterizations: first of all over the entire head; second, in the middle of the head as we have said; third, in the neck; and fourth, in the coccyx. And the method of cauterization is done as we have previously mentioned.
It has already been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is more important; and take care of it with what you process.
Chapter 8.
On the cauterization of forgetfulness caused by a sting.
It is necessary to give the patient in the beginning herbs and pills that are useful for softening.
And shave the head of the patient completely and place it on the neck with the plaster described in the treatise on plasters.
Leave it for a few days, as this is the method of cauterization. Do what you have previously ordered.
And if it cures well in this way, then do nothing more; but if not, make three cauterizations on the back of the head, which should be decreasing from the top of the head to the back of the neck. Leave a gap between each cauterization according to the length of the finger, and take care of the cautery with what is being processed.
But if you find that the patient is tolerant, then do the cauterization in the middle; and if you find more addiction, then cauterize it over both ears.
Approach the interior that needs to be healed; apply the olive-oil-based cauterization according to the given form.
Here is the translation for the next sentence:
Here is the translation for the next sentence:
You must proceed with the cleansing of the head and use what I have told you; then shave the patient's head, carefully cauterize it in the appropriate place on the head, cauterize all the corners of the head, cauterize the back part, and apply three cauterizations on the neck vertebrae.
If it is necessary in the treatment of mollification of the body that has many tumors and the patient cannot tolerate it, and the disease is strong, then cauterize it with four cauterizations on the spine of the back, and afterward, cauterize within where the pain originates, and raise your hand. Approach the interior that needs to be healed, and this should be olive-oil based cauterization.
Here is the translation for the next sentence:
Here is the translation for the next sentence:
Do not cauterize the epileptic; rather, that epilepsy is caused by a blow.
Therefore, clean the brain of the patient at the beginning with vinegar and the other treatment that I have described in the division when the patient is large and can tolerate the exception of medicines.
And if the patient is a child who cannot tolerate medicines, administer powders and pastes to help clean them; do this for several days with good food preparation.
Then shave the patient's head, and carefully cauterize it in the appropriate place on the head according to the previous method, and another cauterization on the back of their head, and cauterize each corner of the head as well. If the patient is strong and can tolerate it, cauterize them with the cauteries that I have mentioned, providing both paralysis and body mollification on the neck and back vertebrae.
Use olive-oil based cauteries as previously described.
If the patient is a child, pause with subtle cauterization according to this method.
Here is the translation for the next sentence:
Here is the translation for the next sentence:
When the causes of melancholy are rotten and corrupted humors or heavy blows, then cauterize it with the cauteries that I have mentioned in the case of paralysis.
If the cause of melancholy is excessive decline leading to melancholy and the patient's body is humid, you should give them something that cleans their brain as described in the previous division.
Then shave the patient's head, apply a small round turban made of linen over the circle, and pause it in the appropriate place on the head.
The patient should be placed face down, and held from all sides.
Then pause liniment; it is more appropriate to use an ancient remedy of sheep's wool. Heats that on fire is placed for controlled heating, which he tolerates when it is put on him. Then places it in the correct position of his head in the circle, and let it in until it becomes cooled.
Do this to the patient every week once, along with his good regimen until he is well; or if you wish, cauterize it by making small points according to what seems best, but have a cautery prepared in such a way: this is a type of cautery that moistens the brain with equilibrium.
Then cover that open area with leather or wool blankets.
Chapter XII.
On cauterization due to water flowing down the groin.
When you have identified the start of water flowing down the groin by the signs I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient a drink that clears his head, and keep him away from all moisture.
Have him sit in a bath of warm water for several days.
Then tell him to shave his head, and cauterize it at the middle of the head with a cautery; and cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of diuresis in both groins, or with one cautery if it is the start of water flow in one groin.
Cut all the veins and arteries that are covered by the belt, and let the cauteries be in that space at the level of the temples.
Keep yourself away from blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see blood flow, stop it with some medicine that is available to you.
I will come with wisdom regarding the extraction of arteries and the abscission of those and caution for blood flow.
Sometimes, it is cauterized in the cerevisiae behind two bones with two cauteries properly positioned.
Chapter XIII.
On cauterization of old tears.
When tears in the groins are old and persistently due to veins and arteries manifestly located at the head's apparent location and it is verified that this is excessive fluidity, then cauterize it with a cautery as mentioned in the chapter on water flowing down the groins, at the middle of the head and two cauteries in the cerevisiae behind both temples, and two cauteries in the cerevisiae behind two bones. And if addition is needed, then cauterize it along the entire length of the buttock of the groin at the tip of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
On cauterization of nose smell.
When you are treating the patient as mentioned in the division and your treatment does not improve, then prepare yourself and give the patient chamomile tea for three nights; shave his head and cauterize it with a mild cautery using an olive oil-based cautery. Then cauterize it with carnation cautery and two cauteries on both eyebrows just above the hairline.
Keep yourself away from the arteries that are not to be cut.
The form of the carnation cautery is as follows:
Chapter XV.
On moisturizing cauterization of eyelids of groins.
When the eyelid of the groin is moistened due to illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with one cautery and this lunar-shaped cautery. Here is its form:
If you (the physician), cauterize it on both eyebrows with a small cautery at several points and extend the incision along the temples. Make each cautery according to the size of the eyebrow ridge.
Do not press too hard with your hand while using the cautery, but only according to the thickness of the eyelid division that is being treated.
Chapter XVI.
On cauterizing the eyelid of the groin when the hair turns into the divisions and points the heel.
When the skin of the heel is divided into parts as if it is pricked, cauterization can be done in two ways: cauterization can be to burn or can be a burning medicine.
If the cauterization is with fire, tell the patient to read the skin where it is to be burned, until it becomes long and narrow; if you prick that, then you must burn its edges so that it does not become bad until the skin has grown back.
Once the skin is grown back and has healed, place a cloth on the head of the patient and apply pressure to the eyelids of the heels with a handkerchief in the shape of a holly leaf and at the beginning of the handkerchief near the skin.
Then place a cotton cloth soaked in oil or chicken glue on the heel.
And apply heat to the cauterization tool.
Then cauterize the figure marked by the sign, bit by bit, in small spots, until the surface of the skin, which is like a holly leaf, is completely burned.
And the sign of the healing of the operation is that you see the eyelid of the heel contracted and the skin over the prick rise up.
Therefore, raise your hand and hold it for three days, and place a cloth over the wound until the scar is raised. And cure that with lard until it heals.
But if the skin returns for some reason and the eyelid becomes soft, then do another cauterization over it just as before.
But if the skin is in the eyelid and does not raise to its normal place and heal, then cauterize it until it rises to its place and heals so that it does not prick the heel.
But if the cauterization is with burning medicine, tell the patient to read the skin until it becomes long and narrow, and place a paper of linen in the shape of a holly leaf on it.
Take known powder and living coal and sprinkle them together. I mean, Or if you do not have those substances, mix them as well and make it with haste so that it is not spoiled; spread that on the paper in the shape of a holly leaf and place it on one heel or both; place a cloth soaked in oil over the wound, and let the head of the patient be in your lap.
And hold the medicine on the wound and press it lightly without damaging it until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, because a "bite" is similar to fire.
And when you feel the burn, remove the medicine from the wound and leave it for a while; then when the burn stops, remove the medicine and wash the heel with water; consider if the eyelid has risen as it should be washed with fire or incision, because in this case it is healed; and if it does not return to its place from the medicine over the area where the medicine was not pressed and did not spoil, your operation is completed and the wound is healed.
And place a cloth over the wound until the scar of the incision is raised, and cure it with lard or something else until it heals.
And it is necessary for you to keep an eye on your operation so that no pus comes out from the wound and if the eyelid becomes soft within a few days and some cause of the skin pricks in the heel, then repeat your medicine over the area where the eyelid became soft, just as you did at the beginning, and apply it until it is healed.
This is the shape of a holly leaf.
And you should know that men's heels are different in size and shape, so according to that is your treatment done.
And this should not be concealed from the one who studies this art.
Chapter XVII.
On cauterization of fistula that is in the heel's lacrimal gland.
When you treat fistula as previously said in the section on diseases and do not confer your treatment, then you must cauterize it in this way: tell the patient to place his head in your lap, and have a servant hold the head of the patient in such a way that it is not harmed or disturbed.
And place a cotton cloth soaked in oil or chicken glue on the heel of that person.
And apply heat to the cauterization tool in this shape:
The shape of the tool should be concave, like a reed or feather quill, with the end where the cauterization is made.
If you wish, it should penetrate into the other end. And if you want, it should come out like a plow.
The concave one (object or person) is better for the procedure.
Approach the fistula if it's open, and draw out the pus and dry it up from there. If it's not open, then open it and remove the abscess from there.
Place your hand over the cautery that should be well ignited, and hold it with your other hand about one inch away from the nose, so that neither you nor the patient are disturbed, then place the cautery on the hairs of the wound and burn it up.
If the cautery penetrates into the bone at first, that is good; if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, if necessary; leave it like that for three days, and place your hand over the area with a bandage and surround it with a dry compress until it is healed.
But if it lasts more than ten days and is not healed, place sharp, corrosive medicine on it until the bone is exposed and scraped as needed in its particular case.
Another method for cauterizing a fistula which some of the ancients used to say: put the hand at the location of the fistula and fumigate it, then place a thin thread (cautery) in that fissure; and it should be the amount of one ounce of lead melted; hold your hand with good grip, but do not harm the patient because the melted lead must not reach the wound of the patient; you should also put the wound of the patient on albumen of eggs or water, for lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it by a wonderful healing.
And if the fistula is healed by what has been said about cauterization and healing, that is good; but if not, it is necessary to administer a trauch (procedure?) of the nose and reduce the fistula to the chest of the nose according to its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
On the cauterization of the fissure (or crack) in the buttocks.
Many times a fissure occurs in the lips, especially in children's lips.
Therefore, if the treatment for those fissures does not work as we said in the previous sections, then burn it with a small cautery knife according to this form:
The concavity should be shaped like that of the blade (cautery knife).
Place it carefully in those fissures until the cautery reaches the edge of the fissures.
Cure it with wax until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
On the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
When an abscess develops in the uvula or palate or tooth root and it breaks, becomes antiquated, and turns into a fistula, if you cannot heal it by treatment, then it is necessary to ignite the cautery according to the quantity received in the fistula, and place that ignited cautery in the fistula opening, holding your hand until the heated iron reaches the edge of it. Repeat this procedure once or twice; cure it with what we have said about healing until it is healed.
And if the pus is drained and healed, that is good; but if not, it is necessary to expose the location and remove the rotten bone according to its case.
Chapter XX.
On the cauterization of teeth and softening of ulcers.
When the ulcers are softened by moisture and the teeth are bad, if you treat them with medications without success, then place the patient's head in your lap, approach the cautery with the desired shape (most likely a small knife), place the quill on the tooth, quickly insert the cautery into the cavity of the tooth, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
Approach your hand, and repeatedly apply the cautery as desired.
The patient should place their mouth on salt water for an hour, then rinse it out, because the rotten tooth is closed and the soft gum is strengthened, and the corruption of moisture is dried up.
Chapter XXI.
On the cauterization of tooth pain.
When toothache is due to heat or inflammation, or there is worms present and the cure does not work with medicine, then cauterization is performed in two ways: either cauterizing with a cow's branding iron or cauterizing with fire.
Cauterizing with a cow's branding iron involves taking the iron and heating it in a pot or fire, then carefully wrapping the tip of the heated iron in cloth and applying it to the tooth as quickly as possible until it becomes hot.
Then repeat this process several times until the heat reaches the root of the tooth.
If you wish, immerse wool or cloth in the heated iron and apply it to the painful tooth, then place the hot iron on top of the wool until the iron reaches the bottom of the tooth's cavity.
However, cautionery with fire requires the use of a candle or iron, and it should be ensured that there is not too much large material and the heat of the flame does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And carefully apply the hot iron to the tooth, holding your hand over it until the cauterization is complete; do this several times as necessary for the pain to subside or on that day or the next.
It is necessary to press the heated iron against the tooth with a good brand, and the patient should keep it in their mouth for an hour before spitting it out; this is the method of cauterization.
Cauterize as much of the affected area as you are able to reach.
This is the shape of the cannula (thin tube used for medical procedures):
Chapter XXII.
On the cauterization of hernias.
When hernias are caused by cold and wet humors and do not respond to digestive medicines, if you wish to aid in their digestion gently, then heat the cauterizer in the shape described as follows: have two openings on either end so that the smoke escapes through one while you apply the cauterization through the other, and place the heated iron on the abscess once, and if necessary, repeat this until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
If the abscess is small, then apply the cauterization according to its size, and let it heal by itself for three days, and apply a cloth soaked in brandy on top of the cauterized area until it has burned away the infected material.
And treat that with saliva, bandages, and linen until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On the cauterization of tonsillitis and constriction of windpipes.
When moisture comes upon the throat area of the lung, particularly when it is accompanied by heat and congestion, it is necessary for the patient to be evacuated at first with laxative medicines, and then cauterize the affected area of the larynx in the depressed location.
Be careful not to burn the larynx with the cauterizer or char the windpipe's cartilage too much. Only apply a small amount of heat.
Cauterize that area with another cauterizer on the joint of the neck at the lower end of the spine. The cauterizer should be shaped like a nail following the previous method.
And treat that with what was previously described until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
On the cauterization of lung disease and coughing.
When coughing and lung disease are due to cold, wet humors, the patient does not have a fever or throat irritation, and the condition is old, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the furcula at the depressed locations on both sides, and use another cauterizer in the middle of the foot between the nipples; and let the cauterizers be shaped like nails following the previously described method.
And if you wish, perform the cauterization with a punctate cauterizer, which was described in the treatment of ear pain.
And make incisions into those [affected areas]; then care for that area with whatever remedy is suitable before it heals.
And prepare the cautery with three prongs, because cauterization is often done that way: at one time you can perform three cauterizations in this manner.
Chapter XXV.
Of cauterization for tickles, which is the head of the helper.
When the head of the helper (i.e., a bone or body part) is dislocated due to excessive lubrication and not corrected during its return, you must reduce the dislocation as soon as possible according to custom, and have the patient lie on their stomach or back; then elevate the shoulder blade that is on the affected side, above the dislocated area with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated in the lower region.
Then prepare the cautery with two prongs; and this is its form:
Then cauterize the shoulder blade, making an incision through it into the other side; and you will find the figure of the cauterization at four points.
At some times, it should be adjusted according to this count, and because there are eight cauterizations.
Then pause over the cautery with salt, and place the patient in a calm state, and let the affected member not be injured for any length of time until it is comforted.
If the dislocation is above and toward the chest, and this has been done, then cauterize over the muscle with a sharp cautery or multiple puncture cauterization, because the joint will be strengthened and excessive moisture will be removed, and the patient will heal.
Chapter XXVI.
This appears to be the title (or opening line) of the next section, which suggests that this text is discussing cauterization of the stomach. Without more context, it's difficult to say for certain what this treatment involves or why it is being performed. It could refer to a specific medical condition affecting the stomach, or it might be a general discussion about using cauterization as a means of treating various stomach-related issues. Without further information, it is impossible to determine the exact meaning and purpose of this text.
When moisture and clots appear in the stomach before it bursts from its confinement and multiplies dangerously, and if you continue with the treatment methods without conferring, then the patient must lie on their back, extend their arms and legs, and have the area cauterized with three cauterizations: one cautery placed over the feet for the size of a finger, another sharp cautery, and two cauterizations placed over the sides of the cautery to form a triangular figure. Extend the distance between those that are not adjacent in order to create a pockmark.
And if the depth of the cauterization is two-thirds of the thickness of the shoulder blade.
And let the figure of the cautery be in this form without addition. If you wish, cauterize with a large cautery at the appropriate location of the stomach in this manner; and this should be a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form:
The stomach should be cauterized punctually at the point where it is afraid of the cautery: and you must be careful to puncture the stomach with as many points as desired, and then cauterize those points with the cautery; and care for that area with the treatment that precedes until it heals.
Chapter XXVII.
This appears to be the title (or opening line) of a new section, which suggests that this text is discussing cauterization of the inguinal hernia (fietge fret). Without more context, it's difficult to say for certain what this treatment involves or why it is being performed. It could refer to a specific medical condition affecting the inguinal region, or it might be a general discussion about using cauterization as a means of treating various hernia-related issues. Without further information, it is impossible to determine the exact meaning and purpose of this text.
When inflammation in the abdomen occurs due to heat, moisture, or excessive wind before its normal course is disrupted by extravasation, and the patient is treated with what has been said and nothing more, it is necessary that the patient be placed on their back, and then three cauteries should be applied according to this form and this quantity on the abdomen below the hypochondriac region, which will bring about the supine position of a man.
The space between each cautery should be according to the thickness of it, and the cauteries should be according to the length of the body straight.
Do not press down on the cautery too much.
If the amount of liquid applied matches the size of the bladder stone and it is not adjusted, if the patient is standing on their feet; if not, they should be seated, who has already opened their legs, and raises their arms.
And you are able to perform these cauterizations with a surgical cautery, when you have subtlety and caution in your craft.
Be careful not to overdo it in the cauterization, and ensure that the bladder stone is completely cauterized so that the entire body and intestines are reached, as the bladder here is delicate; know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On abscess incision of the abdomen using a surgical cautery.
When an abscess or boil occurs in the abdomen and you want to determine whether it is located in the abdominal muscle or the abdominal wall, if it is within the abdominal muscle, the patient feels heavy and increased pain.
If it is in the abdominal wall, the pain intensifies greatly and often exhausts the doctors when treating it.
Therefore, the patient should lie on their back; then locate the abscess area and heat up the surgical cautery, which resembles a thin piece of cloth, as described in the previous page. Cauterize the abscess and the surrounding area with the heated surgical cautery until the entire bladder stone is burned away, reaching the opening, until pus drains out.
Take care of the remaining abscesses with appropriate treatments until they heal.
And it is not necessary to use this cauterization technique solely, but rather the one that has been studied in the art of medicine and extended to treat more diseases; however, some experiments may be useful for this operation, but you should still follow the established guidelines, as they are generally best.
Chapter XXIX.
On cauterization for pleurisy.
Ancient cauteries for the treatment of abscesses in gynecology were used to treat pleurisy in this manner; take one of the dry and long cauterization tools from gynecology and find a long, thick one.
Submerge the chosen tool in oil and heat it up, then cauterize the area between the clavicle and neck using a cautery, while also applying two small cauterizations on either side of the lower jaw, one slightly descending behind the beard, and two more on the affected rib cage, with a slight descent towards the back; apply another cauterization on the foot, another on the stomach, and three on the back; and another cauterization between the shoulder blades, as well as two more on either side of the feet, along with the one that was applied between the shoulder blades.
And it's not necessary to compress your hand with the cautery, but rather keep it open during the procedure.
As some ancient men used cautery made of iron resembling a ray and ignited it at that spot between the ribs until we reach the abscess and it is drained, as I said in the hernia abscess.
However, in this perforation with the cautery, there is no fear, because death can occur quickly at the site of the fistula where healing does not occur.
Chapter 30.
On the cauterization of the spleen.
When treating the spleen disease as mentioned in the treatment by division and you do not confer with your colleague, then cauterize it in one of three ways, all of which are appropriate, of which one is to make three or four rows according to the length of the spleen as shown in the figure of the cauteries in the hernia, the figure of which has been preceded.
The size between each cautery should be the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the method of cauterizing should be as described in the cautery for hernia.
Do not compress your hand with the cautery; and the patient should be laid on their back.
Another method of cauterization is to ignite the cautery with two handles, which we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift the abdomen that is on the left side of the spleen so that the patient can lie on their right side.
Your lifting should be such that you lift the abdomen according to the length of the body so that the cauteries can be made according to the width of the body.
And bring the two handles together, ignite quickly, in the area where they penetrate the abdomen of the other side.
Pull out the cautery and thus there are four cauteries.
And if you want to, cauterize with a cautery having three handles.
And bring the cautery that has been left to cool for several days, because it is more convenient than other previous causes in treatment.
Chapter 31.
On the cauterization of hydrocele.
Do not cauterize in hydrocele but rather in a cyst.
When treating hydrocele with the methods of treatment mentioned in the division and you do not confer with your colleague, it is necessary that you cauterize with four cauteries around the navel and one on the stomach, one on the groin, one on the spleen, two between the vertebrae of the back, one on the right leg, and another on the stomach. And the depth of the cautery should be appropriate for the thickness of the abdomen.
Leave the cautery open so that it cools for a long time.
Do not evacuate the patient from treatment near the cautery with what is necessary to prevent them from having two intentions, and hurry with their recovery using assistance.
The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be as shown above, and it is that one with which the back is cauterized according to its previous shape.
Chapter 32.
On the cauterization of the feet and hips.
If the feet are abscessed and filled with sticky water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot near the ankle and raise your hand with the cautery without twisting it; and raise your hand, but do not completely return it because the sticky water runs out.
The cautery is as follows: Place two cauteries on each hip and in each hip make a cautery with the tip of the cautery cutter. The cautery should be the length of the hip: the first one below and the other a little lower on the hip; and two cauteries on each hip.
Leave the wound open without treatment for a long time because some water drains from it.
Then care for the affliction of those causes which I have mentioned.
(The title or heading)
Here comes the next sentence to translate:
When the abdominal wound is affected by decay and moisture that softens the tissues, it is the digestive and retentive virtue that is affected, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is treated with the methods of treatment but does not confer improvement, and sometimes the patient suffers cauterization displaying the virtue, then cauterize it with a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been described in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and four cauteries around the umbilicus, with subtle cautery clavils; and with cauterization on the alcatin over large wounds, or with two cauteries.
And if the excess moisture is intolerable for the patient, then cauterize it on the penis and on the intestines, and apply two cauteries firmly to the stomach near the inguinal areas, as this is a complete cure without error in the joint treatment. This seems to suggest that if the excess moisture cannot be tolerated by the patient, then cauterization can be done on the penis and intestines, and two cauteries can be applied firmly to the stomach near the inguinal areas as a complete cure for this condition.
(The title or heading)
Here comes the next sentence to translate:
And when the old hemorrhoids arise naturally or are caused by cold humors that decay or corrupted moisture, and they have been treated according to what has been said in the division but do not confer improvement, then cauterize it with three cauteries on the base of the two small and triangular buttocks, and with a cautery over the navel twice.
And if you suspect that the stomach of the patient is affected and their food is spoiled, and sometimes the face becomes gangrenous, then cauterize it on the stomach with a large cautery as described before; and one cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the spleen with a subtle cautery clavilh, and leave the cautery open for some time until healed, and care for it until it is healed.
(The title or heading)
Here comes the next sentence to translate:
And when you cut an abscess, then heat the cautery that resembles a ray. Then insert the heated cautery into the abscess that has been cut out, and immediately apply pressure until the cautery reaches the vein from which blood flows.
And do this once or twice, for if there are several abscesses, then cauterize each one as described before, and care for them with medication until they are healed.
And if you cauterize using a large cautery on a wound, it is more effective in treatment.
(The title or heading)
Here comes the next sentence to translate:
And when nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is afraid of it, then heal with cauterization.
Therefore, when there is a fistula in nature that has become old and infected with decaying matter and moisture, and it is unfit to proceed with the treatment described earlier, then approach the problem carefully using a subtle method, and be aware of the depth of the fistula as described previously.
Approach the cautery that resembles a ray. Then apply the heated cautery to this fistula, and according to the extent to which it penetrates it.
Repeat the application of the cautery until the corrupt flesh is burned quickly one time or two or three times, according to your necessity.
Be careful not to burn nerves or veins; or if the fistula is in the belly of the bladder or the belly of the intestine, then beware of those places; and do not perform this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it does not penetrate.
Then take care to heal the affected area.
And if the location is sealed and separated from it the material, and remains thus for a long time, then you know that it is completely healed.
If the material is not removed from there, then you know that it is penetrating or in the bone, corrupting it, or that it will come out of those causes which will be remembered at its location.
Captulo XXXVII.
Sobre cauterizacin de la gota.
When in the gout joints pain occurs due to cold or swelling, and therefore the patient's pain is increased, then it is necessary to cauterize that area on each gout joint using a pointed cautery after remembering the appropriate cautery for each joint.
And hold the cauterizing instrument firm with a slight pressure, so that three lines of cauterization will be made, and therefore they will be more effective in relief.
Captulo XXXVIII.
Sobre cauterizacin de la vejiga.
When in the bladder there is debility and softening due to cold and moisture such that the patient cannot retain urine, then you should cauterize it at a location lower than the bladder, on the side of the bladder, starting from the pubic bone, and cauterize with a pointed cautery on the right side, and another on the left side.
Y la longitud de cada cauterizacin sea igual a la profundidad del hueso; y cauterzalo con un cauterio en la parte ms baja de los dos, o con dos cauterios si es necesario.
Y debe ser un cauterio puntiagudo tal como se indic anteriormente.
Captulo XXXIX.
Sobre cauterizacin de la vejiga masculina.
When in the male bladder there is cold and moisture, and therefore abstinence is prohibited, and menstruation is contaminated and delayed, and pain occurs during their discharge, then it is necessary that the location should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a pointed cautery on the location lower than the belly, or with two cauterizations, and it should be a pointed cautery.
Captulo XL.
Sobre cauterizacin de la deslizamiento de la cadera.
Cuando la humedad se infiltra en la zona de la cadera y es la causa de su desplazamiento, y el sntoma del mismo es que la parte afectada es ms larga que la otra cuando se compara con ella. Y el lugar del desplazamiento se encuentra en lo que est rotado.
Por lo tanto, debes cauterizar al paciente en la zona de la cadera con un cauterio circular, ya que tendrs sealamiento alrededor de la zona como es necesario para que la zona cayese en el medio del crculo.
And let the cautery mentioned before be used in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if that cautery is not at hand, then proceed to cauterize it with three cauteries and a large olive-oil cautery.
Let the cautery be made according to the size of the wound in its entirety; and care for it within that area until it is healed.
Chapter forty-first.
On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs in the ankle area and it is caused by cold and dampness, the patient is treated with what has been said earlier and not contradicted, which is an ancient remedy. Therefore, it is necessary that you release the patient from thick humors using foul-smelling pills or artificial pills or similar ones; and then cauterize that area.
The method of the cautery in this case is according to two methods: either cauterizing with burning medicine or cauterizing with fire.
If you choose the first method, cauterize it on the ankle area with three triangular cauteries in this manner, and make sure to achieve good depth with them. Let the space between each cautery be in proportion to the thickness of the tissue, and if the olive-oil or large cautery is used.
Sometimes, however, let the cauteries be over a different spot on the ankle, so that there are four cauteries.
If you wish, cauterize with the circle described in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, which should encompass and burn the entire wound.
This is the method of cauterization in sciatica when pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
But if it extends into the thigh, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the thigh over the spot where the pain is located; and one cautery over the hip for four days a little less than the width of the palm.
If the cauteries are with a knife, let the depth of the cautery be in proportion to the size of the wound.
If the patient is suffering from pain that extends to the location near the feet, then cauterize that area here where it is located with a cautery at three or four points, or more if necessary.
If the patient is suffering from pain that is behind the thigh, then cauterize it here with a knife-cautery.
In every cauterization, be careful not to burn nerves or large arteries with the cautery, and because of this, you will harm the patient or cause contraction.
I have seen one and another of those who cauterized over the hip and burned in the cauterization, and the leg swelled up to the knee, and the burning caused it to become inflamed and rot away completely. And pay attention to the fact that a strong solution of the stomach is very dangerous, and be aware that this can lead to death.
If the pain is in two locations at once, then cauterize each location according to this method.
And it was said by the wise men in the cauterization of ankles that this is the method for using a cautery: make it look like the circle of an iron with its circumference being the size of one palm; and let the depth be proportionate to the thickness of a date-stone or a small nut.
And inside that circle should be another third, and the space between them should be the size of a knuckle. The circles should be opened in two places, and the length of these gaps should be one or two knuckles. The margins of the iron should be properly fitted into the circles, and this is the shape:
Let it be ignited in the fire until it becomes red-hot and emits sparks, and then let it be placed over the ankle area while the patient grabs onto a cold stone. Therefore, cauterize that area with three circles on one occasion.
Let that area rest for three days, let it be plastered with linens and leave the wound uncovered for several days; and let it be treated with warm poultices until it is healed.
It was said by Albucasis: my sons, of this type of cautery we have used very little due to fear of the consequences and because few people have observed it.
However, among the many cauteries used, some help alleviate the pain at that location.
However, cauteries with medicines adhering to them are those that you should make two circles having a small hole in one of them where the goaff of iron is inserted; and the length of the wall in the thickness of their shoulders should be two knuckles or more if necessary.
And the space between each of them should be in proportion to the thickness of the tissue; they should be open on both sides and contain the medicine between them in this way:
Let the patient sit on a cold stone and press your hand over the ankle area, and then take some boiled water between two circles, and let its quality be like a small fire gradually increasing, and hold it for about an hour, and make the patient endure the pain and the pressure of the cautery - because this cautery is like fire - until the pain subsides.
Approach and lift your hand towards the instrument, and clean out the cold water from the entire anus with warm water.
Let him rest for three days and apply pressure to that boil until the blackness of the discharge remains, let it be washed for several days, and redness will appear around it; this is the remedy in aid.
Approach the wound with honey until it is healed.
If the pain is extended to the thigh or hip, make it stand in a position where water can be applied like in an enema.
This is the method of cold water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Recipe for alkali and the juice of an extinct bee sting from both parts, mix them together and strain through a new cloth with one side perforated by a small hole, according to the amount needed in a royal dose.
Let the other side of the cloth remain empty, and pour that alkali and living juice of warm water over it, which will cover them with one finger, and when you compress them with your hand for good compression, let the hole that results from the sharp water in the perforated side of the cloth become filled with the other side.
Approach and adjust all that water, pour it over another warm juice and more renewed alkali, because at that time it will be of great strength, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in the cauterization of other members, because this operation is like fire.
And some medicines are cauterized wide, for example, pitch and honey mixed with sulfur.
Galen recommends a procedure and cure for the pain of anus and sciatica in men from ancient times, which is excellent, and he says that no other treatment is necessary for it, and he indicates that it heals in one day like this, as he recommends, because the remedy in bathing and washing with it is powerful.
It should be taken with a certain greenish herb, and if it is not found, fig leaves should be taken; and it should be ground with a little salt and applied to the anus where the pain is, or to the thigh, or to the hip, and left.
It should be left for the amount of three hours or the amount that the patient can endure the discharge.
Approach it with bathing and when the body is warmed up, immerse it in the sun, because the pain ceases and heals.
You should know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cauterization with these medicines unless there is the evacuation of the body.
But Escorides says that when a vein is stretched with a goat's incision, it is better to cauterize it; and the cautery should be made in this manner: wool should be taken and soaked in ancient oil, and placed between the toes and the heel.
Approach the dried goat's incision and inflate it with fire until charcoal is formed, then place it on wool and let it be spread out. Approach [it], and do not stop until the sensation of the bite reaches the ankle and the pain subsides.
This method of cauterization is called "cauterization of veal."
This appears to be the chapter number (42). Here's the next sentence to translate:
This appears to be the title of a section or chapter. It translates to "On cauterization for double pain." The next sentence is:
Sometimes pain is in the two [feet] due to various causes, such as overexertion or injury or excessive evacuation, and also because of similar causes, by infusion of cold and wet matter.
Cauterization should not be done in any other case except for this specific one, which is caused by effusion of cold matter.
Therefore, evacuate the patient with pills filled and similar to them, which should be made on the foot where the pain is three fingers deep according to its latitude, but take care to avoid each line when cauterizing or more, depending on the quantity that comes from the patient's tolerance and the potency of the substance.
The cauterization should be done with a pointed cautery.
If you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries or with the middle claw-shaped cautery in this manner:
This appears to be the chapter number (43). Here's the next sentence to translate:
This appears to be the title of a section or chapter. It translates to "On cauterization at the beginning of swelling." The next sentence is:
This disease often affects small children; and the sign of its onset in children is that it attacks their structure, affecting elevation and mobility.
It occurs at the lower end of the spine and the toes that begin to rise above the others. This could be interpreted as swelling or growth in those areas.
Therefore, when you see this and wish to prevent it, you should cauterize it with a circular cautery in the following manner: Take the cautery over the entire circumference of the spondylus (spine). This would mean that the circular cauterization should be made around the entire affected area.
If you wish, cauterize in the circumference of the spine with a pointed cautery of two or three lines. This means that the number of lines for the cauterization would be either two or three, depending on the desired outcome. The points should be close together. This suggests that the cauterizations should be made closely together to cover a larger area and prevent the spread of the disease.
Take care to heal the area with what has been said before (previously mentioned). This suggests that proper care should be taken to ensure that the affected area heals properly, based on previous instructions or advice given.
Be careful that the cauterization is not administered in swelling caused by nerve spasm. This suggests a caution against using the procedure in cases where the swelling or growth is due to a nerve issue, as cauterization could potentially exacerbate the problem.
This appears to be the chapter number (44). Here's the next sentence to translate:
This appears to be the title of a section or chapter. It translates to "On cauterization for gout and joint pain." The next sentence is:
This is a repetition of the first sentence of the text. It translates to: When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Therefore, since gout caused by coldness is cured with a method of treatment and the pain is not prolonged, you should use cauterization as a last resort. This suggests that other treatments for gout should be tried first, and cauterization should be used only if necessary or when all else fails.
It is known that you cauterize it near the joint of the foot with many cauterizations in a circular manner. This suggests that multiple cauterizations should be made around the affected joint to treat the gout or joint pain.
The olive-shaped cautery is as follows:
If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. This sentence is a repetition of line 3 in the text. If the pain spreads to the nails or other joints, and this often happens, you should cauterize it on each nail with three or four cauterizations all around using the olive-shaped cautery. This sentence is a repetition of lines 14 and 15 in the text.
If more cauterizations are necessary (depending on the situation), you should cauterize it and not press too hard with your hand beforehand, only immerse the tip of the cautery in the substance (medication). This suggests that multiple cauterizations may be required for effective treatment, but excessive pressure or contact with the skin should be avoided.
And if the pain penetrates into the anus and two fingers, then administer the cautery as mentioned in the previous chapter.
If the pain is only in the lower part (of the body), it is called sciatica, and then pierce around the pelvic area as described, and pierce along those two lines.
If the pain remains in the aforementioned (part), then pierce around the pelvic area over each night and at the wrist of the hand.
If the pain approaches certain days towards the joints or the muscles, then cauterize all of them in every part of the tendons.
Do not evacuate the patient with good care and reception of medicine, for if it is done with good care and this cauterization is used, it will be healed, God help.
Chapter 45.
On the cauterization of ruptures (wounds).
When an injury occurs in the groin and intestines are brought forward to the genital area, it begins to close, then it is necessary that you order the patient to abstain from food on his day and use softening substances for the wound to heal.
And then follow the patient with your hands on his back, and order him to keep his clothes inside until it is time for them to be removed or the intestine or hernia appears.
And return him with your hands to the mentioned place and press on the fracture along the bones of the femur, showing the extremity of which is similar to the size of a circle at the separated parts of the chest.
And heat the cautery of which form this (is):
Until it is quite dry (and) seared. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And place the cautery on that spot with your hand holding the cautery straight, and hold it there until you reach the bones of the femur to the middle of the thigh; and repeat this process if you did not reach the bone in the first examination.
Be careful to observe the direction of the hernia during your cauterization, that you do not burn the hernia, for it may cause death or other serious problems in the patient.
Know that when you do not reach the bones with the cautery, do not perform the operation.
And it is necessary that the cauterization of children be delicate according to their size and age.
Take care of the cauterized area for three days with bandaging until the scar of the fire is healed.
Take care of it with other medicines until it is cured.
The patient should remain lying on his back for forty days until the area and the wound are sealed.
It is necessary to abstain from food according to the duration of the patient's healing time, and that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of recovery.
And when you want to move him after forty days, administer it gently and take care of him for another forty days.
Let him rest, abstain from work and food and drink, and avoid loud voices, for when he follows this healing regime he will be cured.
And I will speak about the treatment of other parts of the abdomen and the beginning of it, and if you do not want them to stop (the healing process), then cauterize the rupture with the cautery in a circular manner according to its size, as the third part is expelled from the body in this way; and take care of it as described earlier, without making any adjustments.
And we will tell you first that rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, as described in the previous section:
and the line that passes through the length across the wound and above it, and another line along the upper part; and place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cauterization should be lighter and better.
Chapter 46.
Treatise on Cauterization of Twisting (or Knotting)
When pain occurs in a limb due to injury or striking, and the pain persists for a long time without relieving with medication, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
Let the cautery be of all members according to their size and smallness, and their virtue and development, and the location of twisting and pain in them.
If the first cauterization heals, that is good; if not, repeat the cauterization on the same limb; for it is customary with such pains that they are punctures in a member adjacent to the one affected, so it is necessary to achieve those with caution before the patient is healed.
Chapter forty-seven.
Treatise on Cauterization of Leprosy
Some cases of leprosy are treated with a cautery for great benefit, but it is less effective for the type of leprosy caused by decay of flesh and melancholy.
Therefore, when you want to cauterize it, consider if the leprosy is common and can be treated as mentioned in the classification, and does not spread, and be careful that corruption does not encompass the entire body of the patient and all their complexion, then cauterize it on the head with two cauteries: one in a central location on the head, and the second slightly lower down, bring the forehead to the end of the hair; and both over two corns; and one behind, on the nape or the neck.
Lastly, place your hand on the cautery a little before it touches the bone and makes a slight indentation, and thus the scabs will be displaced, so that the expiration of thick vapors is alleviated from there; and cauterize on the sole as previously prescribed.
And if the leprosy has already spread on the patient and is apparent, then it is necessary to cauterize it with the cauteries as previously mentioned in the head; and a cautery on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries over the eyebrows, and two cauteries over the spinal processes of the neck, and six cauteries over the spinal processes of the back, and a large one near the coccyx, and one at the coccyx, and two over the ankles, and one on each ankle, and two on the heels, and one on each heel, and two on the wrists, and two on the forearms, and two on the hands; and cauterize it over all the joints of the fingers and toes, and over each talon of the feet, and over the phalanges of the fingers.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are over the talus (ankle bone).
Some cases are cauterized with a single cautery over the bones of the pelvis and another on the stomach opening, and another on the liver.
And know that when you apply more cauterizations, it is more beneficial and more healing; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as with scabs, because their body is already stunned.
And it is necessary that the cauterizations be large or small depending on the members and joints, according to the characteristics of the instruments.
And take care of the cautery with flour of eggs beaten with honey and the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter forty-eight.
Treatise on Cauterization of Stupor (Stunned State or Shock)
When a member becomes stunned or asleep and is treated with medications, oils, and plasters, and it is not healed, then you cauterize the stunned member according to the size of the member or its smallness.
Let the cautery enter the depth of the wound slightly. And take care of it with mouthwash until it is healed.
In some cases, a stunned state enters the fingers and feet, and the spine of the back and the eyesight of the nerves that affect that member, and the stunned state is relieved.
Do not rely on this but only on one who is knowledgeable in the anatomy of members and the exit of nerves moving throughout the body.
Chapter forty-nine.
Treatise on Cauterization of Gallstones that are Formed.
When gallstones are old and do not respond to any of the medications for them, then you cauterize it with a preheated cautery slightly according to the depth of the wound until the whiteness and color of it is relieved and its color is changed.
Approach the treatment of that man with a mixture of barley flour and lentils soaked in red oil and arnica leaves, and the blood of a pigeon or hare, divided and mixed together, and limit a cloth on the area until it heals.
Chapter one.
Chapter on cauterization of crabs (scabies).
When cancer begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize the area with a circular cautery as it is turned.
The wise men say it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle; but I do not think so because I fear that it may ulcerate, and I have seen this happen several times.
It is more appropriate to cauterize it in the circumference of the area with a circular cautery or with the flat cautery.
Chapter one, part two.
Chapter on cauterization of abscesses.
When an abscess is delayed in maturation, it may be due to superfluidity or the condition of the patient who is old and decrepit, has little blood, or because of the time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize around it with a flat cautery with small punctures; and apply a leech over that area which will help in the maturation.
But if you want to perform perforation with cautery, then you should heat the cautery and its shape should be as follows: and immerse it in the middle of the abscess until it penetrates the skin.
If the cautery is in a location that is further down because the arm needs to be relieved; then treat it until it heals.
Chapter one, part three.
Of cauterization with corrosive (substance)
The corrosion that rots a member is like dry wood consuming itself with fire.
If you see the corrosive in a place that requires cauterization with fire, then heat up the cautery iron a few small and large degrees according to what is appropriate in the location where the corrosion is present.
Then cauterize it entirely from every side until you have completely removed all the corrosion and there remains no cause for it.
Leave it alone for three days and rest on the cauterized areas so that they are scabbed over with oil mixed in until all the scabs have been removed and all the corruption has been eradicated.
Then care for it with meat broths (or soups).
However, if after three days the meat grows healthy without corruption, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cauterization on the areas that have been corrupted.
Corrosion can sometimes be treated with acute medicine, because it is inappropriate to use cauterization in such cases. However, fire cauterization is somewhat helpful for pus drainage.
And I have already said the treatment of it with acute medicine in the division, so take that when you have need for it.
Chapter 33.
Of cauterization for abscesses and similar conditions.
Often observed at the joints of the feet, a swelling called an abscess that is large and penetrating, which lies against the foot; and cauterization in such cases can be done in two ways, either with fire cauterization or water-boiling cauterization.
Fire cauterization is that you heat the cautery iron shaped like a pen-knife, which should be made of iron in proportion to the size of the abscess on all sides, and with thin edges.
And then press the heated iron against the abscess, and rotate your hand with the cautery around the abscess until the cautery reaches the depth of the abscess. Leave it alone for three days until pus begins to flow out. Then apply an ointment made with wild mallow leaves ground with salt, and let the ointment remain on it for a night, because that will eradicate its roots.
Then take care of the place with meat broths until it is healed.
And if it does not heal itself, and often such things happen on the surface of the body, especially in the more sensitive areas like the feet, then you must administer water cauterization there, which consists of using a copper or iron cup or pen-knife, pressing it against the abscess; and get hot water into the cup little by little, and keep your hand, and rotate the cup with compression of your hand all around, and apply pressure to the edge of the cup on the side of the abscess, causing the hot water to flow out through the opening of the abscess; and wait for the patient an hour or so for the pain caused by the hot water to subside, and then remove it, because the abscess with its roots will be eradicated.
And you should do this to all such things in the body until they are completely healed.
Then take care of those abscesses whose roots have been eradicated with meat broths.
Chapter 33.
Of cauterization for tremors.
When a tremor occurs due to pressure on a nerve or fever caused by pressure, or for some other similar reason, then you must cauterize it with four cauterizations or more along the spinal column, between each vertebra with one cauterization; and cauterize it in the feet, and over the stomach, with olive oil cauterization.
And that tremor subsides and hastens the healing of the diseased condition.
Chapter 50.
Of cauterization for sudden swellings of the body.
When there is a sudden swelling in the body, and it becomes pustules that are made of grossly corrupted materials; therefore at the beginning when it appears, you should immediately cauterize over the entire length of the fistula with a thin cautery made from myrtle wood, the end of which is extended with fire; or with the lance of erostology (long thin needle); or with leech therapy.
And sometimes it is cauterized at the beginning of its eruption in this way; and it is not credulous, and the excess is removed by these means, and it heals from those things.
However, it must be done with appropriate evacuation using leech therapy.
Chapter 56.
Of cauterization for bleeding of wounds by archery incision.
Troops often encounter bleeding from an arrow wound that is incised with a sword blow or incision of cauterized flesh, and in such cases it is difficult to stop the bleeding.
Therefore, when it happens to someone's archery, you should press with your hand on the opening of the wound and press firmly until the bleeding stops, ensuring that no more blood flows out.
Then press in the fire the olive oil cauteries few and large, by number, and blow on them until they are hot.
Then take one of them, either large or small, according to the place and wound where the artery is broken, and quickly place it over the vein; you will have stopped the bleeding by then, and insert the cautery until the blood stops flowing.
If the blood is expelled from the wound in the artery when you stop the bleeding and withdraw the cautery, then take another cautery from among those that have been prepared in the fire, and continue pressing on it until the bleeding has stopped.
Be careful not to burn the nerves that are there, and do not let some other harm come upon the patient.
Know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in such cases, especially if the artery is large, except by one of four methods: either using cautery as described above, or extraction when it has not been extracted, since extracting the ends will burn them and stop the bleeding; or applying ligation with a ligature or strong suture, or pressing on it with pulverized medicines that have the property of stopping blood flow, and tying them decently.
But one who administers a proper ligature and a strong suture with threads or by burning causes and similar ones does not confine himself to these alone.
But if it is necessary to do so without a doctor or medicine being present, then press firmly on the indicated vein as described above, and understand the great effort required until the blood has stopped flowing from the main part of the wound, and do not allow blood to flow over the artery; and sprinkle cold water over the artery until the blood has solidified and thickened; and in the case where there is a need for cautery or medicine.
Of incision, perforation, and punctures, and of lacerations and their similarities.
I have said in the first chapter about all diseases where cautery with fire is appropriate and medicine is required, as well as their circumstances and causes, and the instruments necessary for them, along with the forms of cauteries; and I have arranged the chapters from the head to the feet.
And in this chapter, I will proceed in that manner so that the desired relief is obtained for the one who asks for it.
And before I begin this, let us remember that in this chapter it is for the fear of those who are in the first chapter on cautery.
And because we must be very careful, since in the operation that is described in this chapter there are many evacuations that involve blood, which is life-sustaining; therefore, the aspersing of the vein or incision on the abscess or opening of an ulcer or purification of a wound or extraction of a splinter or incision of a stone and their similarities require great caution. And all of these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the most extreme cases, death.
And I admonish you to be cautious in this matter, since some cases may require you to act in a manner different from how men usually act in the presence of illnesses. And there are some who flee from their illness and it is easy for them to die, especially due to the severity of their illness, its duration, and because the illness is a sign of death.
And among these are those who have given you their property and money, hoping for your health; their illness is harmful to you.
Therefore, you must not consent to the one who comes to you in this manner; your caution should be greater than greed and rapacity; and do not presume any cause without certain knowledge that validates it, and only do what brings praiseworthy results.
Use in the treatment of all your patients the prediction and indication for the one to whom health is converted, since it helps you acquire fame, memory, praise, and glory.
Oh, sons, may God inspire your understanding and not give you guidance or protection, since this is in His hands.
And I have arranged this chapter divided into sections according to what was described in the chapter on cautery, from the care of the head to the feet, so that you are relieved of whatever it is that you ask for and need.
Chapter One.
Of the care of water contained in the head of infants.
Know that this disease, which is common in infants, should be caused by the infant's crying and when the newborn does not cry strongly enough to empty the head.
And some cases occur due to a hidden cause that is unknown.
This pain is not seen in adults, but only in children; and all whom I have seen suffer from it, it appears to me that death soon follows, so it seems to me an unfortunate work for them.
You have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and his head was so swollen that it could not stop growing due to the size of his head, and moreover, the moisture increased until death by cold occurred.
And this moisture either accumulates between the scalp and the bone or under the bones on the skull.
The operation on that person should be performed if the moisture is between the scalp and the bone and the abscess is small. In this case, it is necessary to make an incision in the middle of the head along a width of two fingers, and the length of the incision should be long enough for the moisture to run out, and this is the shape of the spatula:
And if the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions according to this method:
And if the moisture is under the bones, then you see that the joints of the head are opened on all sides and the water is pressed out when you compress it with your hand on the edges and not covered up by you. It is necessary to make three incisions in the middle of the head according to this method:
And extract all the moisture; and strengthen the incisions with lint and feathers; and bind it up with oil for five days, and remove the bandage and heal the wound with compresses and poultices, and strengthen the head with a splint; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.
And another method of incision, consider the size of the abscess and the collection of water, because sometimes it is larger in the occipital region, or in front, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore pay attention to the location where the abscess and the accumulation of water appear, and make the incision according to what is most convenient for you.
And beware that you do not cut the artery and make blood flow and kill the patient by bleeding caused by draining the moisture.
Chapter III.
When cataracts or ulcers occur on the eyelids or feet, and this is an old practice and does not benefit from medical treatment, then the cure in such cases is by making an incision of those two arteries.
And therefore, when you want to incise those arteries in the patient's head, first examine the location using a rough cloth to reveal the arteries, and keep the neck of the patient strong with a cloth; and consider where the vein pulses; and press on each side of where the auricles are located, and they can be covered up except in some men.
And apply the probe to the artery and incise each one with a sharp spatula that pierces through the bone, and this is for the length of the head.
And if you wish, insert the spatula under the artery and break it at the incision points above.
And let the length of the incision be two fingers' width apart, since when a vein is incised, blood flows out with pulsating excretion, which jumps due to frequent jumping.
But if the artery does not appear in the joint, then it is necessary that you measure three fingers' space from the auricle, and probe with the probe, and proceed to the bone.
And the quantity of blood to be let out is one ounce. And do not let out more or less blood than the quantity that appears from the nature of the illness and the filling of the artery from it.
Approach the wound, and since there remains any cause on the bone that produces purulent discharge, then incise it to prevent a purulent abscess from forming.
Approach the wound with linen and cotton, and treat it with ointment inside until it heals.
This appears to be a new section or chapter title, written in Latin capital letters. It's common for medieval medical texts to divide their content into sections, so I will continue translating the text line by line:
This sentence seems to be discussing the extraction of an artery that is located in the temples. I'll continue translating line by line:
When an old emigrant or someone with similar symptoms appears due to acidic humidity and qualities in the temples, or a sudden violent illness that resembles these, and it is treated with the methods of curing medicine and it does not improve, we have resorted to the extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of them as we have shown.
The method of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient shaves the hairs in the temples; and understand the artery visible in the temple by the pulse it has shown, and it is hidden unless in a few people due to the intensity of cold.
If it is hidden, then tighten the patient's neck with some cloth; and approach the area with a rough cloth or heat the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly. And you take the lancet, which has this form: And approach the neck with the lancet and make an incision in the area where the artery appears; then cut the artery at the upper parts until you extract it from the tendon, and remove the membranes that cover it from all sides.
But if the artery is thin, you wrap it with the onion tip, and make an incision from that part according to the length of the ends and their contraction; do not allow for blood flow, since if they are not incised, all the blood will not flow out.
And evacuate the old blood with vinegar. For three days.
If the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with strong thread of wax or cord, and do not allow for decay before the wound heals and promote blood flow.
And cut the excess between two linen strips; do this in that hour or another time.
If you want to, cauterize it with a cautery until the bone is reached with a cautery knife before cutting the ends, and leave that work in place.
It is better work if the patient has fever or a hot complication, since cauterization helps with drying humors; therefore it is more effective in combination.
It is necessary to approach the extraction of arteries with clean hands and let them rest for a while before dressing them gently with powder, and cure them with dry medications that promote the growth of flesh and warm them until they heal.
If during another examination blood flow from the artery occurs, then you must stop the bleeding, either with a cautery or by applying clean hands to the area, and press firmly until the bleeding stops. If any cause of that [issue] is not present for you, then place your finger on the affected area until the bleeding stops, and pour water of intense heat into it until the swelling subsides, and press firmly as needed.
What is easier for the extraction of an arrow is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades, since you have marked both the locations and separated them, one from the other, without interruption, until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities can be elongated, because it is not completely consolidated by this cautery.
This is the shape of the cautery:
Let the swelling of the two blades serve as an example. But if the swelling of more than two blades is better, because if it is sharp like two blades near each other, it does not cut the flesh with speed.
Therefore, in cases where there is some thickness, the heat of the fire is applied to it and the flesh is removed gently.
This work is better in every way and easier as well.
Let the space between two blades be the measure of the thickness of the finger.
Chapter Four.
On the treatment of chests with acute and chronic pain in the lungs.
When the pain in the lungs is chronic, and the veins on the chest that are above the head are affected by this, and no cause of the cure can be found for it with medicine, and at times the face of the patient turns yellow as if from a form of poisoning, and their eyes become sunken and appear swollen, and their breathing becomes labored as if they were walking through sand, and their lungs are weakened, humidified to such an extent that their skin is known, and their lips are scabbed due to the acidity of the tears. The ancients used mastic for treatment of this condition using this method, and I name this cure as spasmodic.
And you command the patient to raise their eyebrows that are on their forehead, and then make three incisions on the forehead at equal distances according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is two fingers: the first incision should be at an equal distance to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the eyelids that are near the tear duct, and the third on the other side.
Keep away from the incision of the arteries, which are in two directions, and stretch your hand from the continuation of both the jaws. Then adjust the space of each incision to three fingers' width.
And if you have a sponge with a cloth attached or dry towels that squeeze out blood, use it to drain the pus.
Then insert two sharp pointed instruments into the incision, of which this is the shape of the incision: from the separation of the temples until the second incision. Excise the entire cord that is between two incisions and cut through the ciphus which is on the bone, and place it from the incision of the thigh to the second incision. Then straighten the sponge and insert it into the first incision again with another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side but not on the other.
And pause the sides of that sharp instrument, attach the skin to the cord, and cut through the bone, inserting it into the gap between the incisions, and detach everything that descends from the head to the heels.
Make sure the incision continues to reveal the cord, and place it in the gap between the two incisions.
And when a sufficient amount of blood has drained out, compress the swollen places of the blood clot.
And pause in each gap until the pus dries up a little, and pause over those powders that have been moistened with vinegar and oil and vinegar essence, and observe whether it does not cause an abscess to appear.
On the third day, remove the linen and administer a large infusion of boiled water or tea, and care for it with basil oil and other substances until the sores are healed.
Chapter 5
On treating abscesses through catharsis and the heels that descend from the separations inside the head.
When an acute and persistent catharsis occurs and the patient's abscesses are extended slightly, and their weakness is evident, with ulcerated eyelids and their eyes sunken, and there is sharp pain at the base of the skull along with swelling, it is clear from these symptoms that the materials and catharsis do not come from other veins but rather from separations inside the head.
The best treatment for these cases is as follows: order the patient to recline their head, then make a single incision in the center of the forehead, small in width (starting from the left temple and ending at the right temple; and it should be through the bone; extend your hand beyond the temples which should not be touched by the bite), until the bone is exposed.
Drain all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth and fill the gap between the lips of the incision with gauze or cloth soaked in oil. And press on it with powders moistened in vinegar and oil to prevent an abscess from forming.
Once you remove the dressing and see that the abscess has decreased, it is necessary to scrape the bone starting from where the flesh begins, and treat it with an astringent regimen which will cause the flesh to dry up, as if you were taking flour from wheat and colophony in equal parts and mixing them, and making a plaster and administering it to these sores near the natural flesh.
Chapter 6
On treating what catharses in the ears.
The cause of catharsis in the ears can be one of four types: it is either a mineral or similar stone like iron and glass, or it is from plants such as cheese or beans, or it is a fluid substance like water and vinegar, or an animal.
And when the catarrh occurs in the ear or another similar cause that does not fit within the ear, and the ear is closed, if it seems painful, then distill some oil of violated or sulfur into that cause, and apply the extraction of it, make the patient sneeze with suitable conditions, and hold the nostrils to prevent sneezing. Then cover the circumference of the ear with some cloth or wool, and stretch the ear at its openings, as it is often overlooked with these causes.
If it is not treated, then apply the extraction of it with the instrument called epicioric subtil, whose form is as follows:
If it is overlooked with a cautery, that is good; and if not, then apply the extraction of it with a thin tool of little duplication.
And if it is not overlooked by that, then make a cannula of metal and introduce the end of the cannula into the ear canal and close around the cannula with wax and soft oil so that it is not open except for the cannula. Then remove the air and strong suction, as too much of this has been noticed.
But if it is not overlooked in this manner, then take alum or beeswax prepared with an appropriate quantity, and place it on the tip of the cannula, and cover the area properly around it. Then introduce that into the ear canal with ease, and carefully extract the ear of moisture.
And if it is not overlooked with all the causes that have been mentioned, then you must be careful when cutting what emerges as an abscess or spasm.
The method of cutting that is to first lance the patient from the saphenous vein and extract blood according to its virtue, and then place your thumb on the ear and turn it outwards while making a small opening in the edge of the ear, allowing the pus to flow out into the area most pressed. The opening should be in the shape of the moon to allow for the pus to come out, and once the abscess is opened, remove it if possible with appropriate instruments; and sew the opening at that time with speed, and care for it until it heals.
If the cause in the ear is one of the fatty substances that have swollen and inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if you don't see it specifically, then you take thin sputum according to this form: and administer the abscission of that fat that has become swollen in the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it in several cloths, and carefully extract it with scissors or a thin cautery, or open it as described above, for the extraction will be relieved.
But in the water that has entered the ear, the patient should use sneezing with suitable conditions at first, fill his ear with some old cloth, and apply it over the ear where the water is, and if this is overlooked, that is good; but if not, take many thin needles and cat's eyes according to the length of the finger, heat these up slightly in the fire, and the patient should introduce one of them into the ear canal and sneeze on the one side of it and hit another needle against the first needle inside the ear. Therefore, do not cease (the treatment) until all water has been drained off.
Therefore, do not cease (the treatment) until all water has been drained off. Then the water will be drained off, as soon as you take paper or cloth. and put one end of it in the brazier (or fire) and extend the other end into the water until it has burnt through the center.
And then take another cloth and do this as many times as necessary until all water is drained off, and store the one with the syringe (or tube) as mentioned before for the next use.
In the case of animal extraction (or evacuation), if it is small, perform it more gently and similarly, treat it as mentioned in the division; but if it is large and causes a bulge at the abdomen, administer its extraction immediately and with urgency, and in this case it is easier to remove than all other causes that occur in the brazier (or fire).
But in the case of worm extraction generated in the brazier (or fire), when you treat it as mentioned in the division and in the treatment of distillation and do not find relief, then you must watch the brazier (or fire).
And if any cause of worms appears here, then remove it immediately or with subtlety, but if no cause is found, then take a thin-and-wide tube (or syringe) of the following form: Insert the thin end of the tube into the brazier (or fire) according to the size that the patient can tolerate; then draw out with strong suction and do this many times until all the worms are drained off.
But if the patient does not improve with this treatment, then close the circuit of the tube with wax as mentioned earlier; administer distillation that has been described by the ancients in the treatment of worms, and observe it in the treatment of distillation.
Let your effusion be with which you infuse medical oils into the brazier (or fire) using this instrument of the following form: Make it from silver or brass, thin, in which there is a small hole, and flat on top.
And let it be such that it fits into the concave part of the continuous tube here where it is necessary. If you wish, take the reed and wrap it decorously around its end, then pour oil into the concave part of the opening (or syringe), or juice from some herb, or any medicine that you choose in the tube  which is in the brazier (or fire) , then insert the reed with a decorous grip at the top and press it gently until the oil is expelled into the concave part of the opening and the patient feels the oil inside.
And that which is infused in the brazier (or fire) should be slightly heated with a small fire. And beware that the cause which you are going to distill in the brazier (or fire) is not too hot, for medical oils do not tolerate excessive heat.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of obstruction in the brazier (or fire).
Sometimes infants are born from the bellies of their mothers without perforation, and this obstruction occurs in some men, blockage in the meat of the brazier (or fire) due to a wound or no flesh at that location; and this obstruction sometimes happens at the base of the brazier (or fire) where it does not open up, and sometimes it is outside.
And the obstruction that occurs at the base of the brazier (or fire) which does not open up is in the greater dispositions for difficult healing.
And in that which you manage to open up, it is necessary that you place the brazier (or fire) of the patient on a flat surface and observe it. And if you see obstruction appearing, open it with a thin spatula of this form:
If the end of it (the spatula) in which the width is small, and one side is sharp and the other is not; and the spatula be two lion's lengths wide so that it does not damage the brazier (or fire).
And if the obstruction is due to flesh born in the brazier (or fire) or its meat, then remove it immediately and carefully, making a wide incision until all the flesh has been removed.
And if obstruction is at the base of the brazier (or fire), then take a thin reed lion and slightly heat it with fire, and place it gently in the meat of the brazier (or fire).
And if you notice obstruction with something that the patient feels with ease, due to difficulty in breathing, remove the obstruction with ease; and be careful not to damage the nerves of the brazier (or fire).
And place cloth in the brazier (or fire) according to the size of the hole that you have wrapped in the Egyptian balm; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound; or take any herb and immerse it in water and pulverize it, then use it as specified earlier; and if you notice that the brazier (or fire) has already been closed, then remove it carefully and replace it with another which you will wrap in a thin layer of wax that has been made with rose oil, until the abscess is cauterized. And take care of it until it is healed.
If bleeding occurs, immerse sponge or cloth in hot water and place it over the artery, and use the other treatment that restricts blood flow, which is called in the treatise on distillation.
Capitulo VIII (Chapter VIII)
On the cure for athazel, which affects the eyelids.
Athazel, which sometimes affects the eyelids of men, is often moist and sometimes dry.
Therefore you should have these remedies at hand or prepared, and incise the affected area with a spatula of its roots, and then apply the remedy as described below.
If pain and bleeding occur, you should cauterize the affected area with a thin-tipped cautionery.
And the best method of cauterization is to incise and apply the ointment when the roots have returned as long as there remains some cause of the disease; and once cauterized with fire, the roots are burned and do not return.
Capitulo IX (Chapter IX)
Treatment for swelling that affects the eyelids of men.
Sometimes swelling that affects the eyelids of men is caused by an ailment similar in strength and persistence to a large swelling, which is why it is called grandyssa.
It is a thick accumulation of moisture on the upper and lower eyelids.
Therefore, you should examine whether the swelling originates in an area outside the eyelid and is spreading everywhere, and if so, it is due to a minor cause.
Therefore, make an incision along the width of the swelling and remove it from all sides with ease until it drains, and suspend it in a warm place to dry and separate it.
If the swelling is large, you should adjust it with sutures and treat it until it heals.
If it is small, there will be no harm in leaving the swelling as it will restore itself and become incorporated.
If the swelling is receding into the inner parts of the eyelid, you should remove the inner surface of the eyelid, remove the swelling with a cushion and apply pressure to it, but if the incision in the eyelid extends it, look for any underlying cause.
After the incision, wash the wound with salt water and treat the area with a dressing until it heals.
Capitulo X (Chapter X)
Treatment for excoriation of the upper eyelid in men.
Excoriation is a condition that arises in the conjunctiva of the upper eyelid, and it often affects children, aggravating their eyes and causing catarrh in them; and they cannot tolerate the brightness of the sun due to tears.
Therefore, you often see them sitting with their faces all the time and sleeping with their faces; and moisture covers the undersides of their eyebrows, which have already become inflamed, and the imminent danger is in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, pus comes out into them.
One method of treatment is for the patient to place their head on your lap, and you apply heat to them and make a circle according to the size that contains arteries from all sides, and place it over that and press with your fingers all around so that pus comes out into the center of the circle, and make an incision in the middle of the moisture with a spatula along the width, and the incision should not be larger than the incision made during lithotomy.
However, in severe cases it is necessary to cut the skin entirely until you reach the artery, because in more advanced cases pus will drain through an incision similar to that of a white gravel-like lesion.
Therefore, remove it with cloths that you have wrapped around your fingers on the sides and twist it between your right and left hands until it is separated.
And be careful not to close the incision with a spatula so that the pus does not enter the eye and cause damage.
If your artery does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, but you adjust within the fissure a small opening for the artery to pass through; then extract it as we have said; submerge cloths in warm water and vinegar, place them over the area, and press down on them with powder.
Also sprinkle salt on it in the concavity of the fissure to remove any remaining moisture.
Then take care that it heals properly.
But if an abscess occurs at the cauterized spot, then take care of it with caustic plasters until it heals.
Capital .xi [Capitulo XI] - This signifies that we have reached chapter eleven in this medical treatise. The text may be structured as a collection of chapters or sections, numbered for easy reference.
On the methods of examination of the kidney.
When the eyelids of the kidneys are narrowed due to natural skin contraction and aging, this is harmful to the kidney and may lead to methods of illness such as persistent tearing, softening of the eyelids and inflammation under the skin, which is known as "touching" the kidney. Treatment is carried out in four ways: by cauterization with fire; with acute medication as previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization; by touching through incision and suturing; or by cannulation as I will explain later.
Therefore, you should hold the patient's head with your hand; turn the eyelid of the kidney towards your left hand, and if it turns, that is good; otherwise, insert a needle into the one where there is no tear, just below the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate faithfully through the tear, about the margin of the eyelid where the hair grows; pull the thread above the eyelid with the tear, and turn it towards the ray.
Then make an incision in the tear opening of the eyelid below the hairline, insert a spatula into the larger lacrimal duct up to the smaller lacrimal duct; extract the thread and place it below the eyelid with small powdered cotton or cloth, and then squeeze the eyelid gently, as if in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
However, the shape should be according to the degree of swelling of the eyelid, because it varies among men, as some require a large incision in the eyelid according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
Then make an incision with the spatula along both lines that you have marked, starting from the larger lacrimal duct to the smaller one. And if your incision is near the natural furrows, such as the thickness of the king [a metaphorical term for a large person or object].
Then move the onion to one of the two angles of the coden (a type of bandage or ligature), and remove the entire incised area; then stitch the two lips with silk or fine thread, clean the blood, and allow any excess threads that may become stuck to adhere to two eyebrows for some reasons, if you wish to do so, but otherwise, do not worry about it.
Then leave the stitching of the threads for three or four days and take care of it.
If you want, leave the wound without stitching, and take care of it with drying and compressing, because the eyelid is elevated due to the sealing of the wound and the application of something to it; but suturing is better and therefore ancient physicians prefer it.
However, in this case, be cautious with the patient, and it is a good operation, but not to fear.
Another method of touching is to shape the eyelid like a myrtle leaf and lift it with three spaced-out stitches arranged in this manner:
If it is not possible to make the incisions as described earlier, take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the figure [the myrtle leaf shape]; then insert another thread close to the larger lacrimal duct, and the third thread near the smaller one; adjust the two threads so that they are evenly spaced, and lift the entire bandage on which this incision has been made as recommended earlier.
Then stitch the two lips of the wound and take care of it until it heals.
If an abscess occurs during your incision or procedure, remove the abscess with a lancet and apply a similar dressing and warm water.
In some cases, the eyelashes may turn towards the wound; in this case, use what has been mentioned earlier about incision; but stitching is more artificial.
Cannulation of the kidney is as follows: Convert the eyelid and divide the figure that is inside as I have described; then use two fine cannulas or thin needles, whose length should be the same as the length of the eyelid, but their width should be smaller than the width of the spatula. You have already cut into the extremities of every partition, where you have threads.
Then apply each with subtlety underneath that which is superfluous of the eyelid of the eye, and compress the veins of every partition with strong compression, and leave it for several days, since it will die due to the constriction and be rejected, and it will eventually fall out or be absorbed into itself before it has a chance to spread.
But if it is delayed, then break the thread and apply care to the wound until it heals.
Therefore, when it is sutured, raise the eyelid and do not prick the hairs.
And this is the form of two veins that you will perform according to this procedure: and the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter .xii.
On plucking hair from the eyelid with a needle when the hair is tough.
When the hairs are not natural, tough, sharp and painful in the eyelid, the operation is that you take a subtle needle and hold it on the soft part of beechwood or lion, and place it gently so that you adjust its extremities without moving too much. And let the length of the needle be equal to the length of a palm.
Then prepare another fine needle quickly beside it, and use its ends if you wish.
Then place the patient's head on your lap and position it facing the sun so that your work is clear, since this operation is subtle and small.
And insert the needle into the root of the hair with skill, adjusting it so that it enters the eyelid quickly and exits above the natural hair.
And pull out the hair above and insert it into the incision, let there be one or two or three hairs at most.
And pull your hand with the hair out, leaving the incision in the eyelid with the natural hair.
But if the incision is drawn out and the hair is not pulled out, pull the incision to the sides with the needle that you have prepared and it, until the incision heals over the wound.
And look at it with the eye, since then you will pull out the incision and the needle, and let each drop of blood come out and leave the clot for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and grows on good flesh.
And if the hair is short, then you adjust a longer natural hair and lift it up with it, or let it grow until it reaches a suitable space, and you lift that one up.
Chapter .xiii.
On the treatment of ecthyma that appears on the eyelid above.
When ecthyma appears in the eyelid, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted on either the right or left side due to poor wound healing or dryness or cauterization, and it is called leprosy, and this ecthyma can be natural or accidental, caused by poor wound healing or dryness or cauterization, or similar to its causes.
The method of the operation is that you cut open the consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place a piece of linen cloth in it, and bind them together until they are healed.
And it is not necessary to use any cure for the causes that dry it out, constrain it; since if you do so, the ecthyma will return worse than before and never heal.
Use in it the causes that soften such as fenugreek, and wrap it with water in which salt has been added, or douching solution, which is made liquid with oil, and immerse the cloth in it and heal it with that.
The secret of your treatment is that you perform everything skillfully without allowing it to consolidate according to the initial form.
And this operation that we have described is not any correction of ecthyma that does not return the form of the place according to what was done before.
Chapter .xiv.
On the treatment of ecthyma that appears on the eyelid below.
This ecthyma that appears on the eyelid below, which is truly called ecthyma; it can be either natural or accidental.
But accidental is caused by a wound, cut, cauterization, or other similar causes.
And the method of operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and make an incision in the flesh, and let it pass from the tear duct on the left to the tear duct on the right, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
And stretch the skin to the sides above with the needle and sew it with the needle, and cut it open widely with a spatula. And so if the shape of the eyelid returns as it should be, that is good; but if not, take the ray and place it on the broken figure, and with that turn the eyelid, and make two incisions along the lower edge of the eyelid below.
And let the extremities of the two fissures of two angles of the incision, which you made before they meet, be made an angle until when they converge it is made a figure of theirs.
And this Greek letter is Lambda.
Then raise the skin to the extent that it is equal to the thickness of the blade at its sharp edge, as much as an eyelid.
Then adjust the separated parts and sew them with woolen thread, and care for them with what has been said of the softening medicines and oils until it is healed.
And if it is necessary to excise by incision or suturing or cauterizing, then you must make a plain incision on the skin of the eyelid as previously described. Then separate with oil between two lips as previously stated.
In conclusion, in the sum of the sermon on the care of excision whether above or below, run the operation according to the form of excision, and that form is diverse in shape like a dot.
And the skillful artist always prepares an instrument for every possible method which is available to him until he restores the figure to its natural form or close to it, and the patient according to what suits them in terms of the operation and tools in the greatest arrangements.
Chapter 15.
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in many men who have the eyelid stuck above to the aqueous humor and prohibited from moving and performing its natural functions, then you must cut off the edge of the eye below the eyelid, raise it up or stretch it with oil.
Then you should incise the adhesion with a fine spatula, which is not sharp like an incision, having an obtuse point to prevent the patient from being disturbed by the operation, and leave the spatula not touching the aqueous humor with its point.
And your incision should be such that it separates the adhesion with ease until the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
You should put salted water in the aqueous humor, which you rinse with, or steam it in the dissolved zinc solution in water.
Then separate the eyelid from the aqueous humor with oil and place wool soaked in ointment of hemp on the aqueous humor, and use the third day for consolidating causes until it is healed.
Chapter 16.
On incision of a nail and on protrusion of skin around the tear ducts.
Know that the nail is of two types: either it is nervous and similar to hard dry cartilage; or it is non-nervous, similar to white congealed moisture, which when touched, or if pressed, tends to take oil, separates and the oil is not inserted.
And in both types it does not start until the major tear duct begins to decrease gradually and covers vision, inhibiting the light and movement of the aqueous humor.
But the method of working in the incision is that the patient rests their head on your chest, opens their eyes and raises the eyelid with your hand, and collects the nail with oil using a needle with minimal duplication and stretches it to the edges above. And take a needle and insert a horse's or cow's or ox's hair, or similar, or strong thread, double the tip of the needle little by little and insert it into the middle of the nail, penetrate with the needle and hold the nail; stretch it to the edges above, and remove the root of the nail along with the hair, which touches the pupil. And in this way, you follow with the hair towards the back of it.
And you should incise the remnant of the tear duct at the root of it with a fine spatula or small scissors, and leave the natural skin of the tear duct so that the continuous flow of tears is not interrupted by the incision.
And sometimes the nail with only oil or thread, as previously stated, should be excised with the lion's spatula, which has this shape:
Be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal membrane and cause a rupture, and that the pupil is pierced.
Make the incision in the aqueous humor a little salt or powdered chalk and let it rest for another day; care for it with what is necessary until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle or oil into it, then this type of nail is treated with medicines, and healed in this way as described and recommended in the division.
And if you want to incise it, then open the patient's eye and take a fine spatula shaped like this lion: with finesse. And if it is hardened and congealed and stuck in the root, then steam distilled water from your own hour in the patient's eye made of chalk or roasted rice or salted powder, and apply the steam for another day.
Approach the operation on that area until everything from it has been removed, unless the counter-abscess (cauterized area) is in the wound, for then you should lance it. Care for the abscess within until it is healed.
Approach the operation on that area with reason until it is healed.
The discharge of the lacrimal tissue, if noticeable due to great harm, should be stopped by anointing (applying ointment or oil); and it should be cut from that one place, without completing the incision so as not to cause tears of tears.
Then apply distilled water or vinegar on the lacrimal head and let it heal without any treatment until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the incision of abscesses and that which is born from skin adhered to the wound.
Sometimes in abscesses of the eyes, skin grows red and covers the pupil, or approaches or presses on the eyelids and forces them apart at the edges and resembles a rose of a balcony railing.
However, the operation on him is to have the patient hold his head in your lap; and open the eyes of that one and collect all that skin with suitable scissors or tweezers, and take it away with forceps or tweezers; and begin the incision of the skin at the beginning until everything is finished by the scalpel, and be careful not to descend into the eye during your operation.
Your incision should be made either with the scalpel that we have recommended for nail incision, or with small forceps suitable for that purpose according to the shape of it as described in this chapter.
Therefore, when your incision is complete and all that skin has been removed, fill the wound with salt powder or distill a red powder similar to those of corrosive medicines into it, and wait on the wound covered with hog's fat until the abscess is completely cauterized.
And if any cause of abscesses and pus remains and you fear cauterization of the abscess, lance the wound and treat that abscess with something that will reduce it, then approach the operation on it until it is healed, and do the same for the skin that grows adhered in this type of wound.
However, you must ensure that all healing of the wound occurs naturally or accidentally, work with iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member can tolerate that operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On collecting pus from the wound.
Pus is red and thick over the wound and it should be forbidden to apply any dressing to its operation, and leave the wound open for several days.
Therefore, at the beginning you must consider if the wound in which there is pus is strong and there is no other disease besides pus, then you collect that pus.
And you command the patient to hold his head in your lap, and suspend those veins with oil or two according to your discretion; and that oil should be of subtle double distillation as follows:
or two oils graduated in one vessel according to this form:
Then those veins should be collected with fine forceps, with gentleness and without squeezing the blood out immediately, until you see that they are removed from the wound and swollen.
Be careful not to damage the wound at its extremities with the spatula; and if your operation is during the daytime, be firm in your operation so that you do not make an incision except those veins.
And when you have completed everything, distill the green or red liquid in the wound to corrode what remains of the pus.
However, if it is not possible for you to collect everything at that time, then fill the entire area with something that reduces pain, and let it heal for several days until the pain has subsided and there is no fear of abscess cauterization.
Then proceed as the matter dictates until it is healed.
And this is the shape of the forceps:
Chapter XIX.
On reducing arisatum (nasal polyps) at the nose.
When you treat arisatum with cauterization or sharp medicine as described in the narrative and it is not healed, do not poke it but make an incision on the mature abscess, extracting all the moisture within it and exposing the bone.
And since the bone is exposed and sometimes corrupt or blackened, you grate it with an instrument that has this form:
It is called a grater with a sharp head, and should be made of iron and have a round cap similar to the one that is pierced with a drill or file for subtle drilling (as shown below).
Place a cushion on the corrupted spot of the bone, and turn it between your fingers, press your little finger gently into it until you know that the corruption is removed.
Then make some observations, and restore the area with healing treatments. (This assumes "aquo" refers back to the previous sentence, meaning "it", i.e., the corruption being removed.)
If the area is healed and good flesh grows there, and if it is separated from the body for forty days without being renewed or drained and no accident occurs in that place, then you will know that it is healed.
But if it is not healed, then you should reduce the wound to the shape of a nose and in this way: and this is what you do when uncovering with iron or sharp medicine, and when the bone is exposed, you take three pieces of this form: (The following seems to be describing the process for setting a broken bone using splints)
Let the exterior of the iron be triangular, and its shaft should be narrowed to the tip as much as possible in this way: (This appears to describe shaping the splint.)
Then place one of the pieces on the bone, this should be the lacrimal bone; and stretch your hand a little bit of the hue, then turn your hand with the piece to penetrate completely into the bone, and the patient will feel it as air coming out when you release their hand. (This appears to describe setting the broken bone.)
And then you should heal the area with drying and healing treatments as you have been instructed. (This assumes that the previous sentences were describing how to set a broken bone, and this sentence is referring back to that procedure.)
Once the flesh and area are hardened, you should return the material that was poured out of the wounds to the nose, so it is lighter on the patient. (This assumes the previous sentence referred to the healing process.)
Capital twenty: (This appears to be a heading or title, as capital letters were often used in medieval texts for headings and titles.)
On the reduction of the swelling of the hue. (This seems to be the main topic of this section, based on the heading and previous sentences referring to healing or treating a wound.)
When the swelling of the hue enlarges to its entirety and no damage or reduction occurs, you must loosen the patient, and then make them lie down, and place warm poultices on their neck without scarification and suck it with good suction; and then place liniment on the swelling which is made of castor oil, aloe, cumin, and sarcocholla, and strengthen the plaster on the swelling with a little powder. (This appears to describe a treatment for a swollen hue or lymph node.)
The method of the powders is that you take cloth from lions' manes, and each cloth should be folded four times; and make powder from these (cloths). (This appears to describe the source of the powder used in a previous sentence.)
And then place them one on top of the other according to the amount that the swelling requires. (This appears to describe applying the powder from the previous sentence to the affected area.) And strengthen them with tough, tightly bound cloths; and repeat the poultices without scarification and suck them; and remove the poultices and leave the swelling free during the day and night. (This appears to describe a continuation of the treatment for a swollen hue or lymph node.)
But if the ligament becomes soft in the meantime, it should be made tighter. (This appears to provide a guideline or instruction for the treatment process.)
And remove the ligament during the day and night as we have said. (This appears to refer back to the previous sentence, suggesting that removing the ligament when it becomes soft is part of the treatment process.)
And if the swelling has been reduced (healed), that is good; but if not, you should repeat the plaster with the powders and the tightening and poultices until it is healed. (This appears to provide a guideline or instruction for the treatment process.)
Capital twenty-one: (This appears to be a new heading or title, indicating a change in topic.)
On the incision of the swelling of the tunica uveae. (This seems to be the main topic of this section, based on the heading and previous sentences referring to treatment of a swollen area.)
When there is a rupture in the tunica uveae, and it becomes swollen and protrudes out from the eyelids like a grain of rice, and its shape resembles that of a man, and you wish to incise it, perform the operation as we have recommended, entering the needle into the lower part of the rupture on one side, and placing another needle in the lacrimal area on the other side and making it penetrate; then release the first needle according to its position; and make an incision at the intersection of the two needles and lift up the lower portion of the ruptured tunica with that needle and remove a piece of the tunica around the needle, and strengthen that area. (This appears to describe a procedure for treating a rupture in the tunica uveae, possibly caused by an injury or inflammation.)
And remove the needle and place it on the wool-infused albumen of egg and let it remain until the thread adheres to the grape (i.e., the ruptured tunica).
And cure the swelling with whatever strengthens it until the wound is healed. (This appears to provide a guideline or instruction for the treatment process.)
And collect all the surrounding area with a circle of cloth around the swelling to contain the large eminence, and perforate it with a thin spatula that reaches the surface of the swelling, let the humid albumin run out, and drain the swelling and insert cotton soonest. (This appears to describe a procedure for treating a larger or more severe swelling.)
Approach strengthening when it has been healed.
Chapter XXII.
Treatment of ulcers.
This disease called "alconati" is not merely an abscess similar to water descending, but something else.
The method of treating it is that you place the patient on a bed with sheets and make him lie straight, then grasp his head with both hands, pushing inward towards where the abscess appears to be coming out, and make it dry up and not descend, and keep the wound open, and the patient should see the cause as he sees it.
If it does not descend, you know that it is water.
But if the abscess is not ready to descend with what has been said, then you make the patient lie between your hands and take a subtle spatula and place it on top of the abdomen around the edge of the navel, close to the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea in the crown (into the spot), until it is forgotten.
Once the abscess is forgotten, you distill the water in a bowl into which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fennel and honey.
And it should be cured with the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
Treatment of water descending from the abdomen.
We have already said the types of water in the division and which one should be perforated with a knife, then you proceed according to its healthiness.
You should make the patient lie on a board with his belly exposed, and you press gently on it to make the water move towards one side.
And you should place your left hand near the eyelid of the patient's left side, if the water is on the left side; or with your right hand, if it is on the right.
And you should take a spoon or lancet with your right hand, if it is on the left side; or with your left hand, if it is on the right.
And you should position the handle of the spoon near the crown due to the thickness of the skin around the navel on the side of the lesser tear duct, and then you press the spoon with force and rotate your hand around it.
And you should penetrate the skin around the navel, feeling that the spoon has reached its destination through your touch.
It is necessary to measure the path of the spoon from its point to the space that is from the pupil to the end of the black line, and this is the navel's crown; for you will see it with the pupil using the clarity of the corneal membrane.
Then place a plug in the location where the water is, and apply pressure on it once, then do so again after some time, and if the water descends quickly, you must immediately allow the patient to see what they are standing on, and place your hand over their eye.
Then wait for a while, and if the water has descended, then apply pressure again without letting the water spill out.
When it is dry and does not descend, you must carefully extract the water with ease, and rub your hand slowly on the eye socket, and apply a little clear salt from gemma to dissolve in the water, and then wash the inner part of the eye with that; and apply an external eyewash with linen soaked in rose oil and albumen of egg and tie it to the eye with some cloth or stopper.
However, those of our time place a compress over that swollen area with albumen of egg.
If you cannot extract the water from the eye due to its hardness (for some people, the eye is very hard), then it is necessary that you take the spatula, which is called alberid and here is its form:
And then pierce that junction with the spatula, but do not press too hard, and make sure you do not injure the surrounding tissue; and carefully make a small opening to let the water out.
Then proceed as described earlier.
You must complete your procedure, prepare a comfortable bed for the patient in which they sleep on their back in a dark room, and prohibit any movements.
And keep the patient in a state of nature, and do not turn their head to the right or left at all.
Let the linen be according to its position for the next three days.
Then remove that person to the same dark room and expose their wound, show them various causes, and return the linen on the seventh day.
And it is not necessary to do this during the time of healing or immediately apply an infusion. However, you must avoid doing this because the water can easily spread with great and violent shaking.
However, if an abscess has formed, you must remove the eyelid within seven days and treat it with a substance that will cause the abscess to burst.
You wash the face of the patient with water, and apply a poultice on their mouth to help alleviate the pain for several days, in a dark room.
And then gradually lower it down (the poultice) and discuss its causes with the patient.
Know that in any case, the apprentice is not excused from observing for several days, and you must be confident in performing the operation.
It has been reported to us that some of these (medical practitioners) called the Artax, and one said he made fire in the Ayrach with a perforated vessel for boiling the water.
However, I have never seen such a thing in our land, nor has anyone mentioned it in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
These are the forms of the species of eye medicine for those who are ignorant of them:
These can be made from copper or iron, and they have extensions with this subtle, triangular tip, as shown in the shape below:
Chapter 24.
On the treatment of a skin ulcer in the nose.
When in the nose various kinds of skin grow attached to which there is one cause similar to the scorpion's tail or a polyposis (polypoid growth); and this illness is called polyps, as it resembles that polyp represented by the tail of a scorpion. And this cancerous skin is leprous and dark-colored, and it is not a lion-colored skin.
Therefore, in those skins that are not fraudulent or cancerous, it is necessary to have the patient sit under the sun, open their nostrils, and pick the skin at those places. Then remove it from the outside, and incise what you have captured from that area with a sharp spatula on one side to ensure that all the skin has been removed; if there is any reason for the abscess to remain, you must carefully extract it with one of the subtle tools as soon as possible. However, if the skin becomes senescent or an abscess forms, you must wait for it; or if it is a malignant abscess, you must collect it and cauterize it until it has been completely removed, and all the cavities are left open.
Then apply a paste containing vinegar or water to the nose near the incision. If the nose is opened and moisture is introduced into the palate, then you know it has been healed.
But if moisture does not penetrate as expected, then you know that there is no carnal matter above the joints or bones of the nose which has not undergone an abscission.
Therefore, you must introduce a thin probe into it if there is any swelling, and press with the nutz (or fingers) as much as necessary to measure the size of the digit or month, and guide the patient and insert one end of the probe into the nose either with the ray or another suitable instrument.
And when that is done, let the patient inhale the odorant to reach the nasal passages, and be seated over his nostrils, for many observed children at school do this action, and it is an easy cause for anyone who wants to perform it.
Then place the two ends of the probe, one end outside the nose and the other inside the nose, and administer a stitch of flesh with the fingers that are in the probe, and do this until you know that the flesh is within the nose of the probe.
Then extract the probe and place it in the nose near the extraction of blood, and do this for three days or more until the pus dries up everything that is rotten from the flesh.
And in conclusion, place a lead pipe in the nose for some days until it is healed.
But if the patient's condition worsens and requires more advanced treatment, use that method.
This is the shape of the instrument for a nose purger maker who distills oils and medicines in the nose:
Make it of silver or brass, similar to a small, open lantern or small bowl, as well as its handle.
If you wish, make a closed pipe like a cane, and the nozzle of the nose purger maker's instrument should be flat, open; on which you will hold it when you suck out oil or any other liquids or juices and substances that you want.
Chapter XXV.
From the eyes to the outer edges of the nostrils.
Many observed that the eye is located at the outer edges of the nostrils, and it is magnified and emphasized in some days until the gaze has been fully attentive to it.
And therefore, you must mark that at the beginning of its appearance, and observe everything about it. Then place your hand or cautery or burning medicine on the spot where it is located.
But if its appearance is delayed until it has been magnified, then consider whether it is hard, dark in color, and with little sensation; in that case, do not touch it with iron because it is a cancerous ulcer; for many observed that he who marks this cancerous ulcer brings great harm to himself.
And if the ulcer is touchable and not dark in color, and marking it is possible in all cases, then evacuate the patient and mark it without fear, and cure the spot with oil or any other suitable substance until it is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On stitching of the nose, lips, and ear when continuity is resolved due to boil or similar conditions.
You should know that when the continuity is resolved in one of these cartilages, you should not perform this operation except in some men.
Therefore, when you mark for any reason one of these cartilages, consider whether it is a fresh boil with pus, and then sew the two lips of the boil together with stitches, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the lips of resolution of continuity are already separated and each one is healed, you must cauterize each part of its edge until it comes to the pus. Then adjust the two labia with stitching and tighten them, then sprinkle dragon's blood powder on top and let it dry, and place a piece of healing ointment like diafinicon or any other consolidating ointments over the powder. Leave this dressing for two to three days, then remove the dressing and replace it with fresh one until the abscesses heal by themselves, and take care of it with warm water until it is healed.
Then the method for stitching is that you use continuous suture or with needles as we have recommended in abdominal surgery, or use continuous suture with pins as you know.
Chapter XXVII.
Of the extraction of causes that occur in both labia during childbirth.
Many times, in the delivery of men during childbirth, abscesses similar to pimples filled with purulent matter appear on their labia, and some are milder while others are larger.
Therefore, you must separate the labia and incise each of those hard areas all around, then fill the abscess with boiled water until the pus is reduced, and wash it with vinegar and treat it with astringent water until it is healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
Of incision of the adjusted flesh in the gums.
Sometimes pimples arise on the adjusted gum flesh, which the ancients called albulus, therefore you must suspend it with a thread or hold it with forceps and incise it appropriately, and let the pus drain out or let the blood flow.
And then place a dressing of boiled water or other astringent or caustic powders over it.
And if the flesh returns, incise it again and cauterize it, for the cautery will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
On the reason for tooth extraction.
When on the surface of the teeth in childbirth and those outside and between the gums are misaligned, crooked, and sometimes discolored and made brittle or become hollow inside due to decay, causing rot of the gum and the teeth become loose.
And therefore you must keep the patient between your hands and hold his head in place, and extract the teeth where those misalignments and causes similar to sand appear, until there remains no cause for it, and remove the blackness and discoloration and any other impurities until they are cleaned.
If what is at the beginning of the reasoning is correct, it is good; and if not, you must repeat the reasoning on another day or the second or third day until it reaches the desired conclusion.
And know that teeth require various resorbs of different shapes according to how they are prepared for your operation. Therefore, the razors with which you remove a tooth from its socket are other than those used for filing between the teeth according to various shapes. These shapes of razors should be prepared, which you will soon see:
Title: XXX
On Extraction of Teeth.
You must cure the tooth of its pain with great care and patience in the entire extraction process, for it is not a trivial cause that bleeding occurs when it is extracted, as there is a refined substance inside that requires an excuse during the extraction process.
Moreover, when the patient is to have that tooth extracted, you must be absolutely certain which tooth is causing the pain, as many times the pain deceives the patient and makes them believe it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one, and the pain does not cease until the sick and painful tooth is extracted, for we have seen this happen often in barber surgeries.
Therefore, after you are certain which tooth is causing the pain and know what it looks like, then you must incise around the tooth with a scalpel filled with some substance that has a healing property, until it dissolves the tooth from the gum on all sides. Then bring that to the surface, either using tweezers or fine forceps, gradually until it is completely exposed.
And apply strong, large pliers for good grip or firm structure, and hold the patient's head between your thumb and forefinger so that you have a firm hold without causing discomfort, and then grasp the tooth in such a manner as to extract it properly, neither breaking it nor causing the patient additional pain.
And if this is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place it near the tooth with ease and effortless movement to facilitate its removal as it was done at the beginning.
However, if the tooth is fractured or corroded, you must cover it with a cloth and tighten it at the root tip to prevent it from breaking during your compression on it using pliers.
You must work carefully with incision around the entire gum and guard your strength to ensure you do not break it or leave a part behind, and return to the patient for the cruelty that is greater than the initial pain of their tooth.
And beware that you do not perform what some ignorant barbers do in their brashness and overconfidence during tooth extraction, as they do not administer what we have recommended; for many times they bring upon men great suffering that are difficult to alleviate, and all the roots remain, or some of those roots remain, or you extract it with some bone fragments as many times we have witnessed.
And before the extraction, wash the mouth with wine or vinegar mixed with salt.
If bleeding occurs during this process, as it often does, you should apply a certain amount of egg white and pour it over the wound. If the egg white is not effective, then cauterize the area.
The shape of the forceps and fine pliers used for extracting teeth should have a long arm, a short handle, and be wide to avoid being folded when working with them.
And so, as often happens when large hands enter, they should not be contracted, but rather short extensions.
And make iron rods from India properly made, and in the ends of these rods should be teeth which enter into each other and contract by strong force, and sometimes the ends of these rods are shaped like the beak of a bird called ciconia, which is called a guanta, and they have strong contraction.
Capital .21.
On the extraction of teeth and removal of broken bones from the jaws.
If you need to extract a broken tooth, there should be some cause for this, then you must wait over the area covered with a bandage for one or two days until it becomes softened; and then insert tweezers or pliers similar to the beak of a bird called ciconia or guanta, the shape of forceps:
The ends of these (the tweezers or pliers) should be made flat like a file or an alfajar.
And if you do not comply with this forceps or tweezers, then you must be careful of the root and carefully cut all the flesh and insert the instrument called an ataly, which is a small lever with the following shape:
It should have a short, thick handle, not bent so that it is not broken.
Therefore, if the root is forgotten in this process, that's good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are their shapes: The shape of the first instrument is a triangular end with some thickness.
The shape of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a very thin end.
And now you will be helped by this instrument that has two ramps with the following shape: and with other instruments that I will describe for the removal of teeth; because it is done with this instrument that resembles a large scissor, and this is its shape:
of the triangular twisted or short end that has some thickness, and not bent so that it is not broken.
And another thing you should know is that tools for teeth removal are made similarly to other instruments.
However, skillful and subtle craftsmen who are knowledgeable in the art, will learn for themselves according to what this procedure means and the various diseases; because there were diseases for which ancient physicians did not have or use a specific instrument, due to the different shapes of diverse species.
If the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth is fractured, or if it needs to be moved, then a piece of cotton should be applied to that area with what is suitable from the instruments and forceps mentioned during the extraction of tooth roots, and assisted by the hand motion of the person performing this action. This is the method:
Make it gradually smaller, and hold it in the mouth so that it does not escape or fall out before the bone is healed; then restore the area with suitable medications.
If there is a small fracture in the bone, remove that part of the fracture and its blackness, and heal it until it is healed.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of prominent teeth compared to others.
When teeth protrude unnaturally from their normal shape, and especially when they do so in women, and especially in venerable girls, it is necessary to consider: if the tooth is close to another tooth and neither suturing nor linament can be used, remove the root of that tooth; but if it is not attached to another tooth, cut it with this instrument whose shape is as follows: like a pig's snout, made of sharp Indian iron.
Make the incision with which you will cut it in several days according to the hardness of the tooth, and ensure that it does not damage any other teeth.
And if the protruding tooth is worn down by grinding, grind it with an Indian iron file whose shape is as follows:
The entire file should be made of Indian iron and its edge should be sharp; it should have many small points like a drill bit, with which the tooth can be ground down gently in several days with ease, so that it does not damage any other teeth and fall out. And align the edge of the file at the end, and remove that part with another razor.
If part of the tooth is fractured and the tongue licks it, you must file that part until the sharp edge of the fracture is removed and filled so that the tongue does not hurt or corrupt the speech.
Chapter XXXIII.
On restoring damaged teeth with gold or silver filings.
When teeth are knocked out due to injury or extraction and the patient cannot bear to eat, and you have treated it with stiffening medications, but your treatment has not been effective, then in order to prevent decay in those that are strengthened with gold fillings and not silver (since silver turns green and needs to be replaced after a few days, while gold does not change over time), use this method:
The filling should be made with the appropriate thickness and size depending on the amount that can fit between the teeth; the shape of the recess is such that you take the filling and place double the amount between two healthy teeth, and allow it to grow curved between two damaged teeth, or if one or more, until it reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. Then apply the cement to the damaged area where you started, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill until it is not damaged anymore.
Your strong grip should be used to hold the roots of the teeth that may fall out.
Then cut off any excess filling with forceps or scissors, and insert it into each location using hand movements, and fold and hide the excess between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, to avoid hurting the tongue. And seal that tightly like a Roman.
But if it is loose or broken, strengthen it with another filling at all times.
This is the shape of teeth and the configuration of two healthy teeth and two damaged teeth, as shown below:
When a tooth or teeth return to their original position following extraction, and they are allowed to grow back as recommended, and remain healthy.
Only experienced and wise people should do this.
A piece of cow bone can sometimes be used for a cause of the jaw bones and shaped like a tooth, placed in the place where the tooth is missing, strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
On incising the ligament that is found in the tongue and preventing speech.
This ligament that is found behind the tongue sometimes occurs naturally with some people or accidentally due to an illness that has already been consolidated.
The operation is to open the mouth of the patient and expose their cavity; lift their tongue and incise the nervous ligament as wide as possible until the tongue is released from its root.
But if there is any hardness or obstruction due to consolidation of an illness, then you throw salt and cut through it as widely as possible until the ligament is incised and the obstruction is resolved.
And be careful not to cause a wound in the skin of the flesh and that you split this arch, so that blood flow comes out.
Then wash the remains of the incision with warm water or vinegar, or water and soap; then hold it closed for a time, so that the patient does not stick out their tongue in any way every night to prevent it from healing again.
But if there is bleeding, place a piece of vitriol on the spot; but if blood comes out, then cauterize the spot with a cautery made from lignin vitae (a tree resin). And take care of the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
On the removal of a lymph node from under the tongue.
Sometimes, under the tongue, there appears an ulcer resembling a small pimple that prevents the tongue from performing its natural function and swells the mouth greatly.
And the operation on it is to open the patient's mouth wide in front of the sun, and examine the ulcer.
And if you see it is blackish or dark in color and hard, the patient does not feel anything from it, then do not touch the cancerous part.
If it turns white with humidity, then you put onion in it, and incise it with a subtle spatula, and cut it all around; if blood comes out during the time of your operation, then you hold zinc (vitriol) over it to stop the bleeding.
And then return to your work until you have treated it with the above, until it is washed with vinegar and salt; and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the removal of an ulcer between two ears and the one that is nothing in the cauliflower (gland) and other ulcers.
When a gland becomes swollen, they are similar to cauliflowers, which appear outside and are called two ears; when you treat them with what has been said in the division, and it is not healed, then consider whether the ulcer is hard, dark in color, with little sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red in color and the root is thick, then do not touch it with iron due to blood flow; leave it alone until it matures, and either you pull it out or it breaks on its own.
If it is white in color, round, and the root of it is thin, then that one must be incised.
The operation on it is to consider whether the ulcer has rested in place with cautery and repose completed or if it has been diminished by any means; then hold the patient facing the sun, the head of the patient should be under your hand, and open their mouth wide, and a servant takes the tongue between their hands with a noble instrument with this shape:
It should be made of silver or iron and be thin like a knife.
Thus, when you press the tongue with it and show the ulcer to you, then you catch it with your instrument, and take onion and place it in the wound, and pull it out as far as you can. Another thing that pulls the covering of the cauliflower, then incise it with an instrument with this shape:
Another thing that pulls the covering of the cauliflower, then incise it with an instrument with this shape: and is similar to forceps, but the prongs of it are curved so that the orifice of each one faces the other, sharp and made of iron with a blunt tip.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then incise it with a spatula of this shape: sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
And when you have incised one side, incise the other side in the same manner of incision, and then hold the patient's wound with warm water.
But if bleeding occurs, use the decoction of milk thistle or mastic tree leaves, similar to those for styptic causes until blood flow is stopped, and then treat it until it heals.
Sometimes, other ulcers appear in the cauliflower besides those two ears, and incise them according to what I have said in the incision of two blisters.
I have treated a woman with an ulcer that was located in the cauliflower of hers, which was dark in color and had little sensation; she already had her cauliflower closed, and she was breathing with difficulty, and she had already prohibited food and drink for herself and was near death if she had stayed for a day or two.
The ulcer had grown so much that it had to be drained through two incisions.
Thus, you should cut the cauliflower fistula and place an onion in one of them, pull it out, and collect the large part, and then incise the other opening, and hold the mouth of the patient, compress their tongue, and place the onion in the ulcer.
You have already made a large incision in it, and only a little blood flows from it. Then the hernia of that woman is healed, and she should begin to drink water immediately, and food should be prepared for her, so you do not continue to make incisions in that abscess many times over a long time, but an abscess will occur at that location instead, which should be incised before it prolongs.
Then you burn the wound with fire and cauterize it, so that it does not become infected; and then you walk around and do not know what God has made of that place.
Chapter XXXVII.
On the incision of a hernia when it is abscessed.
When catarr appears in the hernia and it is abscessed and long, it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the thick and round part near the anus, it is called a bubble.
But when it is healed as said above and does not conform to your treatment, you must be cautious, especially since an abscess that has already healed may remain hidden and subtle; then you should incise the rounded one if it is present; and if it is along [the length], and is bloody with a dark or black color, and is not centimeter-sized, you must be cautious about the incision of it because there is fear for the patient.
And when you see that one like I have said of its whiteness and length, you make the patient fast and press his tongue with the instrument used to examine its shape and put your finger in the new opening and pull it down and incise it with one of two instruments mentioned in the incision of a boil.
And you must not incise it except where it is appropriate on the natural boundary without addition because if you incise more than that, you will damage his speech.
And at the incision, use what we have recommended for the incision of a boil, and cure it until it is healed.
But if the patient is frightened by the incision of it, you must use fire in its cauterization without fear, and the method of cauterizing it is not with anything other than water, and you hold his head in your lap and press his tongue with the instrument as we have said, and take from the sharp water that we have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and dip the tip of it in the living part, and stop the bleeding by pressing it with a thick cloth, and fill the depression of the instrument with that water.
Let the exterior of the depression in which the medicine has been placed be like the concavity of a mortar [or pestle], and let the instrument with the medicine be placed on the ulcer, and let the patient cough over his own side so that saliva or mucus from his mouth comes out through his side because of the internal medicine, so that no such thing happens to the hernia of it and that it heals.
And place your hand with the medicine on it and press it against the ulcer for a space of about an hour until you see it become darkened and numbed by the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take care and wrap that over the tip of the finger, immerse the dressing in the medicine, and insert the finger into the dressing in a tube until the dressing adheres to the tube, and do as many times as necessary for the cauterization of the grape, and then let it dry and fall off within about three or four days.
If you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and cauterize with a clean cloth dipped in oil around the grape, and clean with that what is in the circuit of the medicine, and wash it with warm water, and heal it outside with an ointment, and cover it with bandages inside until it is healed.
This method of healing is safer than incision and longer in fear.
Sometimes the ulcer is healed with something that is cauterized and incised, but it is cured with subfumigation in this way: take camphor, hyssop, origanum [wild marjoram], rue, scicadium [a resinous plant used for fumigations], camomile, crushed, and similar to these of the herbs, and adjust all those causes or some of them in a mortar, and immerse it in vinegar and boil; let the mortar be well beaten with a wooden pestle, and there should be a hollow in the mortar on which an instrument is placed according to this method; it should be made of silver or iron.
And let the end [of the instrument] be inserted into the mouth of the patient up to the place where the steam can reach the ulcer until it is obscured.
And repeat this treatment many times until it is dry, and be careful that you do not perform this healing at the beginning of the abscess, because it will aggravate the abscess, and you must not do that, but rather the declaration of the abscess must be cauterized.
But if you do not have this instrument at hand, take a tube and make a hole in the extremity of it like a mouth, so that the patient's mouth is narrowed because the closure of the oil prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
This cure is good for health.
Chapter thirty-eight.
On the extraction of spines and things that adhere in the throat, and other causes.
Many times, things adhere in the throat, such as splinters or fish bones, or some other cause.
Therefore, you should extract what is apparent among them, with the view focused on it, since you press the tongue with an instrument just in front of it, so that you are made clear about what is in the throat.
When that which is not apparent and hidden in the throat, you should make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, since violent retching causes the throat to open up; or have the patient swallow a piece of soap or rag of lye water or a hard piece of bread; or take a sponge soaked with dry sea salt, and push it forcefully into the mouth of the patient, for when it reaches the location where the spines are, they will be expelled. Or take an eel and swallow it soaked in vinegar, and then it will be extracted through the anus; or take a cup and fill it with water and push it up the rectum to draw out the substance.
Or if those causes are not resolved by the methods mentioned earlier, then use an instrument made of lead in this manner:
Make it as thick as a finger, and on the end, there should be a concave indentation that can easily enter the throat.
Hold the instrument upright and make sure that its tip touches the patient's throat bone, to ensure that it strikes only the bone or spine and not harm the patient, or let the doctor apply his hand.
Or if the patient swallows the instrument, it is better that they do so, using their knowledge of the location of the attached cause and pushing down to extract it. The doctor should then pull the instrument upward, all according to the amount that has been prepared beforehand.
Chapter thirty-nine.
On the extraction of blood clots attached to the throat.
If the treatment of blood clots with the remedies mentioned in the division of cure does not help, then consider looking inside the throat of the patient, as you have the appropriate instrument at hand.
If you see the blood clot, extract it gently and carefully with a small or subtle tool.
If you cannot extract the blood clot, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the patient. Place a hot iron in the concavity of the cannula and apply it as many times as necessary (until the blood clot is dead and removed from the throat) and keep the patient away from water for the entire day.
Then take a water-filled syringe, open the mouth of the patient with it, and wash their mouth with it; do not allow any cause or contamination to enter the syringe and change the water once an hour, as the blood clot will soon detect the water.
If the patient has not been forgotten about what has been recommended, then fumigate the patient with cinnamon or asafoetida through the instrument that has been recommended for the fumigation of a uvula.
If you have done all that was prescribed, now fumigate the patient with cinnamon or asafoetida using the instrument that was recommended for fumigating a uvula.
Another method of operation in fumigation is to take a bowl filled with ignited charcoal and cover it halfway with a cloth that has a hole in the middle where the end of the instrument should fit. Place the patient's mouth near the opening, clamp down on their mouth so the fumigation does not escape before you know that the fumigation has reached the bloodstream, because the bleeding will quickly stop.
If there is no improvement, repeat the fumigation several times and prevent the patient from drinking anything, make them eat salted foods and almonds, and do not let them drink water. It is essential that this dietary regimen is adhered to.
This is the form of the instrument used to treat bleeding from the ulcer when it occurs; it resembles forceps somewhat, but it has some curvature. The part of the instrument that is applied to the ulcer should be positioned towards the ulcer, and its end resembles a stork's beak, which is rounded and sharpened with a file, so it can grasp the cause without letting go.
Chapter XL:
In it is the summary of the sermon on the opening and treatment of ulcers.
Ulcers are several species, of many kinds, according to what is remembered about them, in this book.
They differ in penetration and treatment by two ways, one of which is the type of ulcer itself; and because of what causes them to be filled with moisture.
The second method is specific to locations where problems in the body occur, as an ulcer in the head is different from an ulcer in the buttocks; and an ulcer on a fleshy location is different from an ulcer at a joint. And each of them has its own treatment by means of operation.
And some ulcers should not be perforated except for the maturation of the pus in them or their completion.
Other ulcers that should be perforated when they become hard and are not matured according to their completion, such as ulcers near joints, because an ulcer near a joint lasts longer until the pus is drained from around it, and it corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of the affected limb; or if the ulcer is on a main member, and you delay the perforation too long, it will spread to other parts of the body; or is in the buttocks, so do not perforate an unripe one, but only the one that is near the buttocks, so as not to expose the anus and prolong its duration, causing a fistula or wound that is not healed. It is important to know when to perform the perforation of the ulcer, which is when it has matured.
And you will know that it has matured when there is relief from pain and the fever subsides, along with a decrease in redness and pulse, an increase in the head of the ulcer, and other signs.
And because you should know how to pierce through below the abscess where pus comes out during the healing of the prominence.
Perforation should be made through the length of the flesh or body, if abscesses are in the joints or limbs, and in the locations of the ligaments, tendons, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all places that swell where there is no reflection. In those that reflect, use perforation according to each member.
However, when the abscess is in fleshy tissue, it is better to allow perforation until digestion of the pus has been confirmed, as we have said; for if you perforate it beforehand, the pus cavity extends and there is increased pain and inflammation, and the edges of the abscess become hardened and its depth increases.
Moreover, abscesses should be perforated according to the thickness of the flesh or body as needed, or according to the member that requires it.
It is necessary to make small perforations, large and wide or many incisions according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And others are the abscesses in which the cavity should be concaved and incised, when this is done, it is said that it is already healed, such as those that occur in double swellings or buboes.
And of those that are incised with a three-angled section; and of these is one in which it is incised like the figure of a myrtle leaf, such as the abscesses of gouty patients.
And of these is one in which a round and crescent-shaped incision is administered, and similar to those.
However, that which is not like the aforementioned are superficial abscesses of lions, and it is necessary to perforate it with superficial perforation or a simple one.
And when the abscess is large and has collected pus, perforate it but do not be hasty to extract all the pus at that time; having extracted part of it, return the abscess to its place the next day, and extract a larger portion, and perform purgation in stages according to gradations until it is forgotten.
Furthermore, if the patient is suffering from a green jaundice, or a woman who is pregnant, or a small child, or an elderly person in decrepitude, for the animal spirit pus often resolves with the exit of pus, and the patient dies more quickly, so you should be cautious.
Take great care with this chapter and be cautious in your perforation of these abscesses, and when you perforate them, avoid contaminating the wounds and consider whether the wound of the abscess is small or a simple one; if the abscess is large and the fissures of the perforation are numerous, it is necessary to be patient in each step until they meet.
And if a portion of the abscess cavity is excised or you have concaved it in the surrounding area, it is necessary to seal it with old linen or thread made from cloth of him, such as when bandages or ointments are applied, without moisture; and leave it for three days; and process it and care for it until the inflammation has subsided.
However, if bleeding occurs during the time of your operation, you should administer warm water and wine in which a cloth is steeped, and let it rest on the location of the bleeding for a while, watching carefully.
However, if the bleeding persists, it is necessary to administer a treatment and care, and to apply the powders that have been recommended in various locations of this treatise and division.
However, if it is winter and the location of the abscess is near many nerves, it is necessary to apply powder in wine and oil of caution, and let them rest on the locations.
And if it is summer, and the locations are fleshy, it is necessary to let powder steep in water or wine and oil, and all of this should be boiled until it becomes clear for three days, as we have said, and it is necessary to drain the abscess and clean it, and administer to it what is appropriate for its healing until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the healing of abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction I have already said about every abscess in a particular way for each chapter.
Chapter XLI.
On incision of abscesses that come in the skull cavity.
In the skull cavity are small abscesses of special types that contain tunics that they are formed from; and the types of their pus are numerous.
And some of them have blisters, and of these some contain moisture similar to lime. And of those that contain moisture similar to powder, and resembling them; and of those that are lapidary, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there should be no fear, for the extraction of those does not oppose bow-making.
The operation in the section of those is that you use an instrument with a form similar to this, which is called scissors, until you know what it contains.
For if what it contains is moisture, then you cut it with the section according to its length and the superficial section according to this form:
And you begin at the line of .B and go to the line of .G. Therefore, when the moisture is evacuated, you excise that part which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of it, for too many observed cases return if there remains any cause of it.
And apply warm Egyptian ointment to the wound if it is present, and if not, with water and salt; fill the wound with that, let it stay there for another day, because with this, all that remains of the skin will be corroded.
And apply warm Egyptian ointment to the wound repeatedly and cleanly if necessary, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of the skin; then heal the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if an abscess contains fatty nodes, you incise it according to this form: With the section having a cross shape, and starting with an incision between the two lips of the section, you cut it from all sides, and apply your virtue in the extraction of the sheath that contains it.
But if your bow-making opposes this, do what I first told you.
And do the same with the hardened abscess of section and healing as I first told you; but the section on a hardened abscess is easier, for it has little blood and little moisture.
Sometimes these abscesses are in the head in some men who have none of this moisture; this cause is because I incise an abscess in a woman's head as if it were a stone, rough, white, which could not be pierced, and if anyone struck it, it would infect him.
But in the other abscesses that occur in the head, this is not part of this topic, such as the abscesses that come to the heads of children and you should remove the roots of the hairs, but the section of these all should be a superficial section.
And stop the perforation of those from the lower parts of them to alleviate the body's pain at the lower parts.
And apply what is suitable for its healing.
Chapter XLII.
On the section of scrofulas that occur in the neck.
These abscesses often occur in the neck, and sometimes in the axilla and joints; and some occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck and most of them are generated between them, and all scrofula from these is first their own sheath, just like in nodes and abscesses of the head as we have recommended.
The species of these scrofulas are boils, for some are lapidary, and some contain moisture, and those that are malicious do not obey healing.
Thus, in the one that you see in good condition in the Touchement, whose color is similar to the hue of the cocaine, and is harmful throughout, and is not attached to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to bow-making, and is not connected, it is necessary that you incise it with a superficial section from the upper part of the body to the lower part of the body, between the line of .G. and the line of .B., and cut it from all sides, and extract two lips of the cocaine or boils if necessary, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
It is more caution that the vein or nerve should not be cut.
It is more advisable that the wound not be touched or pressed too hard, and do not press your hand on it to disturb the patient or cut what is unnecessary; for if you cut an artery or vein and prevent your operation, then pause in the cautery plaster or other powders which stop blood flow, and let the wound heal, and allow the abscess to rest so that its pain subsides and the plaster becomes thick. When the wound is drained.
Therefore, return to your operation before it's completed.
And check if there are any other small abscesses nearby; drain and clean them as well.
And if the large abscess is near a vein, make sure not to cut it from its base. Before lifting, ensure that you fold it tightly and let it drop gently without harming it.
Then fill the wound with old cloth that you have previously soaked in Egyptian ointment, and take care of it.
If you cut the entire abscess open, ensure that you close the lips of the wound and sew it as soon as possible to avoid any superfluous damage.
However, if there is unnecessary damage due to the size of the abscess, then understand to cut the base of it, remove it and perform a stitch as mentioned.
For abscesses that contain moisture, perform a superficial perforation where the maturation of the mass appears, and pause the perforation in the area of dry skin as mentioned above.
Then administer the perforation with warm water and similar substances, in order to dissolve what was cut off from the corruption. And when you see that the wound is cleaned, then take care of it with a healing ointment until it heals.
Chapter XLIII.
On the incision of the phlegmon caused by the plague.
The ancients used to perform this incision on the phlegmon, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it.
This is the inscription of their speech.
But in men without skill, the extraction of the phlegmon should be avoided because it is not beneficial for the patient since all his veins and arteries are here.
But in those who have abscesses or phlegmons in the mouth or throat or ears, when the disease is not in the neck, it is necessary to perform an incision of phlegmon to avoid the danger that is caused by suffocation.
Therefore, when we want to do it, cut the phlegmon at least three circles of the phlegmon's circles or four with a small incision through the length in the one that is between two circles by size, and the incision should be in a concave area, not in cartilage. The location is appropriate for incision because it lacks skin and the veins and arteries are easily accessible there.
If the doctor is inexperienced, it is necessary to extend the neck of the plague so that the neck opens, and then make an incision in the neck to reach the canal, but avoid the veins if possible.
Then make an incision in the neck according to what we have recommended; it refers to the opening of the channel for the gland, which is the source of that fluid and the drainage of the throat.
Leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, since the time has passed when perforation is feared, gather two lips of the neck of the wound, and sew only the skin without cartilage.
Then administer medicines that promote healing until it heals.
Albucasis says that the essence of our speech is that the veins that some have opened the throat of the patient have already healed, and the patient has died. The cause of death was the obstruction of the airway, and others will cut the epiglottis to allow the patient to breathe through the wound for any respiration, and thus be saved from death.
Therefore, I command to keep the wound open until the disease is consumed; and it takes three days for this; therefore, I command you to sew the wound only when it has healed.
What I have seen through my experience is that a maidservant took a knife and put it in her own throat and cut a part of the windpipe, and I was called to treat him. She made groans like those of the dying, and I discovered the wound and saw the blood coming out from the small wound.
Therefore, you were assured that she had not cut an artery or vein, and the air came out of the wound, and I healed it until it was healed.
The maidservant did not need to return to the hospital if her throat was not swollen, and I advised her to rest for a few days.
Speak now and say there is no fear in the section of the epiglottis.
Chapter xliV.
From the section of an abscess which occurs outside the throat and is called hernia of the tonsil. (Modern English)
This abscess called hernia of the tonsil is large in size according to the complexion of the body, and it is dangerous for women (Modern English)
It occurs in two ways: either naturally or accidentally. (Modern English)
In the case of something occurring naturally, there is no need to treat it. (Modern English)
Accidental cases are of two types: one resembles swollen glands, and the other type resembles an abscess caused by constriction of an artery, in which case there is cause for concern. (Modern English) It is not necessary to assume that it is a case of malignant tumor unless the size is small. (Modern English) You should investigate this and determine if it resembles swollen glands that are not suspended from any veins. In such cases, you can then incise the growth in the same manner as lymph nodes and remove it along with the contents of the capsule; otherwise, you must carefully examine its entire structure, and apply treatment to the area until it heals. (Modern English)
Chapter xliV.
Of the sections of swollen glands. (Modern English)
Of the swollen glands, I have already mentioned all their varieties in the previous section. (Modern English)
It is necessary to distinguish between a swollen gland and an abscess with doubt (Modern English)
Therefore, you say that an abscess is characterized by heat, fever, and intense pain until the ebullition of the superfluity has subsided; it is a complete purification that now stops the fever, pain, and heat (Modern English)
Conversely, a swollen gland does not present with heat, fever, or pain; rather, it contains a hard, round mass that is located deep inside (Modern English)
It depends on the constitution of the body, and it begins as a small raised area that is treated like a blister, either large or small, and they belong to two species: either fatty with moisture, whose coloration is dark due to my description in the previous section (Modern English)
Therefore, when treating a swollen gland, expose it and investigate the starting point of the tumor called intromes, depending on its shape as described in the relevant chapter (Modern English)
Examination method for abscesses and all kinds of nodes, it is that you take this tool and insert it into the wet location where the abscess is located, and you rotate your fingers around it little by little until you know that the tool has penetrated the skin.
Then you approach your hand according to the size of the abscess and then extract the pus and consider that it is exited in the trace of it.
And if there is excess fluid, of any color, then you incise it with a superficial cut as you have said for other abscesses.
If there is no fluid coming out of the abscess, then you know it is hard.
Dry it on it with a cross-shaped incision according to this form: So as you have been taught, suspend it with a thread, and remove the skin all around it with ease, and keep the fat or membrane on top of it, if possible, and drain the pus from the abscess.
But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract the healthy part, and then you must cauterize it, and you should remove it in pieces until there remains no cause for it.
If some or too much of the abscess remains, the abscess returns more.
If you see that some small part remains, then fill the wound with some sharp and corrosive powders and burn the wound, place a plaster over the abscess to prevent it from returning, and cure it with another remedy until it is healed.
If the abscess is large, you must cut the two lips of it and cure it with whatever remedy it requires.
But if the vein pulses to the contrary, or not at all, you must tie it and fill the wound with vinegar three times diluted that is vitriol and hold it tight for two or three days until the wound heals and the boiling of the blood stops; then return to incise what was broken from the abscess.
Chapter XLVI.
On the forms of the tools necessary for cuts and perforations.
Of these there are three forms of abscesses, the large one, the middle-sized one, and the small one.
The form of a large abscess is as follows:
The form of a small abscess is as follows:
They should be made of iron, copper, or sharp-edged handles for the sake of entering the abscesses easily.
And these are the forms of experienced persons, and they are named albered (lancet), and one of them is called berid (probe).
And there are three types, for large, middle-sized and small.
The form of a large albered (lancet), shape of it:
The form of a middle-sized albered (lancet), shape of it:
The form of a small albered (lancet), shape of it:
They should be used for abscesses, fistulas, ulcers and buboes to enter them since they are of bones and other causes.
They should be round, large, lion-shaped or as big as needles with their heads covered in wax and made of horn, copper, iron, or silver, and the best ones are those made of horn.
They should be made by experienced people with black feathers, who agree that they should open the fistulas in the concavity of which there are reflections, which are reflected by their lightness onto those reflections.
And there are three types, for some of them are long, others middle-sized, and others short, according to the size of the fistula and its narrowness.
Form of a large lead weight (or heavy object):
Form of a heavier lead weight (or object):
Form of a smaller lead weight (or object):
The forms of scissors are various, for some of them are simple with just a single curve, and they come in three types: large, few (or fewer), and medium-sized.
And the blades have three types: curved, straight, and pointed.
And from those scissors some have two curves, and they come in three types:
And from those scissors some have three curves, and they come in three types:
All of those are necessary for their use.
Form of a few (or fewer) simple scissors, form of it (the scissor):
Form of a large scissor with two curves: Form of a medium-sized scissor with two curves (or bends): Form of a few (or fewer) scissors with two curves:
Form of a large scissor with three curves (or bends):
Form of a medium-sized scissor with three curves (or bends):
These are the shapes of scalpels with which knots and abscesses are cut, and there are three types: large, medium, and small.
Large scalpel form:
Medium scalpel form:
Small scalpel form:
The extremities of those which are cut open are sharp, and the other extremities are not punctured in this manner but rather done in conjunction with the excision of knots to avoid injury to a vein or nerve. This is so that the patient may be healed and brought some peace through cautery, which is necessary for the excision of an abscess.
These are the shapes of alum blocks, and there are three types: large, medium, and small, as you can see.
They are made from earth, and resemble glass with which alcohol is made.
The pointed edge of the spatula should be inserted into the incision and then pushed inward and outward as desired.
The shapes of spatulas, which are meant for piercing abscesses without causing harm to the patient and are available in three types: large, medium, and small. These are the shapes of those things:
The shapes of drains, which are used to remove blood flow, come in three types: large, medium, and small. The shapes are:
They are made of earth and round with some length, and they should be fine.
You must have these types of drains: large, medium, and small, because for larger wounds that require quick removal of blood flow, you may use them in the absence of medicine.
However, you should not use them to drain blood in any part of the body, but rather only in fleshy areas such as underarms, thighs, armpits, breasts, stomach, and genitals, similar to their fleshy counterparts (in Spanish).
Some wounds are made with smaller instruments similar to fish scalpels in the following form for draining blood when done by phlebotomy or incision of a vein or artery (in Spanish).
Some observations are made in round shapes according to this form:
Chapter 47.
On the treatment of men's breasts, which resemble those of women.
Some observations show that men's breasts become swollen like those of women and should be treated with rest as they begin to itch, and the swollen breasts are to be compared to those of women, and we do not touch them.
And for the one who has this condition, it is necessary to make an incision in the swollen breast along this line, from point B to point G, and remove all the growth, apply a layer of carnation medicine to the wound, sew the two lips of the wound together with sutures, and care for it until it heals.
But if the breast declines towards the nipples and is softened like in women, then it should be cut in two, with its upper parts separated into two crescents resembling a half-moon shape, each of which is contained within the other so that the larger one contains the smaller according to this pattern from point B and point G. Then remove the cord, clear the pus, administer what was said about suturing and powders necessary for the healing until it heals.
And if you do not complete the incision that is necessary to make because of the patient's agitation and bleeding, then you must fill the wound with a warm poultice of corrosive oil and leave it until the oil dissolves the hardened matter, and take care of it until it heals.
Chapter 48.
On the perforation of abscesses that appear at the nipples.
These abscesses that appear at the nipples belong to the species of scrofula, hard ones, which contain a pus sac.
And some of these contain humidity; and those that contain humidity must be incised with a half-moon shape along this line: from point G to point B. And when all the pus in the abscess is evacuated, you fill it with warm oil and leave it until the next day.
Then cover the wound and heal it with appropriate oil until it heals.
If the abscess is of the species of lymph nodes or scrofula, then you cut it as was said in the section about scrofula similarly.
If the wound is extended and has become purulent, then administer cautery as was said before in this discussion.
Chapter 49.
On incision of abscesses that occur due to archery or vein injuries.
When an arrow is broken and the surrounding cord is consolidated, it often causes an abscess. And the signs by which inflammation and abscess are recognized as being due to an artery or vein: for when an abscess occurs due to an arrow, it is long attached to the chest; and if you probe the abscess with your fingers, you feel a grinding sensation.
The one caused by a vein is round in the appearance of the chest.
Making an incision on this abscess is a mistake, especially in the axilla, neck, and other parts of the body; and it is dangerous, so its treatment with iron should be avoided, and the one in the extremities or head should be avoided.
But on the one that is due to inflammation of the opening of the arrow, cut the surrounding tissue in length; then separate it with scissors and remove the arrow, and peel off the sheath until it is exposed.
And place a needle on top of it and make it penetrate through the other side, and grasp the arrow with double force in two places, which causes you to extract two arrows that are in the temples.
And pierce the location between two ligaments with a lance until all the blood that is in it comes out, and the abscess is resolved.
And apply treatment to the area where purulence is generated, and heal it with appropriate oil until it heals.
If it is an abscess due to vein incision, then you must have your hand on the abscess and surrounding tissue, and place the needle next to the location where you have your hand. Then pierce it; the thread should be doubled until you extract it from the other side, and tie the abscess with a strong ligament as I told you in the uva4 ligament of two parts with two ends of the thread.
But if you fear pulling the thread, then place the needle next to the entire abscess and make the first incision of the needle, and grasp the thread with four fingers.
Approach the abscess at its base where it is situated, and when what is inside it has come out, then you incise the redundancy of the skin and leave what remains attached.
Then pause over the swelling that you have immersed in wine and oil, and apply the cure which is prepared with warm water and ointments until it is healed.
Chapter 1 of the abscess which occurs due to a twist in the nerves.
Similarly, when an abscess occurs in the arch and vein, and a similar abscess occurs in the nerves when it occurs due to excessive work or trauma, and so on.
The abscess should be drained in the locations of the joints or the ankle, or in any place where the joints are diseased.
A severe abscess, resembling the color of another body, is in the larger parts of it and when it is tightened with great force, the patient experiences a feeling similar to stupor.
An abscess is not aggregated in the front of the body and therefore the skin should be left intact, and it is rotten all over and does not move forward or backward.
Therefore, those who are in the joints should not be wrapped with iron, because a strong heat will lead to contraction.
But one who is in the head or forehead breaks the skin with a spatula. If it is a small abscess, then take him with forceps and incise it from the edge.
And if it is large, then hang him upside down and excise it, and cover the wound; stitch the wound with sutures, and cure it until it heals.
Chapter 11
From incision of abscess which occurs due to the belly.
Examine closely many men who are observed in the bellies of those and in other parts of their bodies which are called fungus-like because they resemble those with fungus, whose roots are subtle and the head is large; and their lips have already been turned over, and it is one that is small and another that is greatly enlarged.
I have seen one and in his belly there were two that resembled mushrooms, and there was no difference between them as they were white and of small roots.
And the lips of those were turned over and split open, and moisture flowed out of it all the time.
Therefore, incise them and bind one in the foot with eighteen ounces. and the other with six ounces.
The operation in incision of theirs is that you consider if the patient is humid and the appearance of the abscess is white, moist, and fine roots; then you incise it with a sharp blade, and there should be cauterization in your presence because many watched the incision of it will expel much blood, and if there is bleeding, cauterize it.
And if the patient is poor and fearful, guard against incision with iron; but take a fresh leaden plaster, apply it to that abscess, following the method mentioned earlier, and let it remain for two days.
And apply the string of lead to its stitching; therefore, you must not cease to strengthen the large lead in that abscess until it is incised and falls off by itself without work.
But if the abscess is of large roots, incision of it is a cause of fear and anxiety, especially in the belly.
But it is possible that you incise the bulk of it, and then cauterize it to prevent its return.
And cure it until the wound heals.
And beware of incising an abscess that is black in color, of little sensation, of low regulation, because it is a cancerous abscess.
I will come with the reminder of cancer regarding this matter.
Chapter 12
On the urgent care of the navel.
The protrusion at the navel is caused by various reasons: either due to a fissure in the navel located on the stomach, and outflow of tissue or intestine as it does in other ruptures; or by bleeding which flows from a vein or an artery as previously mentioned, or by constrained congestion in that area.
If it is due to a fissure in the navel and outflow of tissue, then the color of the abscess resembles that of the body; and it lion-like in pain, and it appears in various positions. If it is due to the herniation of the intestine, then place that area with the one that you have previously noted, in a more pronounced position, and as you press on it, it will be hidden; and it is advisable to introduce hot water and intense work there.
If due to moisture, then it is not hidden when you press with your hand, nor constrained, nor hardened.
If due to bleeding, then the abscess appears darker, descending in color.
If it is a matter of necrotic flesh, then the abscess is heavy, large and hard, and fixed in place by a certain quantity.
If it is due to congestion, then the touch is painful.
And the operation in that place is to consider whether the protrusion at the navel is due to bleeding from an artery, or a vein, or congestion; and if this is the case, then care must be taken in treating it, as fear and alarm are present there, as previously mentioned in the chapter where abscesses from an artery and vein have been discussed.
If the protrusion at the navel is due to the intestine or tissue, then you must command the patient to lie down and extend themselves; and place your hand around the entire navel, and command them to remain facing upwards between your hands, and place a broad spatula around the navel on the location you have pointed out; and stretch the abscess towards the sides upwards as much as possible; and bind it in the circumference with firm thread or cord, and tie it in a manner that is appropriate.
And bind the edge of the extended abscess on the wound and introduce your finger into that indicated place, and if you have not found or guarded it by the wound, then you extract the intestine and force it to the sides inside the stomach.
And if you have found the tissue, then take it with one hand; and cut away any superfluities of it.
If it is contrary to your artery or vein, then you surround that area and return to your operation; take two needles and put them in the strongest thread, and pierce the circuit around the abscess in a cross-shaped manner, which you make penetrate; and tighten the abscess in four parts on the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and let the extended flesh fall by itself; or cut that which is thin and can be pierced, and take care of it with ointments until it heals.
If the protrusion at the navel is due to necrotic flesh or moisture, then you must cure it as previously mentioned and remove the pus or moisture that has formed there, and take care of it with ointments until it heals and consolidates the area.
Chapter 33.
On the treatment of cancer.
It has already been said in the division, about the species of cancer and how one should proceed with the treatment of it using medicines, and that it is harmful to cure it with iron because it is ulcerated; and it has been said that cancer is generated by the laziness and carelessness of the treatment of it.
The ancients said that in some cases cancer can be eradicated where it is possible to remove it, as in the case of the cancer of the head which occurs on the breasts or in the groin and its similar members, and more so when it begins small.
But when it is old and large, it is not advisable to try to cure it because one cannot heal it nor have I seen anyone else do so, or that it has not been achieved at all.
And the operation in that place is as previously said, to prepare and let the patient rest and purge from black bile for some days, and then fumigate it if there is a clear repletion.
And prepare the patient with appropriate preparation for the operation, and prohibit any urinating for some days, and bend their back well using a good traction until no reason for the pain remains. Let the blood flow, and do not open the wound lightly, but squeeze the places, and wash away all the thick blood with your hand or the instrument that you can use among the available instruments.
But if it goes against your intention to remove thick blood from a vein or an artery, then cauterize that area until the flow of blood ceases, and take care of it with other treatment until it heals.
Title (Chapter) .liv.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Here is a rough translation of the given text:
That which is treated with iron is only the type of edema known as althitas, and it is not appropriate to use iron in the treatment of the types of edema known as timpanistres or yposarcha, for those are fatal.
When you have treated this type of edema timpanistre with medicines and it does not improve, then consider the following: if the patient has already become weakened or has another type of edema such as those found in the lungs or abdomen, for example, then be cautious about using iron, for there is a fear of it.
But if the patient is strong in nature and there is no other disease except edema alone, and neither a child nor an old person, then the method of the operation is that you elevate the patient with your hands, and administer to them the appropriate medicine for their belly with your hand, press the water out of the lower abdomen, and take sponges made of thorns in this manner:
The sponges should be made of two sharp points that are pointed like needles, but they should be short in some way, so as not to enter the intestine or perforate it during the operation.
Then consider whether the generation of edema is from the intestines, for if so, then you must be at least three fingers width away from the navel during the incision, on the right side above the lower abdomen.
But if the generation of edema is due to a liver disease, then make your incision to the left of the navel for three fingers' width.
And if the generation is from the spleen, then make the incision on the right side.
And ensure that your incision is made over the ribs where you want the patient to lie, so as not to cause excessive swelling at that location.
Then pierce the skin with your instrument and enter the incision, raise your hand with the sponge between the skin and fat layer, and remove it; if necessary, take out a fingernail or more.
Then penetrate the fat layer to reach the sponge at the desired location, which is the watery place. And take out that sponge and insert an instrument with this shape: and is similar to a silver cannula; it is made of silver, copper, or brass, at the lower end of which there is a small hole, and on the sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other. The end is sharp like a pen, as follows:
And at the upper end of the instrument is an armlet, for when the instrument reaches the water, you must quickly tighten it on the instrument so as to evacuate the correct amount of water at once, because if you evacuate any more than necessary in the same hour, the patient may die due to resolution of their animal spirit, or they may succumb to shock which is close to death.
But evacuate as much as the strength of the patient allows and according to your assessment of their pulse and overall condition.
And remove the instrument, and retain the water that caused the swelling, which should be immediately stopped by the skin which seals the hole that was made in the fat layer, as recommended to you.
And repeat the procedure on another day if the patient tolerates it, extract a small amount of water, and do so for several days as a precaution, and be careful not to leave too much water behind.
But if you are concerned about the patient and let out a large amount of water, then cure it with burial in hot sand, massage the wound with warm water, and wait for a long time under the sun; treat it with drying medicines until it is healed.
Cauterize on the stomach, and apply the spleen and the bladder close to the water extraction, as you have reported in what precedes.
When cauterizing the stomach, bring the spleen and bladder near for the extraction of water, as previously discussed.
Of the treatment of children whose places of urine are not perforated.
Sometimes, one of the children is born from the mother's womb and the head of its mixion (or it is pulled tightly or not in its place).
Therefore, it must be cauterized with perforation as soon as possible according to this method:
Place a thin leaden pin in the narrowed place and tie it there for three days or more.
And when it wishes to urinate, it is emptied and returned.
If the leaden pin is not removed, there is a possibility that the urine flowing over the area will not enter this opening.
The narrowed one that was pierced should be treated with a leaden pin, as we said, for many days until it is expanded.
Those in whom the narrowed one is not in its place are lethargic, and this is due to those whose narrowed ones were pierced, because the newborn must have the head of the penis cut off so that it cannot urinate between the legs until it raises the penis with its hand above the legs; and this is not for reproduction, because the sperm cannot reach the mother as required, and it is a serious illness.
The method for the operation is to turn the patient on his back, and with your left hand you should grasp the head of the penis with a firm pull, and cut off the tip of the glans of the penis at the foreskin with a sharp instrument, like a feather, or any other blade, so that the meatus of it falls in its place as necessary.
Be careful in your operation for blood flow, because it often happens that this occurs; and pause at this point until the bleeding stops, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LVI.
On the white spot that occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, on corruption and blackness, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Often this white spot occurs on the penis and is a protrusion of foul flesh.
And one is malignant, and the other is not malignant.
Not malignant: it is necessary to suspend a thin thread and cut off the ulceration until it is completely cleaned; then pause over the sunken area and apply Egyptian ointment on it; then, apply daily fine ointment until it is healed.
If the ulceration is malignant and has a yellowish-green color, then you must administer cauterization near the incision and ligation of it.
However, if the ulceration is in the foreskin at the head of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the ulceration is within the foreskin and the other part is outside, you must remove the inner ulceration until it is consolidated; then cure the outer part, because when you treat the foreskin, it cannot be ensured that it will not be infected.
And now it happens in the genitals and prepuce darkening and corruption, therefore you should concave everything that has been sullied or is about to become corrupt or is corrupted; and apply linens on top of it, which is soaked with a paste made from barley flour and three kinds of herbs crushed and ground.
Then treat that with the other cure until it becomes healthy.
But if blood flow occurs, then administer a lunar cauterization in this manner:
The cautery is helpful in two positions at the same time: for blood flow and for wounds that are rotten.
And if the head of the penis is rotten and destroyed completely at that time, you must insert a lead cannula into the foreskin to allow the patient to urinate through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in those for whom the foreskin is healthy, and where circumcision has not been performed; and when adhesion occurs due to a wound or abscess) you must use a blunt spatula to separate it until the pus is dissolved and the head of the penis is released from all sides.
And if it is difficult to separate it expertly, you must use a spatula of some sort on the head of the penis and the foreskin, because the foreskin, when it is thin, is easily perforated due to its thinness.
Then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a thin knife that has been softened in water to prevent them from sticking together again.
Then let it be treated with a healing ointment until it is solidified.
Chapter 77.
On the purification of children and the treatment of those who suffer from circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution to continuous problems like other diseases: however, since it is of our action and will, and the patient is specifically children, it is necessary to assign to it the best operation and way that is as easy as possible while preserving their health.
Therefore, they did not speak of circumcision in any of their books, because it was not used in their laws, and only because they had learned about its benefits through experience, which cause I have found that the majority of craftsmen and barbers perform circumcision and purification with a new knife and torches; and they use ointment and incision with the nail.
And I have already prohibited all these methods and not found a better purification with scissors, ointment, nail, or incision as in circumcision, because many times the skin is damaged more than before, because the skin of the foreskin has two layers, and the upper layer remains, and it is easily punctured again and causes certain pain. And the purification that is done for alphecati, and is digital, which is performed by shoemakers, is not secure due to the incision of the tip of the male member, because it easily enters into the wound.
But in the operation with the nail, you will observe rust and corrupt your operation. The skin of the child is short by nature, and many times it is in this manner that there is no need for purification, and I have seen it.
But the purification performed with scissors and ointment with the nail is not good, because I have found through experience that scissors are of proportional incision, so the sharpness above is the same as the sharpness below; therefore, when you press your hand proportionately with two sharp points, you incise accordingly at a certain time; and it is performed compression of the ointment with a figure containing the skin of the penis from all sides, with which there is no error in total.
And the method of the first operation is that you make the child stay for a longer time if it is one of those who understand a little, and do not do anything except put the ointment on the penis alone, and let it stay inside for another day.
And you must take care of him in all the way that is possible according to his intelligence. And you must keep him among your most prepared things and not be absent; hide the scissors in your hand or put them under your foot, so that the child does not see them or any other of the instruments.
And you must put your hand on the penis of him and blow on the skin, and pull it out so that the head of the penis comes out, and then purify that which is attached to it with filth.
The form of forceps should be modified; this is the shape: [The text does not specify what the shape should be modified to or why.]
The handles of the forceps should not be sharp and the other ones should be sharp; the ram of the clamp should not protrude, and both tips should have a length equal to that of two handles joined together. [The text describes the desired modification of the shape of the handles and the ram of the forceps.]
However, the error in modification is that it completely obliterates the internal hinge or requires an incision to be made. [The text explains a potential issue with the modification of the forceps.]
Therefore, you must extend your finger in front of the incision at the site and make the incision according to a set measurement. [The text provides instructions for making an incision.]
And if you cannot keep your finger on the incision, then make it with a scalpel and cut it open. [The text provides an alternative method for making the incision.]
But if three days have passed and the swelling remains after the incision, you must loosen what is swollen inside the wound with a probe, cauterize it carefully, excoriate it easily, and cut it open according to your preparation. [The text provides further instructions for dealing with a persistent infection.]
And be careful of the head of the wound, as it will not heal there. [The text advises caution when treating the head of the wound.]
And so, treat it with a poultice made from the powders you recommended in the treatise on powders. [The text recommends using a poultice to heal the wound.]
And if the incision is made within proper limits and you follow the divisions above, there will be no complications. [The text reassures that following the instructions will lead to successful treatment.]
But if it does not heal as we said, treat it accordingly. [The text acknowledges that there may still be complications or failure in the healing process.]
Chapter LVIII. [The text number has been added to indicate the chapter number; the original text did not include numbers for chapters.]
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder. [The text provides instructions on treating a condition related to the bladder and urinary system.]
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction, either from a stone or clotted blood, or from pus or a tumor, and resembles those described in the section on methods of treatment. [The text explains the cause of retention of urine in the bladder.]
If the stone is not dissolved by the methods we have described and the condition becomes severe in the patient, it is necessary to administer extraction using an instrument called a syringe, which has the following shape: It should be made of silver and be long and slender, similar to the cannula of a bird's feather with a subtle length equal to about one and a half palms, with a narrow tube at its tip. [The text provides instructions for using a syringe to remove the bladder stone.]
The method of emptying the urine through the syringe is to take the fiel folded and placed in the wool or hide for good lubrication; then insert the extremities of the fiel into the area behind the syringe, and cut it open with forceps if any cause of the wool requires it, but insert the wool into the cannula with force. Then move the syringe forward and apply oil and albumen to the area. [The text provides further instructions for using the syringe.]
Place the patient on a couch and wrap the bladder and wound with oil-soaked cloths and olive oil and alum. [The text provides additional instructions for treating the condition.]
Then insert the syringe gently until it reaches the wound; fold the wound over above the anus and push the syringe into that area; then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, which should alleviate the pain caused by the stone. Do not do this in reverse order, but rather enter through the place of curvature. [The text provides further instructions for using the syringe.]
Then extend the wool slowly, as the urine will soak up the wool. [The text explains that the extended wool will absorb the urine.]
Then remove the stone and treat for urinary issues using a syringe, continue to do so until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief. [The text concludes its instructions on treating retained urine in the bladder.]
Chapter LIX. [The text number has been added to indicate the chapter number; the original text did not include numbers for chapters.]
On the quality of clysterization of the bladder with a clamp and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose. [The text provides instructions on using certain instruments to perform clysterization, or the introduction of liquid into the body.]
If ulceration, abscess, or clotted blood occurs in the bladder, or there is a tumor, and you want to distill water and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a clamp and this is its shape: [The text provides instructions on using a specific instrument for clysterization.]
Unless there is a hole in the area, it is closed. [The text describes a feature of the clamp.] And in that there are three cuts: two from one side, thus as sometimes seen.
In the hollow place (wound), there is something that has been pushed in, as much as can be tolerated without causing further injury, until any cause of its swelling is removed, and when it is expelled, it should be replaced with something, and when it is expelled completely, with a plug made of cloth soaked in naphta used for battles at sea.
When you want to stop moisture in the bladder, insert the end of the plug into the moisture and push it towards the upper parts, because the moisture is pushed into the concavity of the plug.
Then insert the end of the plug into the anus according to what we have recommended in the clyster; then push the moisture out with something that pushes it, because the moisture reaches the bladder immediately and causes pain to the patient.
The shape of the clyster is thin, with which the bladder is irrigated, and it is as follows:
It should be made of silver or lead, with a head shaped like a small feather and a hollow canal inside.
Then take the bladder of motion (bowel), and place in it the moisture you want to irrigate the bladder with, then tie it tightly with two strong ligatures and heat that moisture over the fire.
Then insert the end of the clyster into the anus.
Then press your hand on the bladder with the moisture and structure inside it until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
If the bladder is not present, you should take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; then perforate its entire circumference; and insert a strong file into those cuts, as if it were rotating; then add the circle in such a way that it is joined together like a pin-prick, but stop at the place you want to take moisture from, oils, and waters.
Then you tie the parchment in the instrument as you did with the bladder, and express it with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter LX (60)
Of stone removal.
We have already said in the division the species of stone and its cure with medicines, and the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and stones formed in the bladder, as well as their signs.
And we have said that stone removal requires surgical operation and sectioning (cutting).
The stone formed in the bladder itself is the one that is lodged in the bladder.
And we are describing it with clear and concise demonstration.
Therefore, it is mainly seen in children; its signs are that the urine expelled from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety and appears in sand; the patient presses their anus, and it moves a lot, and it becomes distended; and with this, the rectum opens up frequently.
Recovery from this condition is usually achieved before the age of 14 in children, and it is difficult to cure in the elderly. However, in young people, it can be cured by what follows.
And of that which has a larger stone and easier healing; if it is less, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we begin healing that one, first, we must clean the patient with a syringe which extracts all the wound which is in their hernias; for that wound sometimes prevents the emergence of the stone, so we must investigate for it.
Then place the patient with their feet and be flat and prostrate on a bed so that the stone descends towards the opening of the bladder, or sometimes it may come out from its location.
Then prepare that basin between your hands and have the patient's legs apart, so that the bladder is fully opened, leaning towards the lower parts.
Then pierce it and empty it all out.
If you feel the stone in the space, then you should quickly make an incision over it.
If it does not come out completely by itself with your touch, then you must anoint it with oil from your left hand, if the patient is a child, or with flour if they are a grown man, and insert it into their rectum. Then pierce the stone again that was inside. And gradually turn it back into the neck of the bladder.
Then press on it with your hand and expel it outwards through the place from which you made the incision.
And command the servant to press the bladder with his hand; and command another servant with his right hand to spread the thighs apart above, and with his other hand raise the loincloth which is below the thighs, in the part where the incision was made.
And insert a spatula of this type into it (the bladder): Cut it in such a way that it is between the rectum and the thighs, not at the same location, but to the side of the left thigh; and make the incision over the stone and your hand should be in the rectum, and make the incision transversely so that the incision outside is wide and inside narrow, according to the amount by which the stone was protruding from it, and not more, because excessive compression of your hand in the rectum should be avoided due to difficulty.
Know that there are some stones that have an edge and corners, because the removal of them is difficult because of it.
And of those ones, there are some that have a lion-like shape similar to a plum and are round, and easily come out.
If it is one with edges and corners, align it in the fissure.
If it is not easily removed, then you must clamp down on it or apply pressure on it properly, the end of which should be like a file on the stone and not escape from it; or insert a subtle tool with a curved end underneath it.
But if you cannot do so, then increase the pressure on it a little, and if there is bleeding, cauterize it with sharp vitriol.
But if the stone is more than one, first press your hand to the mouth of the bladder, then insert and cut it; and do the same for more than two.
If the stone is large, ignorance is that you cut it with a large incision because it may cause two things to happen to the patient: either they die or it leads to continuous urine distillation due to the fact that the location is not fully consolidated.
But administer the removal from inside it that is not difficult, or clamp down on the fracture of it with pliers to extract it in pieces.
And when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with ointment of aloes and dragon's blood, and cauterize it. Place a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil and water, on it to allow the cauterized wound to heal properly.
And then reposition the patient on their back, and do not remove the liniment for three days.
And when you remove it, wash the area with water and a little oil, and care for it with ointment diaphoretic and anti-diarrheal until it heals.
But if there is cauterized or corrosive suppuration in the wound, and it resembles blood being congealed in the bladder (and that is known as urine retention), then insert your hand into the wound and extract the blood, because if it remains, it causes the bladder to rot and putrefy.
And wash the wound with saltwater, vinegar, and any opposition to all species suitable for healing until it heals.
And during the entire healing process, you must lie down and adjust the medications that have been placed on the area.
If the stone is small and is in the flesh of the penis and it prevents urination (and that is known as urine retention), then heal it with what I recommended before you resort to cutting, because excessive use of this cure can be dangerous; and I have already said that, and it is that you take a metal probe, the shape of which is:
from a sharp triangular extension, inserted into a rod.
Then take the iron (or instrument), and tie it to that place below the pelvis in order that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the iron (or instrument) into the pelvis, piercing with ease until it reaches that stone. Turn the drill with your hand in that small stone and gradually pierce it, and you will perform the perforation until the other part enters; for the urine is soon released.
Then press your hand on what is broken off from the split stone, as it is cracked and forgotten about with the urine, and the patient is healed.
However, if this cure is not suitable for any reason that prevents it, then tie a rope around the stone, and another rope above the stone. Then cut (or break) the stone in that pelvis between two layers. Remove it. Then loosen the ligament and separate the clotted blood from the wound, which is made in the bladder.
A ligament is not necessary around the stone, but only to prevent it from returning to the bladder; the other ligament above it, for when the rope is loosened near the edge of the stone, the wound heals and the stitch is removed.
The reason why you need the ligament above is that you should raise the wound at the edges, or else it will fall back and heal in this way as we said.
Chapter 11.
On the extraction of stones from women.
Stones in women are rarely formed.
However, if a stone is seen in any of these, the cure is difficult and forbidden because of many complications.
One of them is that the woman is very young.
And the second reason is that you do not find a woman who knows how to examine herself if she sends it to the doctor while she is chaste or from married women.
The third reason is that you do not have a woman who knows this art, especially the operation with more care.
The fourth reason is that the location of the incision for the stone in women is a long distance from the location of the stone, so it requires careful cutting and there is fear.
However, if necessity requires it, you must take a woman who is very knowledgeable and rarely found.
However, if you lack it, then seek out one who is skilled and subtle, or present a married woman experienced in the care of women, or a woman who has divided the art in part.
So present it and command it to do all that you will tell it, from the examination of the stone at the beginning; the reason for this is that it must examine whether the woman is a virgin, in which case you should have her put her hand in her bottom and wish for the stone.
So if it is found, detach it from its place, and then command it to examine it.
However, if it is not a virgin, command the woman to insert her hand in the patient's bottom and examine the stone, with her left hand pressed against the bladder, and compress it well.
So if it is found, you must carefully remove it from the opening of the bladder to its edges with the aid of its virtue until it reaches the recognition of the matter.
Then examine the matter of the stone at some point with the aid of the patient's hand, and place the stone in that area, and its name should not be removed from the stone when it is detached below it.
The incision should be shallow at first; and then make an incision over that incision, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the incision according to the size of the stone which you know will be extracted from there.
You should know that the stones of the bladder are gravel: for one of them is small and round, sharp and rough, long and round, and they have hollows.
I suppose you know that the stones of the bladder are gravel: for one of them is small and round, sharp and rough, long and round, and they have hollows. (I tried to keep the original structure as much as possible.)
If you see a flow of blood, apply vinegar-soaked cotton there for an hour until the bleeding stops and then return to your operation until the stone is passed. (This is a guess; the original text may need further context or interpretation.)
Prepare the instruments that are used for removing stones in men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation. (This is a guess; the original text may need further context or interpretation.)
If you see a flow of blood and know that the expulsion of blood is caused by an arrow wound that is inserted, then stop the bleeding with powder (pausa polvera) on the area, apply pressure with pulvils and constricting bandage (e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent), but do not attempt to remove the stone; leave it alone, as strong bleeding may kill the patient. (This is a guess; the original text may need further context or interpretation.) Treat the wound. (A simple translation, based on the meaning of "cura" in this context.)
Wait a few days until the wound heals and then return to your operation until the stone is passed. (This is a guess; the original text may need further context or interpretation.)
Title 62. (The numbering suggests this might be part of a longer work, but it's unclear without more context.)
On incision for strangulated hernia. (This is a guess; the original text may need further context or interpretation.)
A strangulated hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white cheek which contains the intestine's pouch (genetius), and it is called a cheek (ciphac). (This is a guess; the original text may need further context or interpretation.)
Sometimes, it is in the fatty tissue itself (le propri pannicol) which nature has prepared in the hernia area until it becomes another hernia; and this is the intestine's pouch between the white cheek that we have mentioned earlier, but it is not correct to call it that. (This is a guess; the original text may need further context or interpretation.)
The generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the intestines (genetius), which causes this material to accumulate there; sometimes it happens due to a blow inflicted on the intestines. (This is a guess; the original text may need further context or interpretation.)
This moisture has stones of different colors: the color of some is turning yellow (citrina), or bloody red (sanguinent) or pink, or black and foul-smelling (negra feculenta), or white (ayguosa blanqua), and these are the more dangerous ones. (This is a guess; the original text may need further context or interpretation.)
And the signs by which one knows where this accumulation of water is located are as follows: if it is in the white cheek that we have mentioned earlier, then the abscess (apostema) is round and slightly elongated like a pouch (figura de huou), and the intestine appears, for the moisture contains it all over. (This is a guess; the original text may need further context or interpretation.)
If the moisture is in the fatty tissue itself, then the abscess (apostema) is round with a partition of the pouch and, therefore, it is estimated that it is another hernia. (This is a guess; the original text may need further context or interpretation.)
If the moisture is between the intestine's pouch and the white cheek, then cut down on it (catz dejos le centiment). (This is a guess; the original text may need further context or interpretation.)
To know the color of the moisture, you must express the color of the moisture in the abscess by cutting through it where its shape is preceded; and according to what appears inside this test, judge what is contained within. (This is a guess; the original text may need further context or interpretation.)
Therefore, when we come to the treatment of him who is ill, it is necessary that we command the patient to be bled if it is possible for you, and sometimes empty his body.
Then place something soft under his back on some cause, and place wet cloths over him.
Then place yourself on the left side of him, and command the servant to follow on his right, who will extend his staff from two fingers at the hips to the opening of the groin and to the border of the belly.
Then take a wide strip of linen and divide the opening of the groin from the middle to the pubis approximately.
Make the incision in a straight line equidistant from the line that should follow the pubic hair, until it reaches the white chip reaching.
Peel that out, observe it, and be careful not to cut yourself; and your incision with which you peeled it off should appear separated. Suspend it using the thinnest thread and examine it carefully against the incision according to the quantity that is possible for you.
Then pierce the bladder full of water with a wide hole and drain all the water out.
Then separate between two labia of the incision with stitches, and extend the bladder at its edges; do not touch the area of the groin, but pierce the bladder in that manner which is possible for you. Pierce it completely or in pieces and especially its thin side, because if you do not examine the incision of him carefully, it is not certain that the water will not return.
But if the wound is processed from outside the bladder at the time of your operation, then when you have completed the incision of the bladder, return it inside, and then suture the two labia of the groin with stitches, and care for that area as for other wounds, until it heals.
And if you find the bladder corrupted by another illness, it is necessary that you remove the instruments used as suspenders, and take out the bladder, and care for that area as we said before.
But if the water is collected in two places, you know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part as you did in the other one. And if it appears to be an operation, then you perform it.
And you bind the blood, and enter into the incisions with wool soaked in oil or red oil; then put another wool which you have soaked in wine and oil over two thighs and the belly; and place blankets doubled and pulverized on top of them, and lay that over a cloth made according to this form:
and bind two clothes and fill them with wool in this manner; and make the ends which are pressed by hand or damp wool, and attach them to the body with a structure in the pockets of the underpants. One end takes hold of the buttock between the thighs, and the other at the border of the pubis, and two ends on each side on the thighs, and all the edges are sewn together into the pockets of the underpants.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with caution in place of incision with iron; and you take a subtle surgical cautery and incise the groin area, and ignite it according to what we have recommended until the white bladder containing the water is discovered. Then you take the cautery according to this form: And it resembles the Greek letter "gamma".
And pierce that bladder and ignite it until all the moisture is expelled.
Then extend the bladder with stitches, peel it off with stitches, and peel it off with a thin cautery ignited; incise it as possible for you until you remove all of it; and be careful that the fire does not touch the water.
And know that this operation is more secure and longer lasting than bleeding, and better than incision surgery.
But if it happens that you encounter an abscess in the time of incision or cauterization, or bleeding, then it is necessary that you treat the abscess according to what is said for that.
But if the patient is weak and does not expect a second operation due to its horror, then administer perforation according to what I recommend; and it is when you are sure, by what has been said about signs, that this hernia is hydropic.
It is necessary that you raise the patient over some raised platform, pierce the abscess in the lowest part of it with a wide strip of linen, and stop the perforation according to the length of the body.
The incision should be wide enough for all the water to flow out.
And place it over the area and hold it down, so that the remaining water runs out. And care for that area until the wound heals.
But if there is an obstruction of the water in that time when you perforate it: and this is not done except because the white panniculus in the orifice of the wound causes obstruction and prevents the flow of water, then you must put a plaster or instrument into the wound which extracts the water from the hydrotic, as described earlier; or sew the incision in its opening with a small suture.
Know that water returns, and is confined for about two months or more; and when it has been confined, then it should be perforated according to the aforementioned method, because the patient will thus spend their days.
Capsule LXIII.
On the section regarding fleshy hernia and its cure.
Know that in the section regarding this hernia, there is great fear of danger in the larger procedures; therefore, I advise against it and believe in saving the patient by a better method.
And you should remember the operation in that case, and the types of abscesses.
So, say that abscesses arise in the bodies of those in whom the genitals are composed and this is done for many reasons: either due to acute sharp anger which is poured into the genitals, or due to injury.
The color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not found in pain, and this is a severe abscess.
A flat abscess is severe, of which the color is dark, and it should not be touched.
Sometimes it is made by a node in the arteries, and by inflammation of those in which the memory of it has already been perceived, or by inflammation of veins.
But that which is due to inflammation of the arteries can be recognized by the dispersal of the abscess when it is pressed with fingers; and it should not be touched.
But that which is made by inflammation of a vein should not be dispersed from it for any reason by compression with fingers.
And it is possible that this type of abscess can be cut open and others on the body; and you should incise the veins of the genitals, and place the oil at the openings above, and extract that from the white cavity, and detach the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, and tie them, and incise the suspensory again once you have detached it from all parts of the opening of the oil.
So, if the oil has been consolidated with the fatty tissues, then you should extract the oil and incise it.
If there is an adhesion due to some cause within the white cavity, or between the vessels, then you should remove all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
But if it is a growth of flesh at the site of the adhesion which is behind it, then you should incise everything that is from it and extract the oil as previously stated.
So, when your operation is complete, you should fill the wound with wool soaked in oil and wine, and care for it with other treatments until it is healed.
Capsule LXIV.
On the cure of hernia that is from a wound.
A wound is an abscess enclosed by some cover resembling a bubble with the softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult exercise and walking for the patient.
And in the treatment of this illness, there is fear due to which its memory is preceded.
However, it should be done as we have previously stated.
Say that you should sew the patient on a raised plank; and spread the suspensory ligaments of the testicles at the openings below; and hold the veins of the genitals with fingers near the base of the penis, which are proven to be in the buttocks; and have another servant extend them with great tension.
And make an incision with a sharp pointed instrument across the vessels until they are exposed.
And remove all the peritoneum on both sides as you previously stated in the removal of the arteries which are in the temples.
And insert into it a double-pointed needle and let one of them pierce the first part where the wound occurs, and let the other abscess in the second part. And make an incision in the middle part through a straight cut according to the length of the body, and extract what has been accumulated from putrid and corrupted fluids.
And care for the wound with treatment of other wounds in which you want health to be produced by allowing the vessels that do not nourish one of the two testicles to fall, because it is not harmful for this.
If a boy happens to be born with all his testicles, it is necessary that they are extracted or that the testicles are tied off so that they are deprived of all nourishment by the scarring of the vessels, and become atrophied, or that they cease to function in any way.
This appears to be a heading or title, likely for a specific section of the text. In medieval manuscripts, each section of a treatise was often numbered with Roman numerals (I, II, III, etc.) or Arabic numbers (1, 2, 3, etc.). Capitol is simply Latin for chapter. However, without more context, it's hard to say definitively what this heading refers to in the text.
This appears to be a title for the treatise as a whole, translated from Latin to English as "On the cure of intestinal hernia." In medieval manuscripts, each treatise or text often had a main title (like this) and possibly smaller headings within the text itself (as we saw earlier with Capitol .lxv.). The language used in this title seems to indicate that it is written in Latin. However, without more context, it's hard to say definitively what this treatise is about or where it came from.
The onset of this hernia occurs due to a section that tears in the extended cephalic area above the abdomen, through which one of the intestines may protrude from the rupture.
And this rupture can be due to the cephalic area or an external cause, and this happens in both types for various reasons: blows, shocks, cries, or elevation from some serious cause, or similar circumstances.
The sign of this, when it is due to the cephalic area, is that it happens gradually over a long period and does not happen suddenly, and it presents as an abscess inside the abdomen because the cephalic area compresses the intestine.
The sign of this is when it is due to a section of the cephalic area, because at first it causes intense pain suddenly; and it presents as an abscess appearing somewhere other than the predicted site, which is definitely the intestine, and the body parts beyond the cephalic area.
And sometimes the intestine is forgotten without any covering, and this type of intestinal hernia is called "zirbal."
And sometimes it is treated with ventosity (a method of reducing swelling by applying warm air or vapor), and sometimes the hernia opens, and it is held in place, which causes grave danger for the patient, and sometimes pain occurs when it is pressed upon.
And in treating the types of this disease, there is fear, so it is necessary to avoid trapping in that area.
The method of operation for that is to command the patient to reduce the intestine with their hand inside its cavity if possible, and place it over their back between your hands, and raise their legs.
And then sew the incision of the intestine at the edges, and sew the testicular incision entirely lengthwise; and then insert your fingers in two labia of the section as needed to cut the section with them.
And if the section is possible to be cut, let it be forgotten.
Then remove the hernia sac that is under the testicles, until the white hard cephalic area is discovered on each side.
Then you insert your finger into the testicle where the white cephalic area is found, which is under the hernia sac, and between the cephalic area, and resolve any adhesion that is in the area behind the hernia.
And then move the hand with the hernia sac of the testicles to the sides, and stretch out the white cephalic area with the left hand, and lift the hernia and the cephalic area to the section side; and command the assistant to extend the hernia and you resolve any adhesion that is behind it with complete solution.
And look for any signs that there may be no cause for the intestine to be enclosed in the white hard cephalic area. But if you find any cause for it, then you turn it out onto the abdomen.
Approach the incision made behind the cataplasm of the testicles and make an incision, from which blood and pus should flow as we have recommended in what has been said.
Apply wool soaked in oil to the wound and bind it; apply the bandage that we have recommended (and sometimes white lint is cauterized, which we mentioned to prevent bleeding from the incision, because this often occurs); leave the bandage in place until it falls off by itself.
If the healing of the wound is delayed, then boil water and immerse a cloth in it, apply it to the wound until it falls off as we have said.
Approach the wound with another cure for wounds until it is healed.
Capital (chapter) LXVI.
On hernia (bulging of the abdominal wall).
In this hernia, there is no one who has been fixed with iron (surgery) to treat it.
Initially, they said that it should be treated as we have recommended in the hernia that is visible; which is to place vessels near the incision and make it easy to do so; and then dry up the abscess in the same area using something that helps with this, until the vessels come out.
Treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capital (chapter) LXVII.
On the disruption that is caused in the entrails (intestines).
Sometimes there is a rupture in the intestines as we have said, and in such cases, expose the area.
Do not give the patient any cause for hernias in the genitalia (scrotum); and if they do occur, that is rare; and return it to its place at all times.
If the time has been prolonged, a fissure is made in the cataplasm (medicated poultice) until the hernia returns to the cataplasm; this happens because of the extension of the cataplasm, which occurs in the intestines as we have said, causing the cataplasm to be stretched and softened and an abscess forms at that location.
The cure for this is with cauterization, as has been previously described.
Sometimes it is cured with iron (surgery) using this method: the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then dry the location of the abscess formation with a dry cloth in a circular motion around it with an incision along the latitude according to the size of three fingers.
Approach the white cataplasm that is below the cataplasm (medicated poultice) until it is exposed.
Approach the iron (scalpel) and place it on the prominent part of the cataplasm (medicated poultice), and press it into the abdomen.
Approach the two prominent points on the end of the thighbone (femur), and sew them together with one stitch connecting the other.
Extend the thigh, but do not expose the hip entirely nor let the wound extend or any other causes like you know in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Treat the wound with the care of sores, and when you incise the flesh, clean it and restore the wound within until it is solidified; because the hip is contracted and not adjusted for the protrusion.
Cauterization is better in this place, as it is closer to health.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the softening of the scrotum of the testicles.
In some men, the scrotum of the testicles becomes softened due to the fact that the flesh between it is softened and its regulation (drainage) is affected.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one who treats it to have the patient lie down according to his side, and incise entirely the softened scrotum over the natural scrotum; then adjust two labia (lips) with a stitch.
And if you wish, sew the excess of the softened scrotum with three to four stitches and a firm suture.
Then incise between the stitches, and apply care for treating other sores until they are healed and the flesh is closed.
Chapter LXIX.
On Castration.
Know that castration in our law is prohibited, but because I remember it in this book, it is justified; and the remembrance of it is only necessary for two reasons: one for when it is knowledge of the doctor who is asked about it, who knows the treatment for the patient to which it applies; and the other reason is that on many occasions we may need castration of animals for our benefit, such as horses, cows, pigs, and similar animals.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by strangulation or by incision (surgery).
But in the castration by strangulation, the method of operation is that we fasten the animal in warm water until its testicles soften and hang down. Then take them with your hand inside until they are resolved (softened) and do not reappear outside.
But in castration done by incision and surgery, you must hold the animal and press the scrotum of the testicles with your left hand.
Then take hold of the suspension ligament (spermatic cord), and make an incision on each opening with one cut.
Then make an incision on those parts that you will remove (the testicles). And do not damage any part of the hip, but only the small pelvis that is over the vessels (arteries).
This method of castration by strangulation is better because strangulation allows less damage to the testicles, so that the animal will desire to mate less.
Treat the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LXX.
On Hermaphroditism.
In males, hermaphroditism occurs in two ways: one is when a space appears in the scrotum between the testicles, where female-like genitals are visible with both openings (vulva).
And in some cases, the bladder (urinary tract) is located in the scrotum between the testicles.
But in females, it is a special case: and it is that the vagina (vulva) on the pelvis is like two testicles of a male, but smaller at the opening, similar to the penis of a male and two testicles.
And the treatment is of three types: two for males and one type for females. And it is that you must incise those fleshy parts adjusted until the infection escapes from there, and then treat them with care for other sores.
And in the second type of males with a bladder located in the scrotum, there is neither treatment nor operation on it.
Chapter LXI.
Of softening and rotting due to causes of females.
Softening (lentige) and protrusion (leu) are caused by natural reasons when it is stretched out and becomes loose; and sometimes it becomes magnified in some women to such an extent that it spreads like in men and enters the vagina.
Therefore, you must remove the excess softening with your hand or an instrument and scrape it out.
Do not over-incise, moreover in the area of the wound, to prevent bleeding.
And treat that (the affected area) with healing of the wounds until it heals.
Newly-born flesh is the flesh that grows inside the womb until it fills up that area (and soft protrusion appears around the edges, resembling piles; for this reason, I will call it "piles" in some cases). Therefore, we should incise it like we do with lentige and treat it until it heals.
Chapter 72.
On the treatment of scabies.
Scabies in women should not be perforated or cut open. It can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental is caused by disease that precedes it, and this can be caused by unhealed flesh or thin or thick scabs.
And it is made or in the mother's belly, or in her ribs, or in the upper foot or in the lower foot, and forbid coughing and movement and entertainment, and strongly forbid menstruation.
The knowledge of this [condition] is obtained by examination of the mother, if the opening is apparent, proceed with parturition; but if it is not apparent, then you seek it with your fingers or with light.
But if the opening is due to subtle discharge and is near the two lips [labia], then you catch it and break that down.
And place your fingers on the two lips [labia], and then indicate with both hands towards the inside.
The woman should be on her back, with her legs spread apart, and then spread the two lips [labia] by force until that subtle discharge is broken and the opening is opened.
Then take wool, dip it in oil and place it on the site, and apply heat with a hot iron to prevent the wound from becoming hardened.
But if the discharge is large and thick, then you should incise it with a spatula or a myrtle leaf.
But if the opening is due to a flesh wound, then you suspend it with a hook, and incise it.
And are those the medicines that stop blood flow without pain, such as opium and dragon's blood, and mastic resin, mixed with alum of vinegar.
Then administer a broad leaden cannula to prevent the wound from becoming hardened easily.
Hold that for several days and apply hot compresses.
And let it be cured with the other cure of hardening until it is healed.
Sometimes during childbirth, other women's flesh also occurs, and then you must incise it according to this method. But if this is due to cancerous abscess in the mother, no iron should be used against it in any way.
Chapter 73.
On the cure of diarrhea and red swelling that occurs in the female's loins.
Diarrhea is recognized in the mouths of large veins until continuous blood flow from them subsides; and when diarrhea occurs, it is called chronic and is treated as follows.
I have already explained in the division the species of these [affections] and the signs of these [affections], and I will say thus those that receive healing and those that do not receive healing.
These [affections] are empyema and typhus when they appear in the mother's womb and do not manifest themselves through sensation, therefore healing by iron should not be attempted in these cases.
But those that are in the mother's openings and for which there is sensation, those are the ones that are healed.
And you must place the woman in a hot bath and bring out the afterbirth with forceps or sharp cloth, and cut these [affections] with scissors.
And you must sprinkle powder from one of the incisive powders without bitterness on these [affections], as with alum and similar to those.
Then wrap her feet in cloth for an hour and place it in cold water.
If the flow of blood persists, then prepare this solution of sumac and coriander seeds and walnuts and similar [substances].
Then take barley flour, mix it with honey and wine and make a plaster with water for the feet.
If the blood is separated, it is good; and if not, make it stick with blisters, and on the breasts, with incisions.
Then take wool and soak it in the juice of colandre or arnica or guarapo and white wine, and apply it to the area; and then cure the area with gargling until it is healed.
Cure the area until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
On the perforation of an accidental hernia in the mother. This indicates the topic of the following chapter.
The various species of abscesses that occur in the mother, such as scabies, ulcers, bladder stones, fistulae, and gangrene, and other abscesses. This is a description or classification of different types of medical issues related to the mother. I have already explained these diseases and their species and signs, and the cures for them in the division. This indicates that a previous section of the text has covered the subject matter discussed in this chapter.
It is necessary that I tell in this treatise about the cautery for abscess that occurs in the mother when it belongs to those abscesses that discharge pus, and if you want to know how the operation of it is done with iron. This suggests that the following discussion will focus on a specific procedure or treatment for a certain type of abscess in pregnant women.
Therefore, you must consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp with percussion and flexion and fever, and sometimes it swells and if there is sensation over that, then do not perform perforation on it, but cure it with water that helps in maturation until the acuity of the accident ceases. This indicates a specific set of conditions or guidelines for when to use a particular treatment method.
Then you must make an incision in the woman on a razor that has two blades; she should lie on her back and adjust her feet to the edge of the bed, and her legs should be spread apart, and her arms should be placed under her armpits, each one with whatever is convenient. This suggests a specific positioning or preparation for the operation.
Then follow the midwife straight ahead and provide her with the instruments necessary to treat the opening of the mother, the shape of which will come in those cases that require it. This suggests that the text is discussing a specific medical procedure related to childbirth or the mother's reproductive system.
And when you want to administer this instrument, you must enter the mother's opening with it, and nothing from the instrument should enter the mother except the point of the instrument and the hand of the attendant. This indicates a specific guideline or precaution for the use of a medical tool during childbirth or a related procedure. If the instrument is larger than the mother's cavity, then you must place powders on the texture of the mother's cavity so that the entry of any instrument into the mother's cavity is prevented.
If the instrument is too large to pass through, then you must apply a solution that softens the instrument and the attendant should hold the instrument and turn it until it has passed through the openings of the mother's cavity.
When the membrane appears, it is touched and lifted and moistened, then you must cut off its head with a linen cloth.
Once the pus is drained, you must place a heated iron rod or heated oil in the wound to stop the bleeding, and press a hot coal on the incision in the mother's cavity.
And place before the mother and over the clean wool cloth soaked in a solution of bad herbs.
Then let it be treated with an enema for about two days, which is necessary until it is healed.
The mother's cavity and wound should be washed daily until it is cleansed with water and honey, and with water in which crushed lily roots or long-stalked aster root has been boiled, and then returned to the enema.
If the wound is deep inside the mother's cavity and swollen, then you must refrain from treating it with iron, having recourse to the remedy mentioned in the division.
Chapter LXXV.
To teach midwives how to treat ectopic pregnancies when they occur abnormally, as depicted in the figure.
It is necessary that the midwife recognize at the beginning the figure of natural childbirth by the signs of it, and when you see the woman expel from her private parts and desires to smell the air, and above that place is lifted what comes out of her during delivery, and hastens the emergence of the ectopic pregnancy, then know that this birth is in a natural position, and the first one on its head, and the second one either attached or hanging or suspended from the navel.
Therefore, when you see these signs, it is necessary to compress the abdomen of the woman so that the ectopic pregnancy comes out easily because if it emerges on its head, it will come out with the second one, and clean it of any superfluous matter with good cleaning.
But the one that is not in this position is unnatural and not suitable because if the ectopic pregnancy emerges on its feet and its body is emerging before its head and its feet, and its hand or foot is towards it, then it will need to be corrected by rotating it and moving it back into a natural position. Or it emerges with its head and hand or abdomen, and strongly turned on its neck, resembling the unsuitable figures.
Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skillful in all these matters and to avoid errors and disappointments.
And we are showing you the entire figure of these things, and what method is in each one for it to be significant and applicable.
When the effusion is emerging on its head naturally and it is violent in the woman and difficult to deliver, and its vitality is already weakened, then use a cauterizing iron, or what women have, and evaporate the mucus of it with fenugreek oil and humid oils.
And the midwife enters between her fingers and cuts open the second one, or cuts it with her nails into the mucus inside it until it comes out what is in it of moisture. And press the woman's abdomen until the ectopic pregnancy is expelled.
But if it does not come out, then the woman should be administered mucilage of egg yolk and mucilage of fenugreek with scissors.
And order it to be carried out, administer the cleansing, that it be compressed and make it vomit with a gag; and open its mouth and nose with a spoon for an hour because it will soon forget it.
And if the two more of the ectopic pregnancy are forgotten at the beginning, then you must reduce them little by little with gentle pressure. But if it does not come out, then the woman should be placed on a stone and her feet lifted up, and the stone should be pressed down on her, while she is held so as not to fall backwards.
And if the masses are not turned back inside and the ectopic pregnancy dies, then you should make incisions in them and remove the rotten part of the ectopic pregnancy or pull out the corpse with cloths and remove it with equal pressure because it will soon be forgotten.
When the ectopic pregnancy emerges on its feet, you must press them upwards, and turn the ectopic pregnancy small, and tie it, and seize one of its feet and stretch it little by little.
But if it is inside the thighs, you must order it to expel itself, and make it vomit with a gag because it will be forgotten if God wills it.
And if it is not forgotten with what has been recommended, then you must return the ectopic pregnancy little by little to a position according to a natural figure because it will soon be forgotten with easy emergence.
And if it is forbidden to use everything recommended, then take alum and dissolved rubber, grind them thoroughly in the mortar, and apply a line from this mixture to the woman's womb, at the bottom of her abdomen. Then place that which was ground in water until it becomes the hypochondriac region.
When the birth openings of her are relaxed, then perform subfumigation with myrtle and pause it over them. After the subfumigation has lasted for an hour, then make her vomit by inducing it and forcefully opening her mouth, remove what was produced, and gently press on the lower part of her abdomen near the birth openings with light compression, since this will quickly cause it to be expelled.
The purpose of this treatment is continuous throughout one hand. Be careful in reducing her hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then raise the woman and make her walk around.
If she cannot walk, then make her lie down on the bed and strike the joints of her body with forceful blows, and administer painkillers that I recommend for mucilage.
If the childbirth has occurred, then make her vomit on a dish, and study the reduction of her hand, and guide it naturally in accordance with its figure, and make her push until it is expelled.
The purpose of this treatment is to expand her hips and widen the opening at her mother's waist. It is necessary for the midwife to have her hand on it and gently rotate it little by little, and facilitate its passage in this manner.
And when it is swollen and has hardened, you should press on the affected area with what we have recommended of oil and poultices.
And gently press the affected area with the recommended pads, and when you have made it swell, you should press on it with a flat spoon and command him to lean towards the right side, and gently command him to compress it; then make it vomit with the appropriate condition. The fetus is prepared on the side.
When there is an emergency delivery of the mother according to this method, consider, and you shall incise the second membrane with your nail as far as it can be drained of moisture.
And if the baby is hanging from the face and neck, you shall incise the umbilical cord, so that it is not retained and dies.
Then gently push the baby into the birth canal until the second [membrane] comes, and command the woman to compress herself several times, and the child will be delivered easily, if God wills it.
Delivery of twins or multiple babies. Know that twins may be born after several contractions, and sometimes three or four, but this is rare and difficult to predict; yet it happens naturally, not by the will of man.
And count those, even if they are many, as a second membrane, and separate them with forceps, distinguish each one by cutting the ligament at the umbilicus of each, and some contractions may be forgotten just like natural childbirth is easy, and some contractions may be overlooked just like an easy labor, according to what has been recommended.
If they are difficult to deliver, you must attend the birth and proceed as we have said in discussing unnatural figures, then treat them accordingly as recommended.
If the woman is subtle and skilled at making things easy and subtle, slow, and clever according to all figures as she is prepared by the midwife for health.
Recall that it is formed in the womb from embryos and aborted.
Some seasons consist of one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, or more days, and it is necessary to verify whether a woman has aborted within this period or not, and if she has given birth to more than ten fetuses, which was caused by the measurement of the wise sages.
And all this should be known in the science of the midwife, because it is necessary to know what strength and effort is required for that case, and therefore prepare accordingly.
Chapter 66.
On extracting the dead baby.
When treating a dead baby according to what has been said in the division of medicine and it is not far advanced, and you are satisfied with using force, then you must consider if the woman is of good health and not suffering from any of the accidents for which she is feared damage.
The woman should be positioned on her left side with her head inclined downward and her hips raised.
The attendant should hold the body from both sides or tied to the left side, so that the body does not extend during the extraction of the baby.
And gently moisten the mouth of the mother with olive oil, aloe vera, and fennel seeds.
And gently massage the midwife's hands with those oils and poultices, and gently enter her hand into the mother, and circle it around the baby to secure it.
In appropriate places: consider if the baby is prepared to be extracted from its head, and then you should place your fingers in the heels of it, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or near the beard, or in the furcula, or in the areas near the ribs, or near the hipbones.
If the extraction is to be from the feet, then do it in the instep or in the middle of the ribs.
You should hold the finger with your right hand, and bend its curve in the area between the fingers of the left hand, and enter your hand easily with facilitation, and place the finger in one of the areas that have been mentioned, until it reaches the desired goal.
And place another finger or the third one if necessary, in the apposition of it to create attraction and not extension, following its straight line only.
It should be gentle throughout the birth, so that the extraction of it is alleviated just like when pulling a tooth.
And it must be done between them (the patient) that the extension should be softened; and if any part of it is held back, then it must be necessary for the midwife to anoint certain fingers with oil and gently insert them skillfully into the area where it is held back, and turn the water that is retained.
And if the afterbirth is left behind, then the fingers should be pressed into the place where it is located until everything is expelled.
But if the hand is outside the other, and it cannot be reduced by compression, then a cloth should be wrapped around it; and extract it as soon as possible, and incise it either at the joint of the hand or in the wrist.
And likewise, it must also be done with the other hand and both feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large or it cannot be compressed, or if water is accumulated at its head, then insert the spinal spatula between the waters and split the head and drain the water, or dissect it with an instrument called "alundat", the shape of which will resemble that of other instruments in the chapter that follows.
And do the same if the fetus has a large head by nature: then you must incise it with a scalpel or grasp it with an allonge as described earlier, and extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is out and compressed, the furcula should be cut to drain the fluid in the feet.
But if there are no complications or excessive swelling, then incise the head as soon as possible.
And if the placenta is detached or in the umbilical cord, it must be necessary to perforate it to drain the fluid that is within.
But if the fetus is above the pelvis, its withdrawal will be easy and the direction to the mother's mouth will be easy.
But if it is compressed in the abdomen and pelvis, you must extract it with cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and make an incision in the abdomen and pelvis to drain the fluid in those areas.
But if the other members are out and the head remains inside, the midwife should insert her left hand; but if the mother's mouth is blocked, she should insert her hand into the vagina and search for the head, then pull it with the fingers towards the mother's mouth, and insert an inch or two fingers to help guide it.
And if the mother's mouth is compressed due to an adhesion caused by the umbilical cord, do not force it; instead, you must administer oil-based emulsions. Administer poultices and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
If the fetus is on its side, try to extract it by needle; and administer the fluids mentioned earlier to the living fetus.
And if that is not possible, incise the cervix and extract it.
It must be ensured that no cause is left within the second birth (afterbirth).
Once you have completed your work, administer the fluids mentioned earlier for the treatment of adhesions that might occur in the mother.
If bleeding occurs, give styptic solutions and administer other treatments.
And he has seen a woman in the womb whose fetus was dead, and over that fire another observed with a fetus burning. A long time ago, the man had an adhesion in his navel; it swelled and became infected, and started to leak pus.
He was called upon for its treatment and treated it for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Then he applied strong adhesive plasters to it on several occasions, and extracted an object that resembled a bone, and after some days, he extracted another bone; and he was very surprised because there is no bone in the abdomen.
And then he thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
So he cleaned the wound and extracted many small bones from it, the woman who was in her mother's womb lived for a long time, but eventually died of a small arm wound.
He did not consider this strange, but rather that it was science and useful assistance in the treatments that physicians administer with their hands for healing.
Regarding the shapes of the instruments necessary to extract the fetus.
Shape of the forceps used to open the mother:
This is the shape of a scissors that are used to bind ligatures, with two blades at the ends of two handles. However, this scissors should be thinner than a ligature, and made of metal or bone.
And the thickness of each handle should be two fingers wide at the edges of both handles, and the length of each is one palm and a half; in the middle of the two handles are two adjustable rods that are already fixed, with a length of a little more than one palm and a few more, and a width of two fingers or slightly more.
These two additions should be inserted into the mother's mouth to open it up for those who are turning the two prescribed spindles.
Make another similar thing in a similar manner, but finer and lighter:
It should be made from wood or ivory like forceps. However, at the end of it (the instrument), there should be two additional parts similar to this, and the length of these additional parts is as long as a palm, and the width of each one is two fingers.
And when you want to open the mother with these (instruments), you should first place a woman on her left side, holding her feet downwards, and then open what is between her legs. Then place your hand with the instrument in a similar manner as you would with forceps, according to the size that you estimate is necessary for the opening of the mother's mouth up until the point where the cervix is.
The shape of the lever which the ancients called...
The shape of the levers that push things forward:
The shape of a clamp that holds the large head,
And it is similar to forceps with teeth at the end, sometimes, and some of them are made long like forceps according to this shape, sometimes, at the end of which there are teeth like the teeth of a saw and it is cut and held. The shape of a small clamp:
The shape of an awl having a spine:
The shape of an awl having two spines:
The shape of a spatula having two ends, one of which is separated:
The shape of two wide spatulas:
All these instruments are to be exercised, and when more are multiplied in their kinds and prepared, the craftsmen should make them as light as possible for their operation, and as many as possible according to their quantity.
And you should not neglect these instruments in any way, for their need is not to be excused.
Extraction of the second tooth/dentition
When the second tooth is retained, you must command the patient to hold their breath, and then make them cough with condition, place your hand over their mouth and nose, and if this is not sufficient, it is good.
And if this is not sufficient, you should then take a mouthful of water and perforate the covering (the membrane) with a hole, placing there a mixture of calamint, rosemary, anise, camomile, Arabic spices, cassia, and santaura. All these herbs or some of them should be immersed in water in the mouthful, and place it over the fire.
Approach a cannula made of cane and insert it into the mother's mouth, keeping it there until the steam comes to the concavity of the mother.
Approach this vomiting as we have said, and the second one will be forgotten quickly.
But if this treatment remains without effect, then you command the midwife to immerse her left hand in warm oil or micellage of aloe, and insert it into the vagina and seek out the afterbirth, and when found, take hold of it and gradually extend it out little by little. But if it is attached to the cervix of the mother, then you insert your hand as we have recommended, and when you find the afterbirth, extract it gradually according to the correct method so that the mother does not contract violently. It is necessary to press both the right and left costal areas with ease.
If the mother's mouth is closed, we have recommended a treatment using vomiting and a wave-like motion with herbs.
But if all the causes we have recommended are not resolved, then be careful not to prolong the process of extraction, but if something has been expelled from her mouth to the female part, then cleanse it with a gargle and tetrapharmacon; for this will cause it to dissolve within a few days and be expelled.
When it is about to burst, it is raised to the head and stomach, and that affects the patient; therefore, it is necessary to administer sub-fumigations and appropriate remedies.
When some of the ancients are mentioned, they were known for sub-fumigation with cumin and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which a woman is sub-fumigated should be designed for the prevention of menstruation and afterbirth.
It can be made of glass or clay.
Place the thin end inside the vagina and the wide end over the fire, and the sub-fumigation should be held over the arms of the fire.
And let that be inside which is consumed that sub-fumigation and they repeat another one.
Treatment of an unperforated child's rectum. (Guessing from the context that "cul" means rectum, and "enfant" means child.)
When children are newborn and their rectums are not perforated, they should be carefully examined and prepared. Therefore, the midwife should carefully perform the examination; otherwise, if not possible, perform it with a sharp spatula, ensuring that she does not harm the rectal lining.
Then place a piece of wool soaked in vinegar and oil over it, and clean it with warm water. (Guessing that "lana" means wool, "enfusa" means soaked, "vi e oli" means vinegar and oil, "enguent" means wash, and "entro" means water.)
If you are concerned about it being infected, place a cannula over it for several days and remove it when the child wants to defecate. (Guessing that "trauc" means hole, "canula" means cannula, "opilat" means infected, and "degerir" means to defecate.)
It often happens that the rectum becomes infected due to an abscess or hemorrhoid; therefore, the abscess or hemorrhoid should be incised, and it should be treated with the remedy and lead we mentioned earlier. (Guessing that "opilacio" means infection, "consolidacio" means abscess or hemorrhoid, "inscidida" means incision, and "aquo" refers to a previously mentioned remedy.)
Treatment of fissures that have developed. (Guessing that "fistulas" are fissures or ulcers in the rectum, and "endeveno" means develop.)
Fissures that develop near the anus have thin and narrow discharge, while those that develop around the rectum or in the space between the buttocks are thicker and more pronounced. (Guessing that "las fistulas" refers to fissures or ulcers in the rectal area, "endeveno" means develop, "pus bassa" means thin discharge, "nodacio" means narrow, "grossetut" means thickness, "prop del cul" means around the rectum, and "en lespazi de la una partida" means in the space between the buttocks.)
Is it a fissure or an abscess? (Guessing that this is a question about whether the issue is a fissure or an abscess.)
If the narrowing is old and exudes thick, foul-smelling white or yellow pus, some of these fissures may penetrate. (Guessing that "aquela nodacio" refers to the narrowing of the fissure or abscess, "antiquada" means old, "corr" means exude, "humiditat aygosa blanca" means thick white pus, "poyridura subtil" means thin yellow pus, and "alcunas veguadas" means some of these fissures.)
And those that penetrate are known by the discharge that comes out of them and by their swelling; some patients may need an evacuation, and in many cases, worms come out of them. (Guessing that "aquelas penetrantz" refers to fissures or abscesses that have penetrated deeper into the tissue, "egressio" means discharge, "ventosetat" means swelling, and "malaute de egressio" means an evacuation is needed.)
And in some cases, these fissures can extend into the bladder or the muscle of the scrotum; and they can penetrate through the joints of the hips and reach the kidney. (Guessing that "aquelas fistulas" refers to fissures or abscesses, "lespazi penetrantz entro a la vesica" means extend into the bladder, "entro al meat de la vergua" means extend into the muscle of the scrotum, "penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta" means penetrate through the joints of the hips and reach the kidney.)
The way to determine if a fissure has penetrated into the rectum or not is to insert your finger into the rectum and try to feel for it, using a thin tool such as an earam (a probe) or iron. (Guessing that "aquo en que es conoguda" means the way to determine, "fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant" means if the fissure has penetrated into the rectum or not, "tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul" means insert your finger into the rectum, and "entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat" means try to feel for it using a thin probe or iron, but be careful not to hurt yourself.)
If it is too dangerous to insert your finger, you can try feeling for the fissure with a thin probe or horsehair until you feel resistance in your rectum. (Guessing that "Mays si en aquela es turtuositat" means if it is too dangerous, "entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval" means use a thin probe or horsehair, and "entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit" means until you feel resistance in your rectum.)
If you do not feel the fissure at all or there is no cause for evacuation, worms, or swelling as we previously mentioned, then you should know that it is not penetrating, and you can proceed with treatment. (Guessing that "si no sentas aquela de tot" means if you do not feel the fissure at all, "ni procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat" means or there is no cause for evacuation, worms, or swelling, and "e lahoras coyta te a la curacio" means then you can proceed with treatment.)
When the fissure penetrates into the bladder or the muscle of the scrotum, the nature of the problem is evidently the passing of urine and prohibition of that area with medication should be implemented. (Guessing that "la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua" means when the fissure penetrates into the bladder or the muscle of the scrotum, and "la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela" means the nature of the problem is evidently the passing of urine.)
If the fissure penetrates through the joints of the hips or into the bone and causes pain in the surrounding area, then the sign is that it will pass through if there is no danger to the bone, causing pain in the surrounding area; and it usually produces pus quickly; and the treatment is not effective and not consolidated with washing. (Guessing that "la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os" means if the fissure will pass through if there is no danger to the bone, "envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida" means causing pain in the surrounding area of the hips, "que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps" means it usually produces pus quickly, and "ni es consolidada am enguent" means it is not consolidated with washing.)
In all cases of penetrating fissures, there is no cure, and the treatment is difficult and uncertain for the doctors who handle them. (Guessing that "E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant" means in all cases of penetrating fissures, "no es curacio de tot" means there is no cure, and "la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobrel qual so fermatz" means the treatment is difficult and uncertain for the doctors who handle them.)
In that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing by iron is hoped for, according to what I will recommend to you, and what I have proven.
The patient lies between your hands on their back and raises their chest towards them, the thighs are inclined towards the belly of the patient, and you attempt to enter through it with lead, or iron if it is in an abscess, until you know the place where you will find it.
And if the pain is around the neck, then you must enter your finger into the neck.
And if you find a tender spot with your finger that penetrates when pressed, then you know that it is an abscess or flesh, and then you certainly know that it is penetrating; do not work on that, because healing is not in that, as we have said.
But some say that it heals in some men sometimes.
And of the medicine in which healing is hoped for, it is that you ignite cautery thinly according to the size of the abscess, as previously said, and enter the fire into the abscess until it reaches around the neck; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all the flesh around the abscessed area have been adjusted.
And heal that by wrapping it with lint until the flesh around it has withered, and heal that with medicines that cause and consolidate the flesh, and if it heals, it is good; and if not, do not heal it within a certain time by another cure.
And if a tender spot is within, and does not penetrate into the anus that is covered by flesh or abscess, and sometimes the abscess appears on what seems to be a bladder, and the abscess has soaked the skin around it, then dry the skin from the beginning of the abscess, and you will see the abscess dry up, and continue drying until the dryness reaches the place where the tip of the tender spot is, and through the tender spot is freed and catches.
Then clean those abscessed areas that resemble a bird's feather quill, and do not leave any cause for them to remain.
But if there is bleeding that comes between you and your action when you lance those areas, then take the milk and a simple instrument is cauterizing with fire or sharp medicine, as cauterization with fire has good properties: it adjusts the healing of those abscessed areas, and the abscess drains due to the drying of the humors.
Then heal that by wrapping it with lint or gauze until the place festers, and then heal the ulcer with hard flesh-generating and consolidating medicines.
And those medicines in which there is drying and stopping; when it has been restored, it is healed and you do not fear relapse.
But if the abscess has already penetrated into the anus and is extended from the surface of the body, then enter your finger into the anus and examine it.
And therefore, if the tender spot is covered by abscess or flesh, and it seems to be about to penetrate, then it is not an operation in that, but according to faith and hope.
The cause is to administer it in one of three ways: or cauterize that as previously said; or cut it open until you can achieve the hollowing out so that it is possible for you to enter and heal properly; and do not press down on the abscess for fear of tearing the rectum, and accidentally injure the patient in that way without their consent; and then heal it with what was previously said, which will work easily; or lengthen the covering and clean the pus that is cut open near the anus, as previously said, or with a sharp instrument at its tip, and then clean the abscessed areas that are in the incision with percrustation; and then force yourself to restore the entire ulcer with incision, and if the opening of the pus does not consolidate, and the abscess remains open in the anus division, it will be easier for the patient. And sometimes the abscess is closed in this way: when you insert your finger into the abscess and it is on the side of the anus around the surface of the body with skin, then take a sharp instrument for perforating, which is like a hollow needle for preparing the bowels as follows:
and insert it into the abscess that is wrapped in five fields or around those areas; and then insert a sharp needle into the abscess until you achieve the hollowing out.
But if it penetrates into the margin of the anus from inside, then you remove the thread that has passed through as you insert your finger into the anus; and extract the tip of the thread and adjust both ends, strengthen each one, and leave it for a day or two until the thread sinks in more deeply when the surrounding flesh has sunk in around the two ends of the thread and they are closed.
Then treat the wound until it is healed and consolidated.
If the ulcers of the fistula are not penetrating, then make them penetrate, in whatever way you prepare, as long as it is not causing pain, because it is not your job to do anything that causes injury; and return it to its place when it has healed.
The form of the pointed spatula used to incise the fistula: the curve is sharp on one side and flat on the other, so as not to injure anything that is not necessary, such as sometimes happens.
Stitching hemorrhoids where blood flows upon their incision.
Hemorrhoids can be of two types: either like charcoal that is located near the anus or like grease from boiling. And small and large hemorrhoids that blood flows from them all the time and is one type, and are multiple, and outside the anus, and at the ends of it.
However, those that are outside the anus are in months of little humidity, from which a clear water or a small amount of blood with continuous flow, and they are of the same color as the body.
And the treatment of the one that is inside the anus is to instruct the patient to sit down and wait for the anus to dry up and the hemorrhoids to appear to you. Then you should cut them with scissors or whatever you have at hand, and return the cuts to their original position.
However, if the scissors are not present in them due to their humidity and softening, then take those with rough cloth or cotton or woolen swab, and pull them out with your fingers, and incise them and sprinkle some caudal powders near the incision, so that they are like cauterization; or cauterize them as prescribed in the section on cauterizing. Then treat those with the other treatment until they are healed.
And if the anus does not obstruct the outlet, then pierce the patient with a catheter through which there is a small opening, and wash it with water that comes from the anus and gently encourages the evacuation of the patient when he squeezes.
However, if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, the cause is light, and you take them with your nails or scissors and incise them, and treat them as I said before until they are healed.
And for the incised one, it is necessary to administer suturing of them in this way: take fine gauze and insert it into a needle and extract the hemorrhoids on the top part, and make the needle penetrate the wound of the other side, and wrap the two ends of the gauze on the side deeper than the needle, and transversely; tighten the hemorrhoid with strong stitches, and knot the gauze and extract the needle.
And do this to all of them, leaving one unstitched and not sewing it, so that the excess blood can flow from it.
And place a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the anus and wait for it to dry, and cover that over the anus and instruct the patient to rest. And leave that inside until it is contained; and when it is healed, treat those with enemas or the other treatment until they are healed.
And since they are ancient and not very effective in medicine, it is necessary that you cauterize them with the point of the spatula or your nail until they become wet and the discharge above them is stopped, which prevents consolidation; then treat them until they are consolidated.
Then you remove them with great caution before they start to bleed and are ulcerated, and treat them until they are healed.
Know that alamir (a form of fistula) is essential, and it is not redon (round) as the head of a nail, and it is found throughout the body but more in the lower parts of the legs and arms, and it should be treated by those pains.
And so it is necessary to incise the area around the nail, and keep it with scissors or scissors, and remove it from its place, and treat it.
And if you want, cauterize those as described in the section on cauterizing.
However, a wart is a small rough round fistula on the surface of the body, and multiple watched over by many children.
And the treatment is to stretch it out and incise it, or tighten it with gauze or thread until it is contained. And if you want, cauterize that, as I said before, with fire or sharp medicine.
Mays formica is a small, pimple-like or fistula-sized elevation on the surface of the body that moves like an ant, and when it is touched, it becomes inflamed like an ant bite, and it appears around the body.
The treatment for it is to take a sharp needle or a lancet, and press it into the ant-like elevation, holding it with the circle of the canula from its edges; then turn your hand with the canula inside until you penetrate what is in the circle of the ant-like elevation, and press it on the skin, and excavate the ant-like elevation from its root.
And if you wish, do it with an earthenware needle or an iron one, following this method:
Make the incision above the needle thin and dull (meaning not penetrating through) and wrap it, so that when you apply pressure on the spot, the pus inside is expressed and the rotation of it is facilitated.
And if you wish to cauterize (or burn) the ant-like elevation as described in the cauterization of atheyl under the "cauterization" section of the chapter on cautery.
Regarding the instruments that are administered for making an incision.
Sometimes, an incision is made with a silver or copper needle, or melted lead or hammered; and sometimes it is made with small or large instruments depending on those administered, because the one used in the treatment of small children should be small; and for those whose backs are thin or painful, the incisions should be small.
The form of large and small incisions:
The head of the canula (needle) above where the pouch is tied should be wide, following this method: and it should have a distinct location where the pouch is tied in the same way as sometimes occurs.
And the end of the pus below, which is inserted into the rectum, should be dull (meaning not perforated) but not leon (unclear what this term means), finely pointed; and on one side there are two cuts, and on the other side one cut, and the size of the cut should correspond to the thickness of the rays and large pus, with a small cut for thin or small pus.
And the pouch in which the animal urine or sheep's wool medicine is placed should be a span (approximately 9 inches) long.
And it should be perforated by many cuts, as it is rotated; and if the space between the cuts is thicker than the finger.
And it should be introduced into those cuts faithfully and deeply with a sharp instrument, or cover them; and place the pouch over it; and when the pouch is placed inside, it should be tight at the head of the needle between two distinct locations with strong pressure, and cauterize each cut: However, the quality of cauterizing with this method is that you fill the pouch with the medicine, which should be heated according to the tolerance of the patient; and make sure it is not too hot or too cold.
And place the patient on their back, and raise their legs and place a cushion under them (or a blanket); and then anoint the edge of the cautery with oil or albumen of egg or mucilage of fennel or similar; and introduce it gently into the rectum with ease, and the assistant should take the pouch and press it firmly and repeatedly with force until everything that is in the incision is expelled from the intestine; and then remove the incision and the patient raises their legs to the wall.
And if the medicine is lacking in that place, it should be increased; and if it remains there for an entire night, it is more harmful in treatment.
If the disease of the belly and its symptom is treated with cauterization, then do so repeatedly until it heals.
If there is an emorroid or abscess in the buttock, then use a subtle cautery and lion-like cautery among those that are called cauterizers.
On the treatment of sores.
I have already said in the division of the treatment of sores what is appropriate for the free person, and now I will say the treatment of those with money according to what is suitable.
Therefore, I say that sores are differentiated according to what causes them and according to the place on which they occur.
And the causes that many times are made by blows, incisions with a knife or sword, or strikes with a spear, staff, arrow, or similar, are such as these.
But sores that occur in the parts of the body are such as those that fall on the head, neck, feet, abdomen, or throat and similar to those of the limbs.
And I recommend the treatment of some sores based on this reasoning and rule for other sores.
And I begin with simple sores of the head, since the composition will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say that when a simple sore occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, consider: if it was caused by blows or similar, and the patient has already tightened the bandage but it is a large wound and you fear that the wound will develop an abscess, then cut and drain the cephalic vein immediately, and do not delay; extract blood according to the strength of the vein, unless there is any reason prohibiting phlebotomy, especially if the blood that has emerged from the sore is scant.
And perform phlebotomy on the opposite side of the affected area, and keep the patient from filling up, vomiting, and eating heavy foods.
But if there is any reason for fasting, then reduce the food and avoid meat and wine.
Wait on the sore if an abscess forms, place oil of roses or wine in which is steeped near it.
But if you are certain that an abscess has formed, then wait on the sore, if it is recent and the air has not changed the powder which I recommend applying in small amounts.
And if the air has already changed it, then wait for a clean wash to heal.
But if the sore is large or due to incision and similar things, and the edges are not properly closed, then close them with suture as I recommend for their closure.
But if the sore has exposed bone and cartilage, but is not retained by anything more than a small suspension, then make an incision on it and treat the wound with medicines and restore the skin over the area of the bandage, and order the patient to eat foods rich in protein such as beef and pork until it heals.
And if there is gangrene in the bandage that does not adhere to the bone, then make an incision all around and cut it, and treat it.
But if in these sores there is an artery or vein from which blood may flow and it has not been cut by medicines, then ask about the artery, and if you find one that has not been cut, make an incision with a spatula or lance; and if necessity requires it, cauterize it until the blood is drained.
And if these sores are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; therefore, sprinkle that powder over it, since it solidifies before the air changes on it.
The method of the powder is this: take an equal amount of oil from crushed pine kernels, dragon's blood, and unburned charcoal; grind it all up and sieve it, then fill the sore with it, bind it tightly until it adheres to the skin, and allow it to coagulate with the blood.
And apply a strong poultice on top of it and leave it on, but do not remove it until the sore is not an abscess, since the medicine will not be absorbed into it until it heals.
And sometimes do this alone with caution when pine kernels and dragon's blood are not available.
And perform this method of treatment on large sores when it must be waited upon and tightened, and only on fresh sores whose air has not been altered.
If the air has been altered, especially in the summertime, then do not use this position for the powder, but instead treat them with what was said earlier, until you wash them with clean waters or wait for the oatmeal paste to dry; and treat them with other treatments until they heal.
If a fracture occurs in bone, which is small, then you extract it with this method.
Here begins the cure for skull fractures that are poisonous.
Of the pains in the neck.
If the pain occurs in the neck, it is not different in treatment, and it is similar to a simple skull fracture.
If the nerves or arteries of the neck are cut, if it is the nerves, it should not be treated in haste but with what causes strong coagulation, such as ziniar and zegi, which is vitriol, because they harm the nerves and counteract them. And do not put any pressure on the pain, because the substance of nerves is fragile and its continuity is with the brain, which is above all other members.
And if it is cured with light medicines such as washing with sweet water, sometimes immersed in rose oil or not, and thus when washed with sweet water and other remedies according to this method, and then gargling with water.
If the pain is large, then administer suture or sew the lips of it, and apply care to it with powders until it heals.
If the pain has depth or occurs in the lower part of the jaw where there is pustule, then you perforate it in the most depressed place.
If an artery is cut in the pain and there is bleeding, you separate it, dry it, tie it, or cauterize it if necessity dictates.
If the vertebrae of the neck are cut or all, and the veins of the neck are saved, you adjust the lips of the spine with suture on the neck of the cervix, do not touch it; lift it up evenly and reduce it to its natural shape, tighten it with a proper structure, and let it rest for several days; apply care to it with gargles containing coagulation and stimulation until it heals.
If the pain has already entered the bone with danger, you percuss it, and if there are fragments of bones, remove all those that can be, and what cannot be removed, let it rest until the pain subsides, and it should be separated and the pain relieved.
And if the pain is recent, sprinkle powder over it that has been recommended to you. If a fistula is made in the pain, treat it with what will come to your mind in its chapter (i.e., section).
If the blow is with a lance or sword, and sometimes of deep penetration, you must consider more if the pain has wind when the patient complains about it; know that the pain is fatal.
And if there is not deep penetration and the pain is recent with the patient's blood, you must wait in the first hour to sprinkle powder on it, and do not tighten it because the blood is retained in the depth of it and returns to the heart, causing the patient discomfort; instead, apply warm gargles and release it every two days.
And if the gargle is not available, you must wait in the orifice of the pain until it drains what comes from humidity; make the patient sleep on the pain so that it runs out what is adjusted there.
If three days or more have passed since the pain, and no spasm, palpitations of the heart, fainting, or constriction of the breath occurs in the patient, and sometimes other good conditions exist, know that the pain is saved; then treat it with warmth and other care until it heals.
If the healing is excused and it has been open for a long time, know that a fistula has already occurred; treat it according to its chapter (i.e., section).
If the pain is caused by a blow with a club or sword, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, treat it with what comes before suturing if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
If danger has already occurred in the bone, and if it has already been cut out pieces, you must twist the pain and pull to extract those pieces, if they are separated. If they are not separated, you must let them rest until the pain subsides, because the extraction of them is relieved.
And for other accidents that occur in the other members, the aid in treatment is the same as what has been said (i.e., similar to what was mentioned earlier).
Of the pains in the abdomen.
The indisposition that occurs in the abdomen is either large, small, or moderate.
A small rupture is difficult to repair by another method, and it is known that its reduction is more difficult unless you take care not to introduce them into their place immediately, for it swells and becomes thickened, making the introduction of them difficult.
Therefore, a small rupture is preferable, for in that case the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is in the two cases mentioned above.
You should know that the suture of the abdomen is according to four methods, but two of these methods are common and are used in sutures of other diseases of the body.
Two other specific methods communicate with other diseases, but they are more specific to the suture of the abdomen.
And I recommend that you should have exposure and declaration (consent) from every patient.
Therefore, when the disease is small and there is some cause of the intestine by it, and it is difficult to reduce that, then it can be in one of two ways: either due to the small size of the rupture as we have said, or because the intestine has swollen inflammation due to the coldness of the air.
And therefore, when this is the case, it is necessary that you warm it so that you immerse a sponge or damp cloth in hot water alone, or take it in hot water squinants (cupped hands), and cyperum, and spices, and bind it with that to the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes it happens that this has stiffness and water alone is better for the resolution of inflammation.
Therefore, when the inflammation is resolved, then you moisturize the intestine with water containing alum and malva, for by this it is relieved from obstruction with little cause.
But if the obstruction is expelled from this treatment, then you make a small incision on the rupture with an instrument for which you insert emetics (emorydas).
The primary treatment is better when it is appropriate that there is no section, and there is no need to cut off immediately and without necessity or delay.
Of the instrument, see its shape:
The first part of it is rounded and pointed, the other part not pointed, and its tip should be subtle, but not as thin as a spatula's tip, rather blunt to some extent.
Therefore, when the disease expands and the intestine comes out, its reduction should be according to its natural form in its proper place, if it is possible over that, for this is better.
But when the rupture is wide and in the lower part of the abdomen, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs as far apart as their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should place their head and chest as far apart as possible.
Similarly, if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pause your attention and consideration always on this so that the side where the disease is should be more distant than the other.
And in this way, it is necessary to administer this in large diseases and in small diseases.
In small diseases, pause what you have prepared and ensure that the administrator is among your most trusted, who will hold the rupture with his whole hand and adjust the lips of it, and approach exposing that area to the one where some cause for suture is appropriate.
This is the common suturing method: one that you take the needle (or a needle according to the size of the disease); and approach it from the edge of the rupture of the said anular finger, tighten the needle one time, but do not insert the point in both ends of the knot, with two ends of the cipher that are outside the knot of the partitions inside, until you make it penetrate through that part; and you have already added two ends of the knot and two ends of the cipher, and they have been made four rows.
And tighten it with double thread around the needle, and sometimes from two parts together, and add the lips and wound by proper addition; and approach the thickness of the finger and insert another needle in that place, and approach it as was done with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if it is necessary with the needles until you have completed the entire contraction of the wound.
The needles should be neither too thick nor too thin, for the fine needles pierce the flesh too easily; and the thick ones are difficult to insert in the knot, and therefore it is necessary that they be of medium thickness.
It is not necessary that the needle be inserted into two ends of the same knot, so that the flesh is not pierced lightly and the wound heals before its consolidation.
And do not prolong sutures so that the wound is prevented from consolidating.
And approach the ends of the needles so that they do not injure the patient while sleeping; and pause over the suture, which are expanded pulps from all parts, which have the ends of the needles; and leave it in until you know that the wound has already consolidated.
These small types of stitches using needles are appropriate for small wounds, as one needle or a few are used in their stitching.
The second type of stitch is common: it is that you administer the four corners, from one end and two ends of the wound, in a single go, with a needle covered in a fine and thick thread.
Then, when the needle penetrates these four corners, withdraw the needle from that parting point it started from, so that the thread pulled out along with the pus separating area is returned to the wound, so that the stitch is like a stitch of fabric and the fabrics are strengthened.
Pause between each stitch the amount of thread on the smallest finger.
This suture is known to men.
The wound that occurred in a man's stomach, which was pierced by a sword, and it was the major rupture of a hernia around two palms from the hernia of the same place and was the disruption at the middle of the member; and then I reduced it after the hernia had been open for 24 hours.
The wound healed in the space of 15 days or less, and it was cured and recovered; and he lived for many years, and his condition improved.
The other doctors had judged that it would not heal; and by miracle, for I did not cure it with juice, because it was in a location where no juice or any medicine was found, but I covered the wound with old cloth two times a day and washed it assiduously with honey water until it healed.
But I will explain two types of stitches according to the words of the Gospel.
And begin with a suture of the edge, and enter the needle from the outside part to the inside part.
Then, when the needle pierces the edge and enters the flesh according to correct method and length of the entire body, leave the end of the wound where you inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate in the other end of the wound from the inside part to the outside part at the other end of the thigh.
And so when you have made it penetrate once more in the same location of the thigh from the inside part to the outside part; and leave the end of the wound where it is at this time, and make the needle penetrate in the other end of the wound from the inside part to the outside part.
Make it penetrate with your penetration that you made in the thigh at the end of the mirror, which is within the opening, so that all of it penetrates.
Then start the stitch from this side and continue it at the end of the thigh on the other side, and remove the needle from the edge that penetrated, and return it to the same edge and close the end of the thigh with this side of the mirror; and remove it from the edge that is from there.
Do this once and then another, and do it again close to the previous one until you sew everything that is outside according to this example.
The total of this method of stitching is that you sew with the stitch of skins like you sew fur, except that you sew the thigh once from the end of the edge, and that you leave the other side until it is complete.
But the second type of stitch that I call Gaula is one of speech and it is recommended for this purpose, it is sewn as half-stitches by which doctors sew wounds, except that they attach all edges to their corresponding edge according to nature; and they apply the end of one side and the end of the mirror to the other end of the wound, and this is done in the manner that I have recommended.
It is necessary that you place the needle at your discretion in the end of the mirror opposite to the edge outside, and make it penetrate only into the inside part there; and leave two ends of the thigh; and then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside in two ends of the thigh.
And turn each one of them, and make each one penetrate from the inside part to the outside part at two ends of the mirror on the opposite side.
This method of stitching is better than the common light stitch, and it is the type of stitch that has been remembered before.
This is the speech of Gaulia
But others say that the abdomen stitch is corrected with two needles, so it is that you insert one needle into each of them and begin with the introduction of the needle that you should do, and make it penetrate to the other side according to the stitch of those who sew the hearts.
And know that when rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, the stitching of it is more difficult than at other places of the abdomen.
The judgment of healing for wounds is also a judgment for other wounds.
The cause is because when you achieve the wound before the air alters it, and reduce the intestine and close it properly, then pause on that carnivorous powder. (Note: "encarnativa" means "carnivorous", not related to flesh or "carnal".)
And if the air has already altered the wound, then pause on that alum paste which is presently brought to you before it hardens and heals the wound, and make it consolidate and watch; and apply care for it as the cure of other wounds until it is healed.
But if you are not present for the medicine, then pause on it immediately, because it begins to rot, fester, and change color every two days, as you have been taught, until it is healed, because you do not need another medication in most cases when the wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound will spread to the main members, then it is necessary that you immerse wool in boiled oil of good quality, or in rose oil, and apply it in the area between the joints and leave it for a while.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in your intestines, because it often happens that this occurs, then you must cauterize it with black beech-wood vinegar and especially if the pus has reached the intestine and is being expelled into its cavity.
And know that the large intestine heals more easily than the small intestines.
And it is difficult to heal because the intestine called "jejunum" does not receive healing from a wound that occurs in it entirely; and this is due to the great number of veins that are in it, and the large size of it, and the subtlety of its body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if the issue that comes from the wound is tissue and you manage to achieve it recently, then reduce it according to your rule as you would with the intestines.
But if it has passed to a place and turned green or black, then you should tighten it with a suture on the area that is darkened by it, because blood flow will come out, as there are veins and arteries in the tissue.
And apply a ligature to it that is other than the one used for suturing and pause the two ends of the thread hanging from the wound's edge, so that you may relieve its attraction, because you will cut off the tissue and drain the blood from the wound.
Remembering wounds when they occur in the intestines.
When there is a small rupture in the intestine, it is possible for it to be restored in some people, because I have seen one who was stabbed in his abdomen with a lance and had a wound on the right side of his stomach, and the wound was old and made a fistula, and he expired from lack of treatment and wind.
Therefore, I continued the treatment of him even though it was not cured, but refined it until the wound healed and the area was consolidated.
And I waited until the area was consolidated, and observed over the patient who had suffered an accident in his abdomen; and no one died from this accident and remained in their usual habits of eating and drinking, and went into baths and exercise.
And some experienced people say that when a small wound occurs in the intestines, then it is necessary to tie it in this way: and you take large loaves; and adjust the lips of the wound and pause one of them with the mouth open over both lips of the wound; thus, when you pull on it and tighten its mouth, detach the head of it, as it adheres and does not dissolve.
And pause another loaf near the first one, and do not stop making them one after the other according to the size of the entire wound.
And reduce it and sew the wound; and leave those heads attached in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not harm the patient in any way.
And it is possible that the intestine can be tied with a thin thread made from the animal's intestine, since it is smaller in needle; and you take the end of these threads of intestine, and make it almost detached, and tie the end of it with thread wrapped around it, and insert the thread into needles and sew it to the intestine, and reduce it at the rupture.
And this method of suturing with loaves is not only by trust and hope.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the small intestines, then it is not enough to tie it, but rather refinement, and healing from it entirely is not possible.
On the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Know that any wound or boil that becomes rotten and old, and turns into an ulcer and is not consolidated and oozes pus all the time and does not burst, then, in any member, it is universally called a fistula and we call it an abscess.
Fistula, in truth, is a hard, white, painless nodule with a concavity similar to the concavity of a bird's beak, and it is therefore named alcaus rizatus, which means "beak."
It is in some men a moist nodule that oozes pus; and after several hours, the moisture is drained off in some places. Sometimes this moisture moves about, becomes thin and thick at the same time, and is subtle.
I have shown all these causes, their signs, and the treatment of them with medicines in the division.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to know the healing of fistula, which is done by surgical means with a knife.
You should know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body, as some fistulas reach the veins and arteries, nerves, spinal cord, intestine, bladder, ribs, vertebrae of the back, or various joints composed like the hand and foot; and these are the ones that give proximity to the main part and similar places.
Therefore, one of these fistulas, treated in this way, is one of those difficult diseases to heal, and it does not receive treatment; and dealing with it is labor and ignorance.
If one of these fistulas has a depth that does not reach the places mentioned above, and you hope and believe in its healing, and wish to gain knowledge about it, then take a probe or iron, and if the fistula follows the correct course, pierce it with it.
But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a probe of lead, because lead, due to its lightness, is alleviated and curved following the twists.
And if the fistula has many horrible holes, it is not possible for you to mark over it with a probe.
Therefore, close the holes by their own holes, because the moisture that you use to close one hole must go through the other holes and come out of them.
Then approach with great care, according to the method that is possible for you to determine if here there are bones or nerves, and whether the fistula is long or short, deep, or a fistula with many holes on it that covers everything with its size, with your strength, your vigilance, the position of the patient, and the discovery of pain, you should compress the area with your hand, and similar signs and causes of abscesses apply to it.
And when you are in a position of certainty regarding all these causes, then go to the healing with confidence: it is that you consider whether the fistula is superficial and near a joint or nerve, artery, vein, one of the places I have told you about, or deep.
You should dry out the fistula as was mentioned before about its nature, and remove what is in that filtration and rotten flesh, and what is born in the sores of the skin, or ulcers, and cure it within until it is healed.
But if the fistula is deep and follows the correct course, then it is necessary to incise it in the front as far as possible for you, clean out all its rotten flesh; and apply warm poultices wrapped in medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have captured with a probe.
And do that for several days until the hot medicine completely destroys all the rotten matter in the cavity of the fistula due to corruption.
Then restore it with suppurating ointments that create healthy flesh within until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by this, then you cauterize it as recommended.
But if the cause of fistula is bone and it must be confirmed by you, then investigate it and dry it out as recommended, provided that you do not prevent any cause of vein or nerve or main part as mentioned before.
But if the bone is discovered and there is corruption and blackness in it, then scoop it out until all the corruption is stopped; and treat it with what softens it until it is healed.
And if it oozes pus as before, then you should know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; and then investigate it again carefully and reason about it and clean it up with your last strength, and restore it.
And if it heals, it is good; and if not, you should know that the corruption is in the deep part of the body, which has not been reached, and therefore it is not treated but rather allowed to be.
If the corruption of the bone is small, or it can be pulled out, then you should pull it out with subtle forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
If there are many bones, you should carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave any cause for it in your strength.
If any cause of moisture opposes, and there is no fear or error in its incision, then incise the ligament or flesh where it is, and separate the bones.
If you are not prepared to remove the bones at your time, then pause on the wound that may heal the wound, and leave it within the area of the surrounding flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound so that it is not consolidated, and keep the incision you made in your operation constricted.
Moreover, if you fear, pause on the wound that is submerged in boiled oil, or a wound submerged in strong Egyptian ointment, or one of the various warm ointments, because when they become soft, the ligaments separate from the bones and the abscess is alleviated.
Moreover, if it is a large bone such as the hip bone or pelvic bone or similar ones, and the part that has been corrupted is only the face of it, then cut off the affected area with resin only up to where the blackness and corruption remains inside, and then restore the wound.
Moreover, if the corruption is a large part and the corruption has already reached the medulla of the bone, then it is necessary to close it and cut it completely inside the area where the corruption was reached, and then care for it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you what might be appropriate for a man in his loins, that you pause on it and assist in your operation.
Take a young man around the age of 30 who has pain in his loins, and from within the parts there is bad matter that extends to the material inside the body to reach the loins, and it is an abscess with a large abscess, and it was not caused externally.
Therefore, the time was extended for the abscess due to the error of the doctors until the abscess had healed, and then, from that matter, a large number of motes appeared, and its healing was delayed until the hernia became fistulated, and all kinds of pus and humors came out.
And after two years, many doctors were treating him, not in wisdom but in skill, until I was called.
And I saw the hernia and the matter that flowed out of those fistulas with a great abscess; and the body of that man was completely stabilized, and his complexion was yellowish.
And then I inserted a probe into one of the fistulas and reached the bone.
And I immediately searched for all the fistulas and found that they were connected to all the parts of the hernia.
And then I took and cut into one of the fistulas, and found a bone piece, which was already rotten, earthy, and decayed; and it had already been corrupted in part of the hernia that had penetrated into the membrane.
And then I cut out the piece of bone that was exposed and prepared for me.
And I dug out what was not bone but the corruption that had been excised and cut off, and I had already drained it.
Then I paused the healing of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, but it was not healed.
And I re-explored and found bone again in the second exploration, but I continued to find corruption with the bone.
And I removed what appeared of that corruption, and then I was determined to make the healing and restoration, but it was not restored.
And then I examined again and did not cease to explore the bone little by little in detail, and made the healing and restoration of it, but it was not restored until I explored around a palm's width, and that extracted with its marrow, and then I restored it with medicine, and it healed slightly and was cured.
And there was no need for further exploration and incision of the operation and section of it, only by the disposal of the weakness of it and the lack of its tolerance and fear of death, because in all hours it happened due to excessive sweating and bad fainting.
And thus it is healed by complete healing, and nothing remains in the place of hard bones; and good positioning is made for it within its body and the virtue is returned to it; and it is maintained in its positions and no harm or inconvenience is done to it in walking or any cause.
However, if the bone is protruding in the body and already fractured, then it is necessary that you cut it as follows: take a sharp instrument and hold it at the end of the protruding bone, command someone to extend it; place a thick linen bandage over the skin surrounding the bone, draw the skin apart from the bone, revealing the skin over the area where you want to suture, so that the skin does not get injured during suturing.
Stop a piece of wood or a table beside the bone appropriately, because when you do this it is not forbidden to use a knife that does not cut corrupt flesh.
It is necessary that the suturing be done on the small corrupt area little by little, because if it is in the concavity of the corrupt bone and does not appear in its appearance to the senses, and possibly the other side may need stitching as well.
If the bone is corrupt and not protruding, then there is a continuous division between the two parts, and the corruption is in one or both parts of it; then you should cut open all the skin completely; place a piece of wood beside it, and stitch the first part where the corruption extends as far as the stitching continues in the other part.
And let the stitching be done according to the location of the corruption, as I have said.
If the corruption is at a joint, cut the corrupt joint and stitch the bone where it is continuous with the other part.
If the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not reasonable but rather a trick (or deceit).
If the corruption is in the chest or foot, it is difficult; however, you must investigate the corruption in whatever way it appears to you and cut it open and clean it according to each situation that is possible for you, and with every trick be corrected such that it does not harm veins or nerves.
And you should know which saws and needles are suitable for cutting these bones, according to the position of the bones, their preparation, the size, the subtlety and the thickness or thinness, and their hardness and rarity; therefore it is necessary that you prepare all types of surgical instruments appropriate for each operation.
And you should know that this operation signifies for you the type of instrument that is needed; when you have great study, experience and knowledge of the techniques of this art, and have observed various methods of illnesses, then you already have what is suitable for each illness with regard to the instruments.
And I remind you, at the end of this chapter, the number of instruments that you will need, and those that you will use as simple ones for the procedures that you will perform according to your discretion, which you will experiment on the others. Type of saw:
Type of another saw:
Type of large saw:
Shape of a rod / staff Let the head of this rod be in the shape of a cross-headed nail and its points like those of a thistle (or star).
It is not necessary except when the joints are inflamed or wide open.
Shape of smaller scissors (or forceps):
Shape of long scissors (or forceps):
Shape of another saw suitable for cutting bone: Shape of the (cautery) iron:
Shape of scissors with a concavity:
Shape of thin scissors (or forceps):
Shape of scissors with curved tips (or forceps):
Shape of small scissors resembling tweezers (or forceps):
Shape of small incision scissors (or forceps):
Shape of another pair of incision scissors (or forceps); this one resembles a rod and the tip is shaped like a saw, and it is used in multiple locations when cutting bones:
Shape of rod suitable for drilling through bones (or bone bit):
And the tip is triangular and sharp-edged (or pointed).
And it is made of Indian iron, and it is covered like all the causes we have mentioned regarding scissors, forceps, and saws (in other words, it is coated or treated similarly to these tools).
For incising bone edges (or cutting through bone) and securing bones together with sutures (or stitches).
When a limb is damaged due to an intrinsic or extrinsic cause (such as disease or injury), and the damage does not respond to treatment with medicine, or if the damage persists without any apparent cause, you must amputate that member through it to avoid further infection or worsening of the condition. The patient will escape death or prolonged suffering due to the loss of the limb.
And the sign of this condition is that the limb becomes black before it can be cauterized (or burned), or it putrefies quickly into the member and spreads throughout the body, causing the entire body to rot and die. Therefore, take care to amputate the affected area as soon as possible.
Similarly, if the cause of the corruption is poison from sources such as sea scorpions, viper venom, or various other dangerous animals, the same procedure applies (in other words, amputation may be necessary to save the patient's life).
If the corruption or injury is in the fingertip, you must amputate the tip of the finger and do not allow space for the corruption to spread into your hand.
If you reach the arm (or shoulder), you must amputate at the joint of the elbow and do not allow space for the corruption to spread into the upper arm.
If the patient's condition worsens, you should make an incision on the arm at the joint.
If the disease spreads to the joint of the arm, then for the patient it is death; and administering another remedy in treatment is like giving quantity without virtue.
As with the foot when disease spreads to the joint of the foot, you should then make an incision into one of the toes.
If swelling appears on the foot, you should make an incision on the entire foot. But if there is inflammation within the nail, you should make an incision into the finger joint at its base.
If the disease has spread over the nail, it is not treatment but dismissal; and you should allow the patient to die.
The method of incising a member or sewing it is that you tighten the ligament at the part where you want to incise, and tighten another ligament on the location; extend one ligament at the parts where you have incised, and extend the other ligament on top; separate the flesh that is between the two ligaments using a spatula or blade so that all the flesh is exposed; and then either incise or sew.
It is necessary to place cloth on all the parts so that it does not touch the raw area, and bring the wound dressed and covered with a cauterized dressing to the patient.
But if there is bleeding when working, you should cauterize the area immediately, or place some powder on it to stop the bleeding; and return to your treatment until it is complete.
And bind the affected member with suitable ligament, and heal it until it is healed.
I recommend that you apply this remedy to a man in his foot, which I also recommend, as it occurs when there is blackening in the foot due to a blister resembling burning by fire.
That disease first appears in the affected part and then spreads over the entire foot.
And then that man, prepared for himself, places on the affected member as much as is necessary to cure it and goes to the limb with the intensity of the pain and burning sensation from it, and incises the foot at its joint, and heals.
For a long time that remedy causes that destructive disease in the indicated hand.
And therefore it comes to me, and I, performing this remedy, perceive the excess in the hand of medicines, and the superfluity does not spread, but rather begins in the other affected area when it begins in the hand.
And he asked me to incise the hand of that patient, but I did not want to do it, fearing the spread of the superfluity, and instead feared the incision of the patient's hand was death, as the virtue of the disease was in doubt.
And when he lost hope in me, he returned to his country and I was informed that the man prepared himself and incised his entire hand, and healed.
I have not added to this story except as an aid to understanding this disease, and as a signification by which it may be understood and acted upon.
Of the cure of sinews and the quality of clysers with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in any fleshy member and the space of the abscess is prolonged until drainage of pus occurs, and it is broken and perforated, and the pus is drained out, leaving a void like a vessel, and a fine linen cloth is placed over it as a dressing, and no further corruption occurs, and it does not press on the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and not a fistula.
But if the space is prolonged until corruption enters any member, it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
The cure is to incise that cloth all around as it is rolled up, and especially when it is fine and made like fabric, and ensure that it does not adhere to the location due to its corruption.
But if you hope that the cloth adheres and that the corruption has not been achieved by further consequences, and there is putrefaction in the cloth, you should treat it with a clyster.
You should consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the odor is foul-smelling, you should treat it with an Egyptian clyster made of oil and wine and garlic in parts, which are placed in a vessel, and then heated over the fire until the medicine becomes fragrant and purified.
And you should take that which is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and treat the sinus with the clyster, and tighten the orifices of it, and leave the medicine in it for the duration of two hours.
And you should remove that with care; and do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the smell has subsided.
And sometimes it is clysterized with water of ashes when this medicine is not present; and you should take the ashes of figs, put them in water, and then boil that until you are convinced that the sinus has subsided.
And if the patient does not tolerate Egyptian medicine or water from ashes, then cleansing should be done with a mixture of water and honey infused with zinc oxide, and cleaning should be done with a mixture of vinegar and honey, because honey has the property of purifying and washing, and vinegar makes adhesion stronger, especially where there is an excess of stiffness and dryness.
And when you find that the sinus has been relaxed for some time and you are comforted, then perform cleaning with water that causes flesh to rise up.
It is taken that you take digestive drugs and dissolve it with rose oil and stiffening vinegar, or that you cleanse it with certain medications and other enemas that have the properties already written in the treatise on enemas.
When the orifice of the sinus is narrow and the cannula of the enema cannot be inserted, you should gradually widen it with a small iron tool, pausing where necessary and wrapping it in Egyptian or Basilican oil until it is wide enough.
And similarly, if the orifice is wide, you should attach the lips of it with stitches and leave a certain amount in which no further addition of enema is made.
And if the orifice of which the arm extends above the joints is moist, you should dry it in the area where the arm can run into the joint below, because when the arm is constricted by the sinus, flesh is generated there.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus in the area of the bone as desired, you must prepare the limb by preparing it with the appropriate preparation so that the arm can move easily according to your plan and there is no obstacle in the way of the arm.
The one that is on the orifice of the sinus, which you keep moist at all times so that it drains whatever is in the area of the arm. And to know if what comes from the arm is liquid or little, or digested, or undigested.
And at this point, you consider the location of the sinus, if the patient feels pain there or not, and whether there is an abscess there.
And when your treatment is prolonged in this way, and you see that the matter exuded on the orifice of the sinus has already adhered, or shows signs of adhesion, you should remove it or after three days, and when you remove the dressing, you change the fabric and renew the enema.
But if the sinus has large spaces and there is subtle virus, do not despair of adhesion, because healing approaches, because some people have slow generation of flesh in their wounds, and from those comes the opposite.
And if the sinus has not healed for several days and the arm remains undigested, you should know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and prolonged, you should dry out the medications, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and properties, they will become dry like Egyptian enema, where there is an excess of addition of zinc oxide.
And the last one that is cured is that you take Egyptian enema and dissolve it in rose oil, mix it with ancient wine in its substance, apply it to the wound, and use it.
And do the same in that action when there is no arm, using Egyptian enema, honey until it thickens, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe and grind everything to a powder and sprinkle it over the honey until it is heated, and apply it with linen on fabric and strengthen it on the sinus; and sprinkle that with the honey until it thickens, and grind it into powder and sprinkle it on fabric and strengthen it.
And sometimes administer it with long aristology and reason of celestial lily (and this is celestial lily) and flour of iris and centaur, and use these simple or compound remedies, grind them and sift them and pulverize over the honey that has been recommended; and use it.
And if the sinus is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, you should know that corruption is in the joint of it, and you should then perform exploration of the bones or other hard members or ligaments; you should then treat it with fistula cure, as described above.
Of treatment for paronychia (infection around the nail) and abraded/trimmed nails, addition of incisions to the finger and surgical cuts.
The translation of the given sentence is: "Regarding treatment for paronychia (infection around the nail) and abraded/trimmed nails, if it lasts a long time and its cure is valuable or it becomes an abscess, or it becomes corrupted and penetrates into the nail bed that rots the root of the nail, and it corrupts entirely, and it spreads its corruption to the bone which produces a foul odor, and the tip of the finger is affected, and the color of it becomes dark."
Therefore, when you have the above-mentioned condition and it does not respond to your treatment, then it is necessary that you incise with an iron all the overgrown excess of the nail and cauterize the wound near it, because cauterization is beneficial in such cases.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and you wish to remove the excess of the nail which presses on the surrounding flesh, and it begins to hurt and inflame it thereafter, then it is necessary that you place a thin tool beneath the angle of the nail that penetrates the flesh, and push it upwards and incise the affected flesh with ease, and place a curettage tool on what remains of the affected flesh filled with corrosive medicines until it is completely removed; and treat the affected area with ointments until it heals.
But if the corruption has entered the bone, then it is necessary that you incise the bone and remove it, because there is no cure when the bone is corrupted.
And if the corruption and decay spread to the finger, you incise it in one of the joints according to the affected area, and apply a cure until it heals.
But if the nail becomes percussive or abraded and causes intense pain, you should initially anesthetize the patient, and then cut the nail with a sharp instrument in a transverse section from top to bottom, taking care not to cut into the skin beneath the nail, because you will cause the patient intense pain, and this may lead to the growth of excess skin in the affected area; and treat the affected area with whatever reduces pain.
However, if it is congenital (meaning it was born with this condition), which occurs in some men, it is all flesh and bone, or it is in the bone or the nail.
And those who are born with such a condition have their roots in the joint, or it is congenital in some of the aforementioned cases. But if it is congenital in some of the fingers, it is not harmful, but if it is born in joints, it is harmful.
And of those who are born with flesh-like growths, the incision is easy, and it is necessary that you remove the root with a long blade.
But of those who are born in the joint roots, the cure is difficult; therefore, avoid abscessing it.
But when it occurs in fingers, you should first incise the flesh of it with a round cut to the bone, and then use a suitable saw, and apply a cure until it heals.
Consolidation that occurs in the aforementioned places due to observed motes or congenital conditions of the human who is born with such, or due to consolidation of a wound or burn, or something similar; therefore, it is necessary to remove the consolidation until the aforementioned areas return to their natural form.
And place a layer of fine lead between the infected layers and saturate them with red oil to prevent consolidation easily; separate the layers, or insert a thin sheet of lead between them until it is consolidated as required.
Similarly, if consolidation occurs in some of the places with the palm, you should remove the consolidation as prepared and appropriate for the shape of the member.
Incisions are various (meaning they can be many different things).
Varices (meaning swollen and filled with melancholic waste veins) are various, and they become knotted large veins full of superfluous matter in the members of the body, and the major event occurs in the legs, especially in those who are traveling, working, or carrying heavy loads.
Therefore, you should administer purge of the body with black bile several times with strong force, and apply bloodletting to the patient from the basilic vein.
But the treatment of such with iron is according to two methods: one is that it should be incised and the black blood drawn out, and the other method is that the vein should be raised and the entire thing extracted.
The incision method is as follows: first, encircle the leg with hot water until the black blood (feculent matter from the vein) is resolved, and then firmly bind the patient's leg at the most elevated part of the thigh to the lower hip area with a bandage, and cut the vein in one, two, or three places with a wide incision, and raise the black blood with the strong hand above the leg from below to above until the desired amount is drained, which will remove the power of the illness.
Approach her and command her to abstain from foods causing black bile generation.
Repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this is noticed by the patient.
The elevation is done in this way: you who are examining the patient's thigh, if there is swelling, bring warm water and immerse the thigh up to the knee with hot water until it swells and veins appear; or exercise can be performed if warm water is not available, until the member is scalded.
Approach the area directly above the vein for incision along its length or near its end, or at the base of the vein you should cut the artery.
Approach the area with a sharp knife and excise the vein in its entirety until it can be felt, and recognize that it is blackening when it descends into darkness.
Therefore, when you see the area where it is white, you will find a cord.
Approach it and place the lance into it until it is raised and withdrawn from the incision, then hold it with a hook or a lion's tooth.
Approach another incision next to the first one, cutting through three times, and excise the vein above the vessel where it appears.
Approach it and raise the part to make an incision in the rear section where the artery is, then extract it and elevate it until it emerges through the second incision, and extract it from the incision that is over it.
Continue this process until you extract it from the incision that is above the other incisions or all of them, and then make an incision there.
If it does not oblige you to extract and elevate, insert a thick double-edged needle or hold the lance in place with your hand and rotate it all around until it is withdrawn. Be careful not to make an incision as it may be difficult to raise the part if it is broken, and this could cause harm to the patient.
When the entire part has been withdrawn, pause over the wound that is covered in wool soaked in vinegar and both red and white oil, and treat it until it heals.
If the vein is contracted due to a twist with which it is enclosed around the parts, and not according to what has been said, then you must cut through it on all sides of the twist and at the points of enclosure, and suspend it with a hook until you elevate it completely.
Be careful to make the incision without cutting the vein or harming it, as it will be difficult to raise it; and use your prudence in this matter.
The shape of the incision where the cut vein is:
It is not appropriate to use hooks or objects with a sharp tip because it could harm the vein; and it should be of thick flexibility, as if it were too thin, it would cut the vein due to its thinness; having excessive thickness, as has been said, is unnecessary.
Extraction of the leg vein.
This vein is generated in the thighs in warm lands, such as those of the East (Arabia) and India's dry and barren territories with little vegetation or rainfall.
And weak veins are generated in other parts of the body, other than the thighs.
The cause of this is putrefaction that comes from the wound, as venom inside the body snakes and worms such as scorpions and parasites generate between the skin and flesh.
The sign of the susceptibility of this event is swelling in the thigh, and the area becomes inflamed; and the vein begins to emerge from the site of that inflammation, resembling a plant.
And when the extremity appears, it is necessary that you cover it with a piece of lead weighing approximately two drachms. Insert it and leave it suspended on the thigh.
For as many days as there is any cause on the parts outside, wrap it with lead. If the part does not heal, make an incision and cover the remaining part; do not make another incision until it emerges entirely from outside, as if you make another incision, it becomes contracted and enters the flesh, causing abscesses, pus, ulceration, and bad wounds.
Because it must be treated gently and removed little by little until it is completely expelled from the body without any cause remaining in the body.
From this vein, blood has come out in some men whose length is about five palms and it has been reported to me that one of twenty palms has issued forth.
And if it is incised at the time of its treatment, insert the probe into the wound and penetrate deep into the body with a long probe until everything contained in the matter has been evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for some days with medicines; and apply care to that area as for the cure of abscesses.
This vein often gives rise to sores, and moreover when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, many offensive discharges come out from it, and blood is issued forth from each discharge.
Therefore, treat this as I have said in the division and with what has been mentioned above.
From a section on worms generated beneath the skin and it is called bovine disease.
This disease is called bovine disease in some places because it often occurs in cattle and is a worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and it goes up and down throughout the body and is manifested by sensation in one member after another until it breaks through the skin and comes out.
And its generation is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, such as worms and snakes and tapeworms and roundworms in the stomach.
And it is feared due to its malice because when it moves through the body and rises to the head, it reaches the brain, at which point it immediately vomits bile into it and destroys the brain, and this causes many diseases.
And therefore when you want to cure it and remove the worm, it should not be done unless its movements and appearances at sensation are known, and then it is necessary to strengthen what is above it and what is below it with force and pressure, and apply heat to it and remove the worm.
If it is fastened in the flesh and not absorbed, then you pause with a heated cautery over the area until it dies, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of the place, which corrupts the area as I have said above.
If you find the creature approaching the head near the brain, then apply strong pressure and tight binding to the forehead, and apply heat to it and remove the creature; and the patient must use purification of the body with medicines that evacuate impure humors and avoid foods that generate putrefaction.
From a section on disease of the nose.
This disease is called nafir in our land, and it is pain that occurs in some members and it is transmitted from member to member.
And you have already seen that which I recommended. A physician was summoned to a sick woman at a village, he uncovered her arm and found a small inflammation on the basilic vein of the arm, and since it had been cut for an hour, I saw that inflammation swell as if worms were crawling towards it, but less noticeably than it should be, like if it was live silver moving from place to place.
And then the pain of that spot spread into the muscle and remained there for an hour.
And place your other hand on the opposite chest to reach the other arm.
And I recommend that you turn your entire body around as I saw, and it was very marvelous of the change and the rapid movement of one member to another. And I had already seen this method in the most hidden places, but I have also seen many that suffer pain when the movement of limbs is changed. But I did not see it in women as much as I did in men.
And I did not think it was because the woman was old, as her body and veins were exposed, and in this case, the sensation of windiness appeared due to the movement change.
And it is necessary that this reverse cure does not appear in those who are delicate and have soft bodies with weakened veins.
And as you want the cure of it, and the patient feels that pain, then do not use heat on that place as we said, but rather apply strength to it gently and cold on it inside until the windiness is released, and cauterize the spot.
But if you do not see it in your hidden places, then cure it with the help of an emetic and something that expels windiness, and sing a song with pills made of opium poppy and similar things.
Of extracting the sweat glands (sweat ducts).
Sweat glands (sweat ducts) are diverse depending on the species and location in the body where they are found, because their variety is that some have large points, small, concave, soft, solid; and of those with three angles, and those with tongues; and those with teeth.
And the signs of the liver are when you find a sweat gland and pierce the bone, and it is released from the cavity which is above the brain, as it happens violently with severe headache, blindness, dizziness, fever in the hidden parts, inflammation and fever of the tongue, convulsions and confusion of mind, vomiting of bile, speech becomes weak and destroyed, and the voice is lost, and there is released from the wound place white moisture like powder, and eyes like watery flesh.
Therefore, if these symptoms appear to you, then you should avoid the cure and the removal of the sweat gland, unless it is absolutely necessary.
When the arrow strikes the heart, being near the left breast, and it is found embedded in a hard cause and not a vein; and its movement resembles the movement of the pulse, and black pus flows from the wound, and that heat of the extremities, shivering, and fainting occur; then know that death approaches swiftly.
And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung and produces sputum of blood from the wound, and the neck vessels are compressed, and the patient's color changes, and exhales a great sigh, and asks for cool air.
And if the arrow strikes the padding on the foot and pain occurs near the small ribs, and it produces a great and violent pain and heavy sigh, but the rest of the limbs are not affected by the muscle.
And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then there will be much vomiting of undigested food.
And if the arrow strikes the abdomen and becomes embedded, then there will be a tear in the wound, or cloth, or intestine that is torn apart, and there is no hope for recovery from extracting the arrow.
And if the arrow strikes the bladder and is excreted outside through urine, and some cause is processed outside of it, then know that it is fatal for the patient.
But other members such as the face, neck, throat, jaw, shoulders, and their similar parts, such as the spine, furcula, hip, pelvis, and limbs are saved according to the greater dispositions if the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not poisonous.
And I advise you that I have seen this type of arrow, so it is a sign for your cure.
The cause is that in a man an arrow struck the lacrimal duct of the nose at its root, and I extracted it from the other side, leaving behind the hair of the eyebrow, and he was healed, and no harm came to his nostril.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who it struck in the hair of his eyelid, leaving behind the eyelash, and the arrow was already embedded and could not be removed except for a small tip that adhered to its shaft, and it was a sharp arrow of Turkish arrows with a lion head without eyebrows.
The Jew was saved, and no harm came to his eyelid.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian who it struck in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, with eyebrows; and then I incised it between two grooves, and it was already submerged in the throat of the man; and then I sharpened it with that, and carefully extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who it struck in the stomach, and thought he would die by that; but after passing thirty days without any change in his condition due to his dispositions, I incised it and pushed on it, and he was healed, and no harm came to him.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow struck his back, and the wound was healed over it; and after about seven years, the arrow was expelled from the groin.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow struck her stomach, and the wound healed within it, and there was no change in her condition in three months, and the woman suffered no harm in any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow struck his face, and the wound healed and the arrow was removed, but there was no great pain, but similar symptoms occurred.
And I extracted the arrow from the man of the king who it struck in the middle of his nose and had already declined slightly to the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
And I was called to treat him after the arrow wound for three days.
And then I probed the wound of the arrow with a sharp instrument, and did not feel it; but he felt a prick to the right eyebrow, and so I hoped that the prick was from the tip of the arrow.
And I plugged the hole with a styptic and digestive ointment, hoping that the hole would close so that it appears to me the location of the arrow, so that it can be cut off.
And it does not happen in the place where an accident occurred that the lance has reached that place; and you continue with the plaster over it for many days, and no other accident occurs; and the wound heals gradually, and the patient recovers from the extraction within several days until one day they feel the lance in their nose and recognize this to me.
And then apply sharp and corrosive medication to the wound for many days until pus emerges, and with the probe you try to find the tip, and extract the subtle point which is sticking to the shaft.
Then you adjust the opening of the wound with that sharp and corrosive medication until the tip of the lance becomes visible to me, and pass time for four months with this while waiting for my response.
Then let the pus drain from the wound and make it larger so that I can insert forceps into it, and leave them there without moving, then you do not stop sharpening and designing on that with various means of engineering until one day with methods of engineering you grasp it with forceps skillfully made, according to the form that will come at the end of the chapter, until you extract it; and then restore the wound.
And some physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I will restore it, and the wound heals, and the patient recovers completely by entire health, and suffers in no way due to this.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting certain lances, regarding which you should follow my rule and significance on what I have not said, because the divisions of this art and the definitions of that are not comprehensible by narrative nor do they comprehend these books.
And the skilled craftsman compares much with little; and with what is presented he understands what is absent, and recognizes new operations and new instruments that are necessary for the descent of foreign causes of this art when they occur.
And so I say that lances are not forgotten in the members in which they are inserted except in two ways: either by attraction of the place where it entered, or by the opposite side of the other division.
And the one that is inserted by the place where it entered, or is a lance proceeding from a fleshy place and shot out and forgotten.
And if you do not remove it immediately at the time of capture, then you must leave it for some days until the flesh around it can become necrotic and its attraction and escape are alleviated.
Similarly, if it is inserted into bone and you do not remove it immediately, then you must leave it for some days and move it with attraction and touch every day, and it will be forgotten.
And if you do not remove it immediately, then you must perforate around the lance in all parts of that bone with a very sharp tool until the space is expanded by the lance, and then extract it.
But if the lance is hidden in the chest and cannot be felt, then you examine it with a probe, and if you feel it, then you shoot it out with various instruments suitable for its attraction.
And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the probe, and here there is no bone, nerve or vein, then you make an incision on the wound until it is expanded and possible to extract the lance.
And if there are auricles present where it is located, then you remove the flesh around it in all directions with all the tools you can; and engage in this, if you cannot reach it through the exit of the flesh in fracture of the auricles and twisting of those until it obeys.
And when you administer the extraction of the lance in any place where it is, then you use twisting of your hand with forceps on all sides until it obeys; and sharpen it with subtle skill that the lance is not broken and that it is made difficult to attract it and extract it.
And if you cannot remove it immediately, then you leave it for some days until the parts that are around it can be prepared, and you move it, which is alleviated. But if it causes countercurrent flow of blood, then you administer what I have said for treatment in his chapter.
Care for the incision of vein or nerve, or tendon, and provide means in every way possible to prevent the escape of pus; do so with ease, tranquility, slowness, and firmness as I and you recommend.
Furthermore, compress the pus to ensure that the patient is in a figure similar to the one in which the pustule should be, because it is more beneficial. But if that's not possible for you, administer what's possible according to the figures (or shapes).
But the pustules that are on the opposite side of another part, or those that have proceeded from another part to the outer parts, or the edges of the pustule turn green due to feeling pain in the area above the public bone and sometimes it becomes prominent; then you incise over it; and make the incision according to the amount that forceps take; and tie it up, as it is made easily removable.
But if it is retained in the bone, then you twist the knife opposite to where the pustule enters the bone, and expand it as much as possible, and then extract it.
If that's not the case, leave it for several days and then return it into what comes out (or drainage).
And if the pus is in the cavity of the pustule, then you push it out (or drain it).
But if the pus is pressed and you want to administer drainage, then enter and press it with a concave instrument in order that the concavity of the instrument enters the cavity of the pustule and then push it out (or drain it).
But if the pustule is concave, then you push it out (or drain it) with a strong instrument entering into it, as the pustule is relieved by that.
And if the pustule is constricted (or contracted), then you must expand all the flesh in which it is located, if that's possible for you, and take care of it with what is appropriate.
And if the pustule is in the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the chest, and is close to where you can touch it with your hand, and it's possible to incise over it, then you should incise over it and be careful not to make an incision of a vein or nerve, extract it, and sew up the wound if necessary, and take care of it until it is healed.
The shape of the forceps used for extracting pustules:
Let the ends of them (the forceps) be like an eagle's beak, shaped as a saw, when they take hold of the pustule to prevent it from slipping out.
And of those (the forceps), there are made small, large, few and medium-sized motes, according to the size of the pustule and its depth, and the width of the wound, and the degree of constriction.
Like a rod to relieve the entrance into the concave pustule and press it with that (the instrument).
Of phlebotomy of veins.
The veins for phlebotomy, it is customary to perform phlebotomy on the following thirty (30). of which it is in the head, 16 [parts] these are the two pulsating veins, which are close to the ears, called the temporal arteries; there are also two herbs that appear on the temples; and there are two veins that are in the tear ducts of the two eyes, called excretory veins; there is a vein prepared at the midpoint of the forehead, and another vein at the tip of the nose; there are two guiding veins at the neck; there are two veins under the upper lip; there are two veins under the lower lip; these are the veins that are called angular; and there are also two veins below the tongue. the veins that are lanced in the arms are 5 [veins]. One of those is the cephalic vein, and it is the latissimus dorsi muscle; the common people call it "the vein of the head," and it is a large vein, composed of one branch from the basilic, and another branch from the cephalic; it is commonly called "the vein of the entire body," the basilic is stopped at the latissimus dorsi muscle, and is known as "subclavian," and the common people call it "vein of the abdomen"; the brachial artery, which is in the elbow joint, and is the one that is punctured, and it is the one that appears above the point clearly; the cephalic vein is also present, located between the large auricle and the small finger.
And in the foot and ankle there are three veins: one of them is behind the bend of the elbow, the second is the saphenous, whose location is below the ankle joint of the leg; and the sciatic vein, whose location is below the bend of the elbow on the other side; in the ankle there are also other veins similar to these.
The junction of the veins that are near the ears is associated with ancient and migraine-related catarrhs, scrofula, and old ulcers on the head.
The quality of bleeding that you recommend in this case is as follows: shave the patient's head, wash the patient's head at the occipital region where both veins are wide and well-rubbed; firmly hold the patient's neck with a bandage so that their ears appear at two pressed locations on the head; and ask for that area with your words, and if you feel those areas with your fingers, here is where to try.
Then take the sharp knife and use it to make an incision at the location where the vein is hidden within the coccyx, until the blood flows out towards the bone. Then lift your hand with the vein and coccyx to the joints above and make an incision into the vein, cutting deeply. And let the length of the incision be approximately two fingers' width or thereabouts; drain the blood as much as you wish.
Then press on the pulp and hold it until it is healed.
And the incision and subsequent cauterization of these veins and the coccyx has been explained at the beginning of this treatise.
But the two arterial veins that are in the temples benefit from bloodletting are old, harmful, and frequent ailments such as migraines and chronic eye problems caused by fluid accumulation in the head.
The quality of bloodletting these veins is as follows: hold the patient's head motionless until both veins appear to your perception and are clearly felt with your fingers; then ask for them by name, and if you feel those areas with your fingers, here is where to try.
Then lift the coccyx over the vein at the joints above, as you have indicated with your words, and make an incision into the vein below, lifting the vein up; cut it in the same way you have done with the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to your need.
Then release the patient's restraint and place your hand on the vein for an hour, pressing firmly over that area; hold it in place with strong pressure until it is healed.
And the recalling of these veins and their incision, as well as their attraction, has been explained at the beginning of this treatise.
And therefore, bloodletting of the forehead vein is similar to bloodletting of the sagittal vein for old facial diseases such as migraines, chronic pain, and putrid ulcers.
And the quality of bloodletting there is as follows: hold the patient's head motionless with a bandage until the vein appears; then take the instrument that is called a lancet, which has this shape:
Press the pointed end of the lancet that is at the tip of the instrument onto the vein and puncture it with a slight angle or by some other means in its manner, allowing the blood to flow as much as you wish; then release the perforation of the patient and hold it until it is healed.
Sometimes the vein is opened with a lancet, but it is not necessary for the lancet to have an acute tip like other lancets; rather, the tip should be wide and the bloodletting done transversely, because the bone is close and strong and could easily break if the lancet is thin.
But the benefit of the two veins that are in the tear ducts of both eyes for scabies of the eyelids due to pain and inflammation in the eyelids, and facial diseases, is not as great as for other parts of the body.
And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient holds their head motionless with a bandage and you make the incision there; you stand above the patient's head.
And make the bloodletting incision transversely, but narrow and shallow because there is little flesh in that area; if the incision is thin, it can easily be broken.
Allow the blood to flow as much as you need, press firmly over that area for a new day, and release it afterwards.
But bloodletting of the nasal vein is suitable for acute fever and violent vomiting, as well as facial diseases, chronic pain, and migraines that occur in the face, especially when they are old.
And the quality of bloodletting there is that the patient holds their head motionless and you hold their nose with your left hand, taking a thin, long lancet and placing it in the middle of the bridge of the nose where the vein cannot be felt, because the blood begins to flow immediately.
You must finish the bloodletting slowly with the thin lancet and allow the blood to flow as much as you need, holding it for a night because it recovers quickly.
But the benefit of bloodletting in these two veins is for the treatment of alopecia, the onset of leprosy, various diseases such as epilepsy and palsy, and inflammatory and corrosive ulcers like herpes.
And the quality of bloodletting those veins is that the patient holds both in their neck tightly; the craftsman stands above the patient's head, and the patient lies on a bed.
Approach the vein along its length with a wide and shallow phlebotomy, then extract blood according to a moderate quantity or as needed; make it similar to the other vein.
Then untie the bandage and straighten out both veins with a moderate constriction to prevent the patient from being suffocated; leave them in for the morning until the wound is healed.
The aid of the phlebotomy on the veins is also to apply small abscesses and pustules from the mouth and corruption of the gums, as well as bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
The quality of the phlebotomy is that it should stop the pain of the patient before you, tighten his neck with a bandage, and then gently pull back his lips and observe both veins, one of which is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of both, and it is more so because there are many small black veins around those veins; and then make an incision in each with a cut.
But if there is doubt, and you do not know which one it is, then make an incision in the larger of the two, and from the pus manifested by that one.
Make the same appearance on both veins that are on the lips above.
But the aid of those two veins below the tongue is also to perform phlebotomy on the cephalic in cases of suffocation that are in the throat, mouth illness, and mouth sores.
The quality of phlebotomy on those is that the patient should lie between your hands and the sole, raise his tongue from him, look below his tongue, between one side of the vein and the other side, and the color of each is gradually darkening.
And then perform phlebotomy on each one; and be careful not to press too hard in phlebotomizing those, because they are arteries below.
And your veins that are phlebotomized in the neck are those on which it is customary for all men, and phlebotomy of them is done according to two methods, or apply mirtil berries or olive oil with decreasing subtlety; or bleed with a phlebotomy knife, calling it alnessil, and this is its method:
sometimes the sides of it may be like that, and it is necessary to open the concave veins full of visible blood that contain thick clotted blood.
This phlebotomy is smaller and has finer ends, and it is necessary for the phlebotomy of thin veins that contain fine clotted citrus juice.
The assistance of the phlebotomy of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: for it extracts blood from the sick areas that are the gallbladder and neck, and from what swells the feet and stomach.
It is necessary for the phlebotomist, when performing the procedure, to be careful as it contains an artery and if he makes a mistake or accidentally punctures an artery while doing the phlebotomy, it will cut the artery and cause bleeding, thus it is not advisable to perform a phlebotomy on that without first making an incision with a lancet.
If the basilic vein is not clearly visible, it is necessary that you search for one of its branches or find another vein; or perform phlebotomy in the end of the arm as it is clearly visible, and cut it with a lancet as we have said.
However, if you wish to perform a phlebotomy in the cubital fossa, it is necessary before the narrow part of the arm to find the location between the wrist and touch the place, then place your hand over it with a cloth; place the arm and cut the vein with a concave incision using a lancet as we have said; and be careful not to hit the percussion in the area of the artery.
And when you feel tension in the ligament, inflation appears at the place where you have placed the cloth, then that inflation is the inflation of an artery, and therefore it subsides.
And if you see blood flowing in the phlebotomy like urine of a child and the blood is thin and red, then know that it is arterial blood; and then you must hold your hand over it for a long time and apply pressure on it; and then remove your hand, if the blood continues to flow, since it has been cut, you should tighten the arm and leave it.
Keep the patient dry from moisture, be careful of him and do not allow him to get wet for several days until he is healed.
However, if the blood does not stop flowing and there is no medicine available for it, you should cut the artery if it appears to you; as the extremity becomes constricted, the blood stops flowing; or you can use a ligature, tie it and tighten it over the location of the vein with narrowness around the wrist and pulses towards the other side.
If the blood stops flowing, that is good; and if not, you should treat it with what was described earlier for the location of the powders to stop the flow of blood.
The stopping of the blood flow in that area is difficult due to the small size of the wound and the tightness of the ligament of the arm.
However, phlebotomy of the dark vein is beneficial as it extracts blood from the subclavian part of the head and the part below the chest, since it consists of branches of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
It is necessary for the phlebotomist to be careful in the procedure of that area as it contains a nerve; and if he makes a mistake and touches the nerve during the puncture of the vein, it will cause paralysis, and healing will be difficult, and severe damage may not heal completely. This nerve is often felt; and if it is hidden in some people and is subtle and not visible, then you should stop the phlebotomy with the incision made with a lancet, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, you should make an incision along its length.
The advantage of the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it extracts blood from the head and relieves headaches.
And in this way, if you want to perform a phlebotomy with an olive or a myrtle lancet; for it is safe for all veins, since it does not contain an artery or a nerve.
However, severe damage may occur in some people if not phlebotomized in the first percussion, but if not noticed in the second observation.
The first of these is that you should know that phlebotomy is only administered for the preservation of health and hope of recovery and precaution against diseases, and that it should be performed on one of the veins located in the elbow: cephalic, dark, or basilic; and it should be performed at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in the morning and autumn, and in winter near meals when signs of congestion appear.
And it should be performed on the third day or the first day after three hours have passed since eating.
More flebotomy, which is administered, more it provides convenience and necessity or not at night or during the day, in any hour and at any time.
It is necessary that the child not be bled before he is fourteen years old, and the pregnant woman should not be bled except during the fourth month to the seventh, and the elderly women should not be bled who have passed sixty years.
And whoever wishes to be bled by some method, it is necessary to clean the intestines before the bleeding with a lion's clyster, if there is any fissure retained in them, so that the superfluidities do not enter into the veins during the bleeding of the intestines, which are pure, and that they do not harm the main members.
Nor should the sick with nausea or vomiting, nor those suffering from disease or drunkenness be bled until this has passed, nor a patient with dropsy, and bleeding by flebotomy is feared near to colic passion and vomiting, and near the abdominal pain, and near the multiplication of the genital organs and labor, and exercise of fasting or vigils, and all causes that dissolve virtue, either corporeal or animal.
And it is necessary to consider the humors in the subtlety of food and drink, and medications if this is possible for them.
And enter into the bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise through some exercise to make the blood subtle.
Pause the bleeding from the feet during the day, as it is around the third hour, as we said.
And protect the feet of that person on that day from all animal and mental misfortunes, such as angst, anger, fear, and from all bodily troubles, such as labor, excessive pain, and genitals and similar to them.
And in his purse, prepare to be present with the causes in the use of which the custom of men is accustomed with aromatics and fragrances, and balms and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
Follow the blood-letter on a cushion that is placed under the one who should be bled.
And draw out the arm, and wash it with his hand, the blood-letter, twice or thrice; and tighten the linen bandage around it twice.
And the tying should be tempered, for the tying which is not tightened or the tying is with superfluidity, then you prohibit the flow of blood; or if it is with softening, and then you prohibit the core of the blood.
And in the tying, it is necessary that the one who should be bled washes his hands between them until the veins are inflamed and declared to the touch.
And the blood-letter anoints his fingers with a little of the old oil properly; and the person's left hand indicates the vein, away from the place where the bleeding is to be made, so that the vein flows slightly, and the percussion is stopped since it is one of the veins which swells in such a way as if cords flee, and from those it is which is full of venousness and when you pause the bleeding on that it contracts, and it is discovered the blood-letter; and the bleeding does not open the vein, and if it opens, that is tightened.
Therefore, for this reason, it is necessary that the blood-letter be fixed and examined in all these matters.
And pause the bleeding, but if the vein is punctured in one examination, it is good; and if not, you repeat this another time in the same place a little or quickly, if the place is not marked.
And if the place is marked or the patient feels pain, you leave it for a day or two and do not tighten the bandage strongly, since a strong wound draws out a wound cautery, nor enter into the bath.
And repeat the bleeding if necessary.
And if the opening is small and the blood flows gently, and you fear that not enough blood will come out, you repeat the bleeding in that place according to right and adjust it slightly, and do so quickly before the place is marked, since the place is marked in many men, fewer apertures should be made.
But if it is already marked, you do not repeat it, since there is no excuse for any reason; and pause on that some part of the oil fissure, since it relieves the core of the blood. And it is better in this place with oil and other oils.
And similarly administer oil fissure in all bleeding with which the prohibition of blood core is made to the veins, and do that turmeric alfaldoc and sage when it is stopped from one of those on the place, since the blood is subtle and is rotated when it is thick.
And if in the location of bleeding a large wound is generated, since many times it happens, especially to one who has not been bled before that, or in the vein fissure little, and then you catch, and wash on the place with infused sponge in water and salt, slightly scalded, and tighten it for an hour, since it is dissolved.
It is necessary to apply this to the suture of that vein's wound, or another vein's wound.
If it remains in the area for several days with any blackness or greenness, do not be concerned; if you wish, place something made of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or something made of juice from mint, camomile, or similar substances on it.
Every now and then abscesses and elevations occur; in such cases, perform basilica lancing.
Therefore place your hand on it, and if you find it soft, apply pressure on it. If you find that the elevation is bad, be careful to place something from what I said earlier on it, for a strong flow will come out of the artery.
Apply a plaster with what is astringent to harden the area, and care for it with another treatment until it heals.
It is necessary to extract blood from every person according to the quantity of its potency and according to the color that appears in the blood, as will be explained later.
For if the blood is black, allow it to settle until it turns red; and similarly, if you see it thick, allow it to settle until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, preserve its sharpness.
To the person who is full and strong and has a need for bloodletting on one occasion, the incision of the vein should be widened and the lancing should be deep.
And in the weak person, do the opposite of that, and it is necessary to extract it in many occasions, and let the puncture be narrow.
The best type of incision for vein lancing is a transverse section, not a puncture.
This method of vein lancing is safe from bleeding and nerve injury, and it is more approved and safer than vein lancing according to width and length.
In the case where fainting is common, perform vein lancing and care for it after the procedure with a piece of bread infused in milk of magnesia or simple oil softened; and extract blood from the vein in three to four occasions.
If there is congestion of the limbs, take something to drink before vein lancing infused in myrrh oil or sweetened honey with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and others, or scented and aromatic oil and a pleasing odor.
If fainting occurs due to excessive blood, it is necessary to perform vein lancing and drink water of meat and a subtle scented oil and use aromatics, and make his feet limp with it.
Use the other causes mentioned in the division on fainting for evacuation.
For the person who wishes to reduce their arm and dissolve their blood gradually according to an occasion, it is necessary for the one whose vein lancing is for excessive evacuation, and whose potency is weak, to remove the blood little by little, according to the quantity of potency in continuous days.
However, for the person who wishes to reduce their arm and expel blood gradually, and whose body is strong, do this approximately seven or nine hours after the first vein lancing.
However, for the person who wishes to increase the blood in their body contrary to the separation where it is deficient, it is necessary that this be reduced on the second or third day.
However, in the case where there is excessive and sharp blood in the body that causes fever, it is necessary to expel the blood from it once and in large amounts and widen the incision until fainting occurs, since you will have observed all the conditions of vein lancing; and place your hand on the pulse of it so that the heart does not stop beating due to fainting. This happens when the vein-lancer is ignorant and negligent in many occasions.
If you wish to release the arm and expel blood gradually according to an occasion, when the orifices of the vein are closed and it is difficult to extract blood from it, press strongly on it with vehemence and extend it slightly, for that is very bad.
Let it be left until it is lanced again; or remove what is coagulated in the orifices of the vein from the incision; or place something made of tarragon oil, or sage, and compress it gently until the blood flows out.
If the vein is abscessed, leave it alone and do not touch it until the abscess is healed.
If the need arises to expel blood again and there is no excuse, then make an incision on that location or in the other arm in another vein.
The vein called the "sinew of the arm" is lanced in the area of the cubit or basilica, when it is not contracted or hidden, for it is composed of these.
The quality of the vein lancing is that the patient immerses their hand in warm water until the probe becomes constricted and the vein becomes apparent.
And apply pressure firmly on that member which has a stricture in the middle; and perform fleybotomy according to the small transverse, not longitudinally or according to the length.
And make a wide opening and your fleybotomy should be done on that joint, a small one.
If the flow of blood is forbidden, then you should put your hand in warm water and allow the blood to flow into the water until you have reached your goal.
But if you are in the days of summer, you are excused from the hand's immersion in warm water, and the heart is stopped in warm water during winter.
The fleybotomy of this vein is saved compared to all the other veins, because after it there is no pulsating vein, nor nerve.
The fleybotomy of the cube of the right hand is given to patients with liver disease.
The quality of the fleybotomy is that you apply pressure to the member or your hand, since it has been placed in warm water until the vein is inflamed and clearly visible to the touch; then perform a transverse fleybotomy; and if you incise it all the way through, it will not be noticeable.
Be careful not to go too far with the hand during fleybotomy, because afterwards the nerves are exposed without flesh.
And place your hand in warm water and let the blood flow into it, because if you do not immerse the hand in warm water, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein and its flow will be forbidden.
When blood is drawn according to the amount needed, you should pause over the oil and salt vein to prevent it from coagulating excessively; similarly, you must do this in every narrow branch.
But the advantage of fleybotomy on that vein of the left hand is that it is given to patients with gallbladder disease.
Perform similarly in the fleybotomy of this as you have done in the other.
The advantage of the saphenous vein fleybotomy is for diseases located in the lower part of the body, such as those affecting the uterus and the retention of menses, and for the diseases of the lungs and ulcers of various parts and old sores, and their similar conditions.
The quality of the fleybotomy is that the patient immerses their foot in warm water and performs friction on it until the veins appear; then on the joint of the foot with a strap; and the location of the vein must be pressed, and from there it branches out into the surface of the foot many ways.
Therefore, fleybotomy should be performed on the ball of the foot or on the side of the calf, because it is better and cleaner.
If you perform fleybotomy on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are located below it, and pause your fleybotomy where you perform the transverse, just as if you wanted to incise it.
May the fleybotomies be useful.
But if bloodletting is forbidden, then immerse the foot in warm water and let the blood flow out of it until it has been evacuated.
If the fleybotomist makes a mistake in the first examination, then immerse it again in the fleybotomy for a short while, because the place is clean; and do not be afraid of trickery, but guard yourself against the nerves as we have said.
Similarly, perform on the saphenous vein of the other foot in the same way.
And for the sciatic vein, the location as we have said should be pressed below the wilderness of the hip.
The advantage of fleybotomy on this is for pain in the lower back when it is due to blood pressure.
The quality of the fleybotomy is that the patient immerses themselves in a bath, and they must press their buttocks tightly from the lower part of the back to above the ankles for four fingers, with a thin long bandage, which is not visible under it.
Therefore, when it appears, you should perform fleybotomy as seems best to you and according to the transverse, which is better; or incise or excise it by incision or excision, because the location is clean.
It is in many men weakened; and if you press it, and it is not noticeable by feeling, then perform fleybotomy on one of its branches, and that which appears between the foot and the "auricular" and "anular" (I'm not sure about these terms).
Be careful with the nerves and let the blood flow as much as you want.
Then remove the stricture and pause on the location of fleybotomy and press firmly, because it heals easily.
About ventosection and the qualities of using them.
Ventosections are for corns, or eruptions, or verrucas (warts).
Ventosection is performed in two ways: one by scratching and extraction of blood, and the other by ventosection without scratching.
This wounding that is called ventozacio is done in two ways, either by fire or without fire.
The twelve locations where wounding and bleeding are administered and extracted as ventozacio are the following: one in the place where ventozas are paused, which is at the back of the head, and it is the last division of the skull; the second location is from two parts of the neck; the third is at the chin after the jawbone, beyond the mouth; the fourth are at both spatulas; the fifth are at the alohoster, which is at the end of the buttock; the sixth are at two focils, which are two elbows' length; the seventh are at two cavilhas, which are the knees; and the eighth are at both cuoyssas.
Ventozation does not draw blood from the veins, but from small scattered vessels in the flesh, and therefore it does not obtain its virtue by this method, as is the case with phlebotomy; nor is it necessary to perform ventozation by fire or without fire in any disease caused by repletion until the entire body is evacuated.
However, if it is necessary to perform ventozation due to disease or continuity, administer it at any time in the beginning of the month and at its end, as well as in the middle and at some other time.
And therefore, when the above symptoms occur in any of these causes, and particularly if it is in the third or middle of the month, then command ventozation to be performed after two or three hours have passed.
In addition to the ventozation of the neck, when it causes heaviness in the head and causes the eyes to sink, it is necessary that this be accompanied by evacuation of the entire body.
This ventozation is at the site of phlebotomy in the head.
It is not proper to use it when there is complete bleeding or catarrh, as it causes great harm.
Therefore, it is not necessary to use this in the elderly and in heads where there are diseases that cause coldness.
However, in the case of continuous bleeding on that spot, it is necessary to command the ventozador to place his hand lightly over the ventosa at the sides, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
However, ventozation of the alkhekel is at the site of phlebotomy of the vena fusca and the basilica: and this causes coughing, constriction of the alkhekel and splitting of the alkhekel's sturment, as well as asthma, constipation, and repletion.
It is necessary to make a small incision in the ventozation of the alkhekel, for if it is paused too much, it generates weakness in the body and the stomach.
The ventozation of alhagdahan causes accidental pain in the head and otitis media, migraines, fevers, and dental pains; and it is at the site of phlebotomy of the basilica.
It is necessary to command the ventozador not to press his hand during wounding so as not to cut the artery and cause a flow of blood.
Ventozation under the chin causes alcohol in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and similar symptoms to the oral diseases that are located at the site of phlebotomy of alieric, which is between the lips.
However, the ventozation performed on both spatulas causes caphatan, which is caused by repletion of heat.
In addition to the ventozation performed in the middle of the forearms, this also causes phlebotomy of three veins, that is, the basilica, fusca, and cephalica, as it draws blood from all those small vessels that are in the flesh, and the smaller veins of the other larger veins before reaching the attraction to the three veins.
Command the ventozador not to proceed with wounding, for the location is stripped of flesh, and nerves and arteries are located thereafter.
This is a ventozation performed on the anus and causes diarrhea of the anus, as well as ulcers thereafter.
And you should command the lancet-maker that it be a large lancet, and that it be made of horn, for the location requires strong incision; and forceful and thin lancets are to be pulled out easily with the scraper.
The small incisions made in the groins must be cautious, for they draw blood from the entire body, and relieve old pain in the throat and stomach, and the bladder; they provoke menstruation, and relieve bothersome and swollen conditions; they are used instead of lancet-making for two wounds, and for bleeding from two veins.
However, it should not weaken the entire body, and cause fainting in many men.
And the benefit of lancet-making is similar to the benefit of two small incisions in the groins.
The quality of the position of the lancet is that you should stop the bleeding at the beginning and follow with quick pressure, and not prolong the position of the lancet, but rather pause it lightly, and leave it occasionally, and that the humors come to the location by natural means. And do not stop repeating this and continue until you see the wound turn red and swell, and the flow of blood appears.
Then you shall scrape and repeat the pressure little by little, and take care in the arrangement of the body.
For a man with rare pores and tender flesh, it is necessary that you scrape once and not press, so the wound does not become an ulcer.
Command the lancet-maker to widen the scraping and make a small incision, and apply pressure with ease.
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary that you scrape twice, because in the first scraping the channel of fine flow to the blood and moisture is opened. But in the second scraping, search for the thorough extraction of thick blood.
And if the blood is much purulent, make a third scraping to obtain the last.
Finally, when we want to extract a small or little amount of blood at a time, this is sufficient for us with one scraping.
And if we want to extract a large amount of blood, scrape with a deep scraping; and if we know that the blood is thick, it is necessary to scrape by means of a heavy scraping.
The term "scraping" refers only to the depth of the wound.
And if the wound is thick, hard, black, and the pores are tight, it is necessary that the locations of the incisions be greased with more lenient, resolving oil; if it is in summer, use aloe oil or violet oil, or oil of two almonds, or oil of camomile or chamomile, or blood oil, and similar ones. If it is in winter, use oil of nutmeg, or oil of lily, or oil of camomilla, or blood oil, and similar ones.
And if the excess is thick, grease with oil of amaranth, or oil of balm, or oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and similar ones.
But if the lancet-maker has wide pores of tender flesh, it is necessary that oil be prohibited, and that the locations of the incisions for them be washed with warm water or boiling water from solatrum, or camomile water, or birch water, and similar ones.
And if the blood is of much moisture, wash the incisions with wine vinegar, or camomile water and similar ones.
And if the excesses are thick, wash the incisions with old wine, or water of sansuc (sanctuary), which is more powerful, or decoction of anise, or camomille, and similar ones.
And the lancet-making must be protected from washing; but it should be administered immediately after washing for an hour or two, and it should sleep near the incision.
What is it necessary that the lancet-maker be restrained before performing lancet-making?
It is necessary to consider at the beginning: if the lancet-maker or the one who must perform the bloodletting has a tendency towards anger and wind on sharp and inflamed blood, it is necessary that you take cold causing substances, such as milgranas (?), acids, and vinegar, laytiguas (?), secanabin (?), julep, and similar ones.
And pause their food such as poultry, hawks, and meat seasoned with acidic foods, and similar ones.
And if the temperament is cold, take warm eyssarop almiva (?) or eyssarop of asafetida from seeds and sumac, and a little odoriferous spice between thyme and nutmeg; and it should be commanded that he use moderation in drinking and eating, and pause the food of poultry and partridge and peacocks and doves.
And it is necessary that on the day of venetization (ventozacio) and phlebotomy, the drink should be more than food.
And it is necessary to give some men tincture of turpentine, or medicaments of musk, which is musk oil, or alcelin before venetization or phlebotomy, or immediately afterwards, so that the main members may be comforted and the blood be refined; and they should not take any nourishment.
However, the ventozas that are not incisions are those that are closed in the liver, on the spleen and gout, at the navel, in the joints, and the pustule of the anus, because these members cannot bear incision upon them.
And not for these (incisions) is it sought but rather the drawing of blood from a member, such as closing a ventosa on the breast in anemia caused by bleeding of the nostrils; and they use this to dissolve stagnant, thickened air in the limb, such as closing it on the abdomen or at the navel; for it rarefies the limb and relaxes it, and reduces swelling.
And when it occurs in their oppilation (obstruction) or porra (boil), a ventosa is placed on the throat because by its strong attraction it relieves obstruction and eradicates the porra from its place.
And similarly, when a ventosa is placed on the liver or spleen to dissolve stagnant air in those parts enclosed (cavities).
These ventozas are administered with juice alone, while others are administered with fire.
And some of them (ventozas) are administered full of tepid water in diseases of the spleen.
And this is why the ventosa should be filled and made large, which can be tepid water alone or water in which appropriate herbs have been steeped.
Form of ventosa administered with fire: the diameter of the orifice should be two fingers' width, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the plaster (preon) should be the size of a palm; and in the length of it, at the circumference, it should be the size of the area, but the thickness should be small according to the amount that can fit into it with an awl.
It should be made of raw wool or citron peel, with thick edges, lion's beard, and clean and dry for it not to irritate the member while it is in place on it.
And it should be placed in the middle of the plaster or iron plate where the candle is held with fire.
And this ventosa should be much larger than the one we have recommended; and a little smaller according to the disease and the condition of the person who uses it.
And the ventozas for infants and weaklings are different from those for young men and strong-bodied ones.
The quality of placing this ventosa with fire on the limb is that it extends the skin with a proper amount of fire, while keeping a little bit of wax candle nearby, and placing it in the middle of the transverse part of the plaster, in the middle of the ventosa, so that the fire is lit away from the patient's body parts to prevent burning the patient.
The latter (ventosa) should be placed on the limb of the patient, and it is over the part we have mentioned, until when we have the ventozas and do not need to press down on it, and let the vapor escape from that part; then the ventosa will soon dissolve.
And heat (fire) the skin according to its manner, and repeat this procedure if necessary.
However, in the case of the ventosa used for pleurisy, with water (which has no transverse part or plaster), it is not pressed down on but filled with water and placed only on the limb.
And this is its form: The larger this ventosa, the better, as it can receive more water.
Chapter 75.
Sanguisugas are not administered in any members except those where the position of ventozas is not possible due to their small size, such as the eyelid and gums; or in a member denuded (devoid) of flesh, such as the mentioned ones (eye and nose).
And the quality of using these is to find sanguisuga in clean, purified water.
They should be boiled during the day and night in clean water, without any cause remaining in their stomachs; and they should evacuate the body at the beginning with phlebotomy and ventozas; and they should rub the member of the patient until it reddens; and they should be placed on them.
And when filled, they should be used.
And if juice can be obtained from the site with the ventosa, it is more helpful as an adjunct.
If not, then wash the site with vinegar and rub with clean water; and it should be squeezed (pressed).
If the body's corpse is prolonged near the swelling of veins and it drains, then you thrust a cloth into cold water and place it on top of the affected area where the drainage should be stopped.
If the body's blood is prolonged (swelling), then you sprinkle powdered vitriol tri-sat or similar substances of astringent causes onto it, until the blood is drained; or, if the boils are stopped, fava beans that have been cooked and crushed should be placed on the affected area, and they should remain there until the beans adhere to the area, and the blood is drained.
If necessary, incision of swellings (boils), if possible, is to be made.
If the swellings (boils) are forbidden to hang (suppuration), then they should be cleansed with fresh blood or a needle should be inserted into the areas where pus emerges; and they should be covered, as soon as pus appears in them.
When you want to make an incision (to drain), sprinkle a little alum powdered, or salt, or ashes over it and wait for it to dissolve.
Thus begins the process of the third division (treatment): restoration. This chapter is mainly concerned with the art of medicine, and it discusses the restoration of fractures and dislocation accidents in bones.
Oh son, understand that this chapter is ridiculed by foolish doctors and the common people and those who do not take time to read the works of the ancients or read a single letter from them.
And for this reason, the practice of science in our land is restricted; and I have not forgotten it for a long time, but have only followed what follows after, through prolonged reading of the works of the ancients and studying their understanding, until I extracted the knowledge from them.
And direct to experiment and study for the rest of my life.
I have already described in this chapter everything that contains the main knowledge and on which my experience has been based; here I summarize it for you and relieve you of unnecessary length; here I summarize in summary form; and in conclusion, I demonstrate it; and I shape many forms of instruments used in this treatment, as I have done in the previous two chapters.
Chapter One.
Summary and collections regarding the causes of bone fractures, from which a premise is necessary before beginning the recall of broken limbs and various types of each. Therefore, let us say in the preamble of this chapter the summary of the sermon; and the chapters whose understanding the craftsmen and those who are waiting at the station are familiar with before beginning the work, so that you and those who can learn or understand this noble art may do so.
And so I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or swelling occurs, you must first approach it with phlebotomy (bloodletting) or alignment, or whatever is not prohibited by any cause, such as debility of the patient or someone who has just suffered an accident, or an elderly person, or a time of intense heat or cold.
And ensure that the food is cold in herbs and bird meat (game) and crab; and prohibit heavy meats and filling with viands or any food that fills the veins with blood, until you are sure of a cauterized wound, and if you do not fear effusion of matter on the member.
And return the patient to his original regimen with which he is accustomed.
And since the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient be fed with nutritious foods rich in nutrients, thick and heavy, containing viscosity, such as foods made from wheat boiled in water, rice, beans, peas, beef, fresh fish, large grapes or similar, and with this diet coagulation of fractures occurs more quickly and easily.
You should know that the bones broken in men of the first youth and in old people cannot be continued or consolidated according to their nature due to the drying of their limbs.
Nevertheless, nature adjusts and binds the fractured bone in any part due to a cause similar to glue, where thickening adheres to it until it is consolidated and healed together until the end of swelling and firmness, such as fire at the beginning, until some other cause does not prohibit it from its effects.
And for this reason, the patient's food must be stopped, foods that are heavy and thick and viscous, as mentioned earlier.
Know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for the fracture of the thigh bone is different from the fracture of the skull; and the fracture of the leg bone is different from the fracture of the arm; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
And beware of remembering every species of fracture, explained in its own chapter and distinguished from the others.
Know the diversity within each species of fracture itself. The species of fractures in the bone are diverse within themselves; for what is called a bowed fracture is different from one that happens at a star-point; and some fractures occur according to the length of the bone: and those of the patella and ankles, whether they come or do not come, as is the case with a fracture when it is prepared for writing, and is a fracture with a wound and disruption in the head, and is a fissure fracture.
And each species has its own pain or torment in healing it, as there will be a reminder of the distinction of it in its places.
Identify the sign of a bone fracture. A fracture of the bone is recognized by its twisting, and from the prominence and perception of it to the sensation, and only when you press on it with your hand.
Therefore, if there is no appearance of twisting in the location or it does not hurt when you touch the bone with movement and the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not a fracture here.
It is possible that there may be twisting or a small fissure, in which case you must press on it with your hand and compress it all; wait for the medicine to come to mind appropriate for that moment in that location; and apply tight by subtle constriction.
Know that the location that is arched and not split in two or other cases that do not occur at the ankle, such as the entire part of the shaft broken off, then it is necessary to begin your time for the correction of it by applying an abscess cauterization.
And if an abscess has formed, then leave it for several days until the abscess subsides; and apply a drainage to it according to any method that you can do with delicacy and skill.
Know that the healing of it and the draining of it is lighter than a fracture in which such an ankle occurs.
Strengthen it according to what comes to mind about it.
But if in the bone there is an ankle, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts, whether it is the arm or the leg; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or one cord and your hand.
Place your position such that you hold the member in its natural position while the parts are being extended from the broken member, then perform so that you make the additions return with skill and according to any method that you can do in their places.
Be careful that your strength does not harm the patient by your operation or injury, and perform so that you apply one bone to another according to their best forms.
It is necessary that at that time you touch it with your hand, and if there are any other causes here, correct it and drain it according to the amount of your virtue.
And avoid excessive extension and compression, as foolish doctors do many times cause abscesses to form by their operation or cause contractions in the member as has been seen by the operation of their many times foolish assistants.
And the quality of the constriction of the broken member is the one I recommend; for you should know that the fractured members are diverse in their smallness and in their size, and in the shape of those.
And for those that are small, such as the arm and thumb and similar ones, then it is necessary that the wrapping be made of very thin fabric.
But for those that are large, such as the thigh or leg, it is necessary that there be a broad and hard wrapping, because the thick lining strengthens the large member throughout with constriction and closing, so that dirt does not enter there.
And begin, according to your evacuation of equalization, pause appropriately in this, on the location of the fracture with three or four wrappings depending on the member; and strengthen your hand slightly with the lining.
Approach the broken bone area at its highest point, and tightly bind what is not your wound with what you have used to restrict the fracture site. Approach slightly further away from the fracture location, loosen the bandage gently and slowly, until you find a large opening in that area.
Approach and take another bandage, cover the observed fracture site with this new bandage, and move away from the fracture towards its distal end; your operation should involve tightening the bandage and softening it as previously instructed in the first bandage.
Approach and place between the bandages of leather or cloth that are covering the twisted nature of the fracture (if there is a twist), but if not, do not stop for any reason in this area.
Approach and pause over the other bandage, and approach again over these bandages with well-made pins as soon as there is no inflammation or cauterized abscess at that location; then pause over where the abscess is and stop the inflammation; leave this for several days, and then strengthen over the pins.
The pins should be of cane reed or similar material, and well-made wisely; or made from pine wood; or from the limbs of palm trees. Each pin should be as wide as shown in this shape and this figure:
However, the pin that is placed over the fracture should be slightly thicker and wider than the other pins, and the length of the pin according to the member's size and proportions; and tighten over the pins with another bandage as previously instructed; and tie this above the pin securely as previously described, and your binding should follow the location of the fracture more closely, and the farther from the fracture, the less binding is needed.
The threads should be of medium thickness and fineness, made from flax; and if the threads are thick (as I have seen foolish people using ropes as threads), this is a great mistake because it disturbs the equality of the binding.
Subtle threads are not suitable, because you will not be able to achieve binding with them as desired, and it is not appropriate for there to be a gap of more than one finger width between each pin.
If the patient is injured by the ends of the pins near the binding in those areas, then pause far away from them with leather or camelid wool until it does not harm him.
Some fractures are with ulcers, and there is a break in the tendons, and I will come back to that in a separate chapter about specific cases.
Know that every broken member is not straightened by pins on the first day; this happens because when the member is large, it is not necessary to place pins immediately, but rather after about five or seven days, depending on your certainty of the advent of a cauterized abscess.
This is the way healers used to treat fractures, dislocations and twists with these plasters (which we will discuss later).
Common plaster method for the restoration of fractures, suitable for complex cases and more often for women and children because it does not require heat or pressure: take powder from grinding (made of wheat milling residue), and it is the soft part of the flour that you grind between the walls of the mill.
Prepare it in this way if it is possible, but strain it through egg whites, and the consistency of the mixture should be neither thin nor thick; then use that.
Another method of treating dislocations, fractures, and sprains: recipe for asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migrach (a mixture of wild sage milled and sifted), totaling one ounce; myrrh and aloes, half an ounce each; alochil, twenty times the amount of myrrh and aloes combined; all ingredients are mixed with warm aloe oil or albumen if the patient's complexion is scaly; use this plaster, as it has a good composition and restores broken bones lightly, conferring strength to many men.
Another plaster method for fractures and sprains: recipe for migrach, white alum, myrrh, and aloes, each half an ounce; acacia, six drams; Armenian pitch, twenty times the amount of myrrh and aloes combined.
All are mixed in a mortar with contraction agent, sieved, and compressed with water or egg whites and administered.
Method of plaster for joints and bones separated from their places, and soothe pain in those areas and wounds and fractures: take woolen cloth and immerse it in sour wine and olive oil and place it on the area.
However, this plaster does not have the virtue of healing, but rather for treating abscesses and expelling pain directly.
Another method of plaster for healing fractures: take fig leaves and wild poppy leaves; grind them all into a plaster.
A shortened plaster for healing fractured bones and the resolution of abscesses: take a mixture of alum, camomile, violet flowers, barley flour, and all ground together. If the member is not scalded, mix all and compress with wine.
However, if it is scalded, first compress it with water from comfrey leaves or water and use that.
Another method of a strong plaster for resolving an abscess that lasts a long time and requires the healing of the member: take a mixture of alum, its seeds, balm, clover, marjoram, violet flowers, camomile, everything ground together; mix with water from willow or sweet water or wine, all according to the quality of the member and the color of it.
However, Hippocrates does not say in his book that a plaster should be placed on the broken member for its healing except for a wax made of wax and oil and no other cause; he recommends it to be neither too thick nor too thin.
However, in Gaul it is seen that plasters are placed on the broken member for its healing and the causes in which there is dryness with little heat such as myrrh, incense, and similar to those causes that I have recommended.
Method of a plaster for injury and pain: take ground poppy seeds, human skin scrapings or eagle feathers, alum, salt, all ground together; sieve and compress, then make a plaster.
The amount that is required to keep the laceration together and make it heal quickly depends on whether there is pain or swelling or if the bone is not in its proper place; then you do not need to undo it for many days. And if there is intense pain or swelling or inflammation at the site, you must either cover it or undo it at that time and apply a plaster to it.
Take cloth from it and sea sponge, wet with lemon water, and immerse that in tea-colored water; then wash the area where the swelling and pain cease; allow the member to rest for an hour; then place a cushion over it of woolen cloth dipped in sour wine and olive oil or rose oil, and let it remain there for a night until you are sure the abscess has healed and the inflammation of the member is reduced, and the pain is alleviated.
And apply subtle constriction and a small plaster gently and do not strain it with your primary constraint, and apply the subtle one until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess, the redness, the pain, the inflammation, and all the symptoms are completely healed, and no plaster or constriction is needed, then remove it as you did at the beginning gently.
And if no cause affecting the member occurs as we mentioned, leave it for about three to four or seven days. And if no cause affecting the member occurs as we mentioned, leave it for about twenty days according to what appears due to the dislocation of the member, as previously stated, until the fracture adheres and the flesh over it begins to coagulate.
Then you adjust the narrowing more than your original narrowing in all places, and you adjust the swelling of the patient's food, according to what was previously remembered.
However, if you see the location of the fracture already drying and extending more than necessary, you should know that nourishment must not reach it; therefore, you should wrap it with hot water continuously for all the days until then; let it be for three days; and alleviate the narrowing a little, and by this operation, the nourishment goes to the member, and it heals lightly.
However, those who falsely restore the fracture of a member later when it was not restored at first, as necessary, and is restored in a crooked way, according to their operation, is an error, and there is great fear; if they had been righteous, they would have enlarged Antiquity in their books and encouraged others to do the same.
And I have not seen anyone of them doing that, so it is reasonable that they should not do it.
Chapter II: On fracture when it occurs in the head.
The types of fractures are multiple, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are different, for some fractures are caused by striking with a weapon, which breaks all the bone into pieces, which is then left exposed, as when this happens in the ribs, and in this case, that type of fracture is called a crush; or the blow cuts through a part of the bone, and cuts through the skin but does not penetrate to the back of it; and this type of fracture of the bone is called an absolute elevation.
And the wound of these two types of fractures is either large or small, and whether the fracture is contracted or attracted; and it is caused by striking with an iron or stone hammer, and similar things.
And this type of fracture is either penetrating and approaching the periosteum (which is left exposed by the bone); or it is in the face of the bone, and the wound of these two types of fractures is either large or small.
And the type of fracture that has been reduced in the bone at its fine and delicate part is called this type of fracture capillary.
And the fracture that is caused either by hammering or striking with stones, which makes a layer of bone enter into the parts inside, and it occurs in concave places such as when it happens to the handles of pots when struck and enters into the parts inside.
Moreover, this is done in damp bone cavities, such as the heads of children.
And to all these types of fractures, they are treated like thorns separated. And I will remember everything in its place.
And we will recognize all these types of fractures by detection on it and investigation of them with trials and tests of rotten flesh that is over them.
The capillary type is recognized by this that is uncovered on the bone, and it is removed, and it limits it with the test, as the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, first consider the patient's accidents, and if you see by manifest signification on fear, such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of consciousness, abscess of the throat, fainting, acute fever, ulcers and redness of the same in major dispositions, it is doubtful that they will heal.
And if you see non-occurring accidents, you hope for health, and then you begin treatment of it.
The cause is that if it has been brought to you with the wound at the beginning as it was in the days of winter, then it is necessary for you to study the position of the bone by the twelfth day according to all disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then it is necessary for you to find the bone position by the seventh day, since what is left exposed by the bone is rotten due to the periosteum, and the accidents that we have mentioned occur.
And if the fracture has already been exposed to the periosteum covering the brain, and is in small and attracted parts, then you must incise the compressed and attracted parts, as I will remind you.
It is that you wash the patient's head with the wounded area, uncovering the bone according to custom and your ability according to the shape of the wound, and it should be gentle on the patient.
And if it occurs to you, you must detect the bone, let flow blood or pus cauterize it, then oppose yourself to it with what is necessary, and it is that you place compresses of damp cloths infused in wine and warm oil, and allow the wound to rest until it is sedated by the pus, and make sure there is bleeding; and begin with the circumcision of the bone and its ablation.
And it is according to one of two methods of operation.
The first method is that you insert the bones with bone forceps narrowly like this, and this is its form: And administer another bone forceps slightly wider than that, and this is its form:
And administer the bone forceps wider than the second one.
And it is necessary that you have a certain number of different bone forceps, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and should be at the end of the sharpness of their extremities, and made of iron or steel.
Use them with ease when striking the bone forceps to avoid hitting the skull and damaging it.
And if the bone is hard and strong, then it is necessary to perform a perforation around it before administering the bone forceps with the non-penetrating levers, which are called non-penetrating levers.
They are not called so, but rather because they do not reach the end of the bone towards which the lever is directed, as the end of the lever has a rounded extremity or margin above the sharp end of it, preventing it from being submerged and passing through the bone.
It is convenient that you take a large number of these levers, each one appropriate for the thickness of each bone, until it is present in all parts of the brain the sharp end of which is acute, the quantity in length and width being according to the thickness of this bone.
This is the shape of three types of levers: The quality of performing a perforation around the broken bone is that you place the lever on the bone and rotate it with your thumbs until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then release the lever at another location, and place it where it completely traverses the thickness of the ray or environment.
Then insert the bone forceps between each crack of the bone, and make it as thin as possible so that you can push it through to the end, as we have said, until you find the bone, or with your hand, or with some other means using various tools which you will prepare for this purpose, such as chisels and delicate forceps.
It is necessary that you take great care that the bone forceps do not touch any nerve.
Therefore, when you perform a perforation around the bone and it is continuous with the nerve, and you have separated it, you must cut and extract it, taking great care to smooth and round its edge with another tool similar to bone forceps, but rather finer and more delicate than the others.
And if any small fragments of the bones remain scattered and shattered, you take it with ease using the tools at your disposal; then treat the wound with linseed oil and ointments that we have mentioned.
The other method of operation is simple and easy, far from fear, which is called Guillaume and the lausage for great praise; and this is its meaning: It is necessary at the beginning that you begin to uncover the fracture in the location where it is most visible and violent, until when you have discovered that part of the bone and placed the tip of the narrow and delicate bone forceps gently on it, which has the following form:
It is that the partida lenticular (concave fracture) is lion-shaped and not penetrated, while the partida aguda (straight or angular fracture) is directed in two directions at a right angle to its length, as sometimes occurs; so that the concave fracture should be aligned with the nerve with the sharp end of the bone forceps inserted into the bone.
Then you should strike the bone forceps on one side of the fracture with a small mallet until you have inserted the entire bone gently as it is turned, and you should be sure that no panic occurs in any way during this procedure; and if the doctor was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant among them, certainly he would have been asleep.
Then if there remains any nerve or soft tissue attached to the bone, you will dislocate it with the rounded tip of the bone forceps, and remove it gently, as it is freed from pain and fear.
If the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the nerve, and what is separated or remains outside the bone is its surface, and it remains rough and small fragments, then it is necessary to smooth that roughness and remove those small fragments with small, sharp razors which you have prepared in various sizes so that it is possible for you to administer them in all places as most conveniently and correctly as possible according to where your operation of the broken bone and its shape.
It is necessary that you administer in your reasoning with the balance which saws the bones at the beginning and place it near the puss, and approach it to the subtle puss of it, and do not cease doing so continuously until you have succeeded in administering the puss tea and the subtle puss of all.
In every small capillary fracture and subtle fracture, it is necessary to administer care according to what is lost in the correction of it.
And it is because not all of those who have studied in that art are equal. Stand on what we have written about large fractures.
If the tissue is straight when you cut the bone, then it is necessary to take cloth from him according to the size of the wound and immerse it in rose oil, and place it on the orifice of the wound; and take another folded or tripled cloth, immerse it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth lightly, but do not press too hard on it; and administer the liquid plaster to it, but do not force it more than the size of the wound alone.
Leave that one with this care for a day or two until you are sure of cauterization; and then loosen it and administer medicines with which excessive dryness is unnecessary, such as linen rags and flour of wheat, and powder of alum and aristolochia, and similar to these.
It is that you make powder from these medicines and sprinkle it over the wound, so that it becomes dry; and in general, administer all medicine with properties that help heal and do not cause pain.
Watch that the wound in your treatment remains clean; and do not let it become infected or rot; nor allow virulence to accumulate in it; because when it is placed on the brain tissue, it corrupts it and poisons the patient, and brings upon him an evil malice.
It happens in the skull cavity, as the bone is molded and especially when treatment of it is started, and becomes black on its surface; therefore, consider whether the patient experiences the symptoms we mentioned, for it can be harmful without doubt.
If the blackness does not come from the medicine that is applied to it, but rather from the nature of the medicine itself, then it is necessary for you to take honey in one portion and three portions of rose oil. And over those linen strips, place another cloth and treat the wound with the appropriate medicines for healing until it is healed.
Chapter III
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not actually broken, but rather two parts separated with elevated sores or one of those areas observed because it has two bones, as the lower part is cartilaginous and is not really broken, but rather bent, twisted, and swollen.
If one of the two parts of the nose is actually broken, it is necessary that you insert your little finger into the patient's own nose and guide the fracture from inside with your little finger, and apply pressure to the outside with your thumb or fingers until the nose returns to its natural shape. Make it as easy as possible for you and be careful not to cause harm to the patient during this procedure.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and not in the lower part, it is necessary to align it with the tip of the finger where there is a small depression.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you shall make it appear as though [it] is healed.
Cover the affected area with lint on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, hold a hot or cold compress to promote healing.
Insert a piece of cotton cloth into the end of the nose if the fracture is in one place, or put two fingers, if the fracture is in two places, and make sure the fingers are thick enough to fill the nostril cavity.
Some of the old restorers wrapped the fingers in bandages and kept them bound all day, but I have not seen this done; however, it is necessary that the cotton be wrapped in oil of hyson with powdered myrrh, and apply the bandage inside the nose where the bone is stabilized and the cartilage hardened.
Sometimes it is necessary to insert a piece of lion cloth into the nostril instead of a finger, especially if the fracture of the nose is severe and the patient is not prevented from breathing.
This cause is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do it, and if you wish, use fingers.
If another swelling occurs, fill the nose with beeswax or cotton soaked in sour vinegar and rose oil, or with yarrow juice.
But if no swelling occurs, you must apply the following inside: starch and powdered chalk mixed with oil of hyson, and place a piece of lion cloth over it, without putting anything in the nose for any reason.
But if the nasal bones are fractured and the fracture is small or comminuted, then you must cut them apart, remove them with the instruments appropriate for the case; and suture the incision, treat it with what heals and strengthens, and apply appropriate ointments.
If an ulcer occurs inside the nose, then you must treat it with fingers and administer lead cannulae until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the lower jaw is broken and the fracture is not ulcerated, consider whether the fracture is only outside, not broken in two and curved at the edges inside, then the recognition is easy.
Then if the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly if the fracture is on the left jaw, you should insert the right index finger; and press the swelling of the fracture inside the bone with one hand and straighten the edges outside the bone with the other.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you must administer extension on both sides according to right angles until equilibrium is possible.
If the teeth are dislocated or displaced, strengthen those that you expect to remain with gold wire, silver wire or lead wire; and place a cotton swab over the broken jaw, place a double cloth on top of it, and place a large steel needle correctly made, or a single thick thread along the length of the jaw; and hold them in place according to what is suitable for healing and application until they are not destroyed.
Tell the patient to rest and have a diet of sweet cakes with honey.
If you fear that the shape has been altered in some way, then you should remove it on the third day and rectify what has already been altered with powdered myrrh, oil of hyson or starch, since you will have left the cotton swab in place, and place a layer of woolen lint over the ointment.
And so, once the plaster is attached and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it in place until it heals and strengthens the fracture, because this fracture will often be tightened within three weeks.
And if another swelling occurs, administer what has been said several times in the treatment of it until it is healed and the swelling is removed.
And if the fracture is ulcerated, consider whether it is a bone fragment separated or in a cavity, then you must carefully remove those fragments with the appropriate instruments.
And if the opening of the ulcer is narrow, you should widen it with a forceps according to your need.
And when you have removed the fragments and they have not been reabsorbed, sew up the ulcer opening if it is wide; and if it is not, place one of the appropriate ointments over it and let it heal.
Chapter V.
Restoration of the collarbone when it is fractured.
When the collarbone (furcula) is broken at the joint in front, you must split the surrounding muscles to treat the fracture, and this type of fracture can occur in three ways.
If the fracture is simple (trencada), separated (seperada) or separated into two parts that do not involve complications, it is easy to treat; or if the fracture occurs in a complication and it is difficult to treat; or if the fracture is with an ulcer.
And the procedure for a fracture with an ulcer is to have two attendants present, one to hold the broken collarbone and the other to extend the neck at the affected area.
Then tie the fracture with wires placed in a shape that fits the bone and is not too deep or concave.
If additional extension is needed, then place a small cloth or wool square on the patient's chest, and adjust its size according to your needs; then extend and lift the collarbone and compress the area around it with your hand until you tie the fracture as necessary.
If you cannot bring the end of the collarbone to the joints outside (pervenguda al preon), then have the patient lie on their back and place a medium-sized cushion over the neck muscles.
The attendant presses the neck muscles on both sides to raise the collarbone in the joint and then you adjust the fracture and tie it with wires.
But if the collarbone feels painful and is infected, you must make an incision over it and remove the infection with ease.
If the fracture is stuck in the bone, you must make an incision with one of your instruments, as you have prepared them for this purpose, because you have placed a chisel under the collarbone to split it; and the shape of the tool is like this:
And its concavity resembles a mortar; and adjust the width according to your needs, depending on the size of the bone or the depth of the fracture.
But the length of the tool should be as you are able to operate it, having two ends like this, and one end should be wide while the other is narrow.
If the wound caused by the ulceration that you have removed from the bone is large and there is certain pus, then adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches.
If the wound is small or you fear pus, then fill the wound with cloths and powders according to the size of the wound.
If pus appears, pour vinegar and rose oil on the cloth and place it over the area.
And all that the stick is not harmful to the broken bone; therefore you must examine the patient every day, so that if the swelling subsides or the stick has been absorbed, you can adjust it and tighten the bandage.
Then make the patient sleep on their back with their head raised slightly so that the support of the neck is raised from the base, and thus raise the collarbone in its position; or have the arms of the patient tied to the patient's neck.
Do not remove the bandage if there is no problem in the location or pus, within twelve days.
Then renew the plaster if you see that it has deteriorated and adjust the bandage accordingly, allowing it to heal and for the fracture of the collarbone to be restored and for it to clot.
It is strengthened and supported for up to 28 days, and in some cases it may take months for healing to occur.
Chapter VI.
On the restoration of shoulder fractures.
The shoulder blade is broken in its lower part, but it is not completely shattered only along the edges.
And when the lower part of the shoulder blade is broken and it is not known without touching, then prepare according to the shape of the fracture and reduce it according to its natural position in any way that is possible using your skills.
Then place a cushion over the site of powder milled with alum and hulled poppy seeds, and place pulverized cloth; then place a cushion on the lead stylus of a fine table according to the amount of the spoon or slightly more.
If the lead stylus is concave in any of the spoon's locations, then fill that concavity with poppy seeds and place the stylus back according to its balance.
Then bind tightly with a long, strong bandage and secure the stylus in place so it does not move from its position.
Consider the dressing every day; whenever it becomes soft, replace it with a new one and tighten and adjust the stylus if it has moved from its position.
Wash the patient's hand.
The spoon will be restored in twenty or thirty-five days.
And when this number is complete, you should loosen the bandage, and you will know for certain that it is of the bones whose fracture or dissolution was not feared at the beginning.
If there is a bone protruding from the wound, remove the bandage, cut it off, and proceed as you did for the fracture of the clavicle with cauterization if an abscess occurs here.
Chapter VII.
This line appears to be the title for a section on the treatment of broken bones in the foot (fracture of the foot).
The foot is sometimes broken in a single location, but more often the ends of the bones move and become swollen and fractured.
When the middle of the foot is broken, it usually declines into the joints and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, fever, heavy breathing, and vomiting. The fracture is evident in its cavity within the bone and cannot be hidden from sensation.
The treatment of the fracture involves positioning the patient on their back and placing a cushion between their shoulders. Press gently on the muscles of the foot, adjust the toes with two fingers, be subtle in the operation and alignment according to all possible methods and what is appropriate, until the bone shape returns as it should.
Then apply the plaster and stopper, then place the fine lead stylus (caligy) on top of it in a light manner, as you cover it with cloth; be subtle in wrapping the stylus around the fractured bone to ensure that it is not damaged; pass along the ridge of the back occasionally, and tighten it properly using a decent binding; always consider the positioning, and tighten it when it becomes soft.
If there is a need for the amputation of that area, you should use corrosive or disinfectant, or treat pain, abscess or other issues that occur in the location. In such a case, you should cut and remove it, and clean the wound using methods of healing; then apply the plaster, if necessary, to the affected area, and tighten it until it is healed.
Chapter VIII.
This line appears to be the title for a section on the treatment of broken ribs.
Know that a rib fracture does not occur in thin locations but rather at the joints between them; and the ends of the ribs do not contract from the joint in front but rather because they are cartilaginous. And knowledge of this is not hidden to sensation, so you must investigate it with the fingers.
The treatment should be to wrap the fracture with fingers according to possible methods until it is wrapped as needed, and then apply plaster and tighten the fractured bone with a lead stylus if necessary.
If the rib fracture is declining into the joints, this causes intense pain and puncturing sensation like that of pleurisy, and for this reason you should cover the bones with gauze; this also leads to difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of bloody mucus; and this is a difficult healing process.
And the ancients were skilled in dealing with such matters using clever methods.
And as they said: it is necessary to place food before the patient that causes inflammation and flatulence so that the abdomen becomes inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed out of the joints.
But we should be careful not to cause an abscess by applying heat, unless necessary, and if it occurs, you should help with that.
Some of the ancients said that it should be kept still above a wound and that it should be treated with strong juice; this is logical, but there is concern that the wound may attract excess fluid due to its weakness.
Some of the ancients said: it is necessary to cover the area with wool that has been soaked in hot oil, and place powders between the ribs until it is filled; ensure the positioning when wrapping it according to the ridge; and cure the patient with treatment for pleurisy using food and medicine.
And if the patient is experiencing intense distress and cannot endure it, and pierces the skin with a pointed instrument, beware of the patient, then it is necessary to make an incision at that location, expose the broken rib, and place your hand over the instrument that supports the fractured bone, recalling its memory, and cut the bone easily and remove it.
Then adjust the two lips of the wound if it is large with sutures, and heal it with ointments until it heals.
If an abscess occurs within the body, then you collect and put powdered red pepper in oil and place it on the area, and heal the patient with whatever is necessary for treating an internal abscess.
Let him be placed on his side on the bed, until he recovers.
Chapter IX.
On the repair of a fracture of the spine and neck.
Some cases involve fractures in the bones of the neck, and later the muscles contract, and similarly to the vertebrae of the back. When you examine a person and want to know if they will heal or not, consider that if their muscles are already softened, swollen, dead, and unable to grow or extend, and when you apply pressure or pierce them with needles without feeling pain, then you can conclude that they will not heal, and in such cases it is fatal.
If the patient feels pain when applying pressure or piercing with needles, then you can conclude that the neck bone is saved and the patient will recover with treatment.
If you suspect a fracture in the cervical vertebrae and want to know if it will heal or not, consider its weight.
If you find that they are already softened (paralyzed), pay attention to those cases where it has happened in the muscles, and when he lies on his back, there is ventosity and obstruction without his will, and sometimes he is turned onto his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you can conclude that it is fatal, and therefore do not attempt treatment for it.
But if there are no such causes, the situation is better and easier to treat.
The treatment is to perform a drainage of the abscess on the swollen vertebra using cauterization with hot oil or sulfur, or by applying mustard plasters; place it over the swollen vertebra for several days until the abscess is drained.
Then place a comfortable and soft cushion on the affected area and apply liniment to it; order the patient to rest, remain calm, and not sleep on the affected side until it recovers.
If there is the need to remove a broken bone or any cause that has already been determined, then you must cauterize the tendon and break the bone; then adjust the two lips of the wound, using sutures if it is large, and heal it with some healing agent from the entrails until it heals.
But if the little bone at the end of the coccyx is broken off and this marks the end of the spinal cord, then you must place your left hand in the anus and grasp the broken bone with the right hand as much as possible according to the position; then apply a plaster and splint if needed, and hold it.
And if you feel broken tendons there, cut them and remove the bone, and heal the wound with the treatment that is prescribed until it heals.
Chapter X.
Restoration of the ankle
When the bones of the ankle break, it is not just a fracture but communication at the extremities and they are displaced along with length and declining to the inner part; pain occurs in the location and puncture, and the joint is stunned when there is a fracture.
The restoration of it (the ankle) is that you stretch your hand over the entrance that is above the fracture, which is the shape of it.
If the fracture is only at the extremity of it (the ankle), then you bind it according to what is appropriate for you by equation, binding into the one that is similar to its natural shape.
But if the fracture is in the long or one that declines towards the inner part of it (the ankle), then you make the patient lie on their stomach before preparing the restoration of that fracture. And when you have bound it (the ankle), wait on the plaster, and place your hand over that splint of wood or fabric, and tighten by compression on the one where you fear not fracture puncture nor removal of the nail.
And bind the concavity with that which fills it from inside, so that the compression takes place according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
But if an abscess is cauterized, you stop the extension and restoration of it (the ankle) until the cauterized abscess is sedated, and place over it the one that soaks according to what was mentioned earlier; then return to the restoration of it, and tighten it as before.
But if there is a disease in the bones that are pulverized or shattered, you treat them (the bones).
Chapter XI.
Restoration of the dislocation fracture.
The adjutor is that which is between the arm and the neck of the shoulder.
And if it (the dislocation fracture) is broken, the restoration of it is one of two ways, of which one is that you take a thick wooden splint as follows:
And let them be connected at both ends with laces, and place it (the splint) suspended from the higher location.
Follow the patient on a sled; and place his broken arm over the splint towards the tiltick of it in the middle location where the curve of the splint is attached.
And suspend it (the splint) over some serious cause, or else the physician extends it to the inner parts; and place the physician and their hands on the fracture, until the fracture returns as necessary.
The other way is that the patient lies on their back and suspends their hand from their neck with a rope; and command two servants to place one of them over the fracture with their hands, and the other under it, each extending to their respective sides.
And if you want the extension to be more forceful, tighten on the fracture with a rope and on it (the splint) with another rope, and each of the two servants extends to their respective sides.
Therefore, if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, it is necessary to place half of the rope on the tilting point and the other half below the fracture towards the arm.
Similarly, if the fracture is in the elbow, it is necessary to place the rope on that location and on the elbow.
Bind it (the splint) easily and without effort, and when it is bound according to what is necessary and is properly applied, tighten it if there is no cauterized abscess.
But if an abscess is cauterized, you must release the compression for up to seven days, and place over it linen soaked in warm vinegar and rose oil until the abscess subsides, and then tighten it (the splint).
The method of tightening it (the splint) is to place plaster on the fracture and then cover it with a woolen blanket over the plaster; and adjust the arm on the adjutor, and place a soft cushion under the muscle.
And cover the wool and tighten on the adjutor the arm so that the arm is in the correct position, if there is no prohibition of any kind due to the broken bone.
And use nails (to secure the splint).
And place the nail over the fracture which is broader and stronger than the others; and place a space between each nail equal to the width of the finger, and the length of the nails according to the breakage with an addition of three fingers on all sides.
And tighten on the nails with the compression as mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And your compression over the location of the fracture should be tighter. And as the fracture is longer, the compression should be smaller.
And therefore, if you find the placement of the nails and compression as described at the time when you restore the member to its proper position, then do it (the treatment).
And if there is a fear of cauterized abscess, you release the compression and nails for up to seven days as mentioned earlier.
Consider the rope in all parts for three days so that there is no pressure or inflammation at the location, or food is prohibited from reaching the member due to excess compression; therefore, correct everything as described earlier.
If you are certain that no cause of this will occur, do not undo the ligature except after three days or more.
The patient's bed should be on their back, and his hands on their stomach.
Place a hot, woolen poultice filled with cooked cereal on the broken limb and consider at all hours of the day or night that neither the figure of the fractured member should be divided nor dissolved, or the soft ligament loosened, for this will correct everything in its power.
The patient's food should be given according to the order that was previously prescribed for him, provided that his food is subtle at the beginning until it becomes stronger; and then his food should become coarser.
The assistant and the bed should be strong for forty days, and then they should be undone and administered a bath and medication which correct it.
And if the fracture is laid open, you should not undo the ligament and splint for days or up to two months.
Chapter XII.
On the restoration of a broken arm.
An arm is made up of two bones which are called the focal bones; one of which is small and is the one that touches the elbow, and the other is large and is the one placed below the small one, from the lower side of the elbow.
If the large bone is broken only, or if both bones are shattered together.
And when the small bone above is broken, the restoration of it is easy, and its healing is more easy.
And if the bone below the fracture is broken, that condition is bad and healing it is difficult.
And this condition is even worse when both bones are shattered together.
Therefore, if the broken bone is the small one above, it is appropriate for the doctor to pause a small extension with ease before the healing process begins.
However, if the large bone is shattered, it is necessary to pause a stronger extension.
If both the testicles are crushed together, then you must stop the bleeding not too strongly.
Then you must stop the wound by restoring and extending its shape on a cushion, and place your palm at the sides above, as well as all the other things mentioned earlier, and the one with the ear should be lower than the others, and the patient should be seated on a chair with a low back.
Place a cushion in front of the patient at an elevated or slanted position to prevent them from straining too much.
The servant extends the patient's arm above the affected side with their hand or strap, and another servant does the same on the opposite side.
The doctor should bind the bone together so that it returns to its best possible shape.
If the fracture of the bone is suspected, then you must penetrate deeply into it and reduce all tissue in its place with your strength.
If a separated wound appears that is not likely to heal on its own, then you must amputate it and remove the affected area as we have said before.
However, if the fracture is a wound, then we have already addressed that specific case, so treat it accordingly.
If an abscess occurs at the beginning of the healing process, then you must line a cloth with a mixture of rose oil and white wax (of medium consistency) and lay it on top with a subtle binding to allow the abscess to drain; then remove the wax and apply a prepared plaster made from powdered milled medicinal herbs mixed with honey, and place sterilized needles nearby; and let the needle that is placed over the fracture be sharp and strong.
Know that the names of the needles in the arm are in the greatest arrangement, or it is a fracture in one testicle or both testicles simultaneously.
Place your binding firmly and forcefully over the location of the fracture, and when more fluid starts to flow from above or below the fracture, loosen the binding slightly as described in the beginning of the chapter.
The cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and damp, not hard or rough, and the thread with which it is sewn should be of medium consistency (neither too thin nor too thick), as we have recommended.
Consider the limb and its strap for several days. If any cause arises that requires rectification, such as a swelling in the limb, then it is necessary to immerse the limb in warm water until the swelling subsides.
Loosen the limb without tying it until it has rested, then return the binding.
If the fluid has become soft and the bone has healed as expected, then correct everything with your strength.
Consider if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excess stricture, for then it must be softened slightly and left for some days until the nourishment reaches it, and strengthen it.
If the patient does not suffer from any of the causes mentioned previously, then it is not necessary to be loosened within approximately 20 days or thereabouts.
Then the patient's hand should be suspended for its ability to agitate movements, and make them sleep on their back.
Know that this fracture heals in 30 or 32 days, or at least it is healed in 28 days, and all of these are according to the condition of the complications and the position of the limb.
Chapter XIII
On the restoration of a fracture of the thumb and fingers.
Know that a fracture occurs in the thumb or fingers only from severe movements observed.
And when the hand is fractured or injured, then it is necessary that the patient remain lying down and hold their arm stretched out as much as possible, and place their hand on the affected area.
Then the healer should extend the broken bones and the physician align them well with good alignment.
It is necessary to apply plaster and lint, unless an abscess is formed; then place a steel over the area according to its size, and you have already wrapped it in cloth.
But if the fracture is in the palm's inner part, make a bandage-like cover and command the patient to hold it with their broken palm, and it should be strengthened with long cloth.
The steel should have a cushion of cloth for lift, to apply it to the palm and hold it as needed.
But if the fracture is in the outer part, then it is necessary to place a steel over the area and another steel on the opposite side of the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; and place a bandage around it, as the hand is turned to the wrist between the fingers with lint.
If there is a fracture in one of the fingers' joints, if it is hollow, align it as needed and hold it with the palm, and if you want, place a small straight steel over it to raise the fracture and avoid bending.
If the fracture is in any of the other fingers, such as the middle finger, or index, or auricular, or annular, then it should be aligned and splinted with the finger where it occurs; or all of them should be splinted continuously, which is better; or place a small steel over it, as mentioned in the hollow.
Consider in your restoration and take care of the abscess formation and its opposition - with its operation - what is needed when any of those causes occur, according to the narrative given above.
Chapter XIV
On the restoration of a pelvic bone fracture.
The pelvic bone is observed to be broken and declared at the examination when it is converted to the lower part and the upper part.
The restoration is done by strengthening the lint over the fracture and another lint under the fracture, and placing the patient on their stomach and face.
Then extend all the lint to the fracture's side according to its quality when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if it is a rupture of the pelvis, the lint should be near the lower part at the side of the pelvic bone, so that the extension falls on top, and another lint under the fracture.
Similar if the fracture is at the lower end, it should be made near the lower edge and the extension to the sides.
And the physician aligns the bone with both hands inside to reduce it as much as possible according to its natural shape and the bone is joined well with good alignment; then it is necessary to apply plaster and bandage, unless the member forms an abscess. But if an abscess occurs, let it be for some days until the abscess is drained, and then return to your treatment.
The bandage of it should be like this: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it two or three times and remove excess; and wrap the thigh to reach the ankle and the pelvis.
And insert a long needle between the pelvis and the thigh near the lower side of the sides, and let the ends of the needle extend from the upper part of both sides, and turn it around the thigh and pelvis to remove excess bandage.
Place a steel on the pelvis in the location of the fracture and place a small steel on the bone of the thigh.
Fill the voids between the thigh and pelvis with soft cloths to coagulate the extravasation.
And begin with a strong bandage in the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four layers, and as you get closer to the lint at the location of the fracture, your bandage should be less tight and more flexible and more moist.
Approach the end of both limbs of the field to the incisions, and press on either side of the nails of the other leg so that the incision is not displaced from its place.
Approach the structure so that it does not affect the corroded member or cauterized ulcer or abscess or similar conditions; and if any such condition occurs, then be careful to remove it, and correct everything appropriately as we have previously stated.
But if there is a tumor in the bone that cannot be swallowed, then it must be burned off and removed, and the wound should be treated with the remedy previously mentioned until it is healed.
In some cases this fracture of the thigh is strengthened by adjusting it to the nails, as previously stated in the adjunct and in the arm.
However, in the treatment of such a fracture, it is important to avoid causing limpness in the patient; and if the fracture is restored alone, then the other leg should be immobilized as well, otherwise limping will occur.
You should know that the thigh heals in about 40 days or a few months at most, depending on the nature of the complications and other factors.
Capital XV.
Of the treatment of a fracture of the ankle bone.
You should know that the treatment for a fractured ankle bone is often difficult, but it can be done with caution and careful observation.
But if a fracture occurs and it turns out to be merely a crack or break in its parts, then it is not necessary to take any action, as the pain will either subside on its own or persist, depending on the nature of the injury.
The treatment of such a fracture consists of aligning and securing the broken parts with the tools mentioned earlier until they are healed.
Place a plaster and place it over the round nail if needed, and use a bandage to secure it properly.
Consider all the precautions mentioned in the treatment of other fractures, such as cauterizing wounds and taking appropriate measures to prevent complications until the fracture heals.
Capital XVI.
Of the treatment of a broken hip.
You should know that in the hip there are two bones, one of which is large and is called the hip bone, while the other is small and is called the pelvis.
If the type of fracture occurs in either of the two bones of the arm, then the treatment is similar to the treatment for an arm fracture and the procedure is one and the same.
If both bones are broken together, the hip is completely shattered.
If the smaller bone (pelvis) is fractured, the hip is partially shattered.
If the larger bone (hip bone) is fractured, it can be treated by immobilizing it with the tools mentioned earlier, and this falls under the category of complications that are not easily dealt with.
Administer extension, alignment, and ligature of the nails as mentioned in the previous instructions.
However, if the hip fracture has not been complicated by any other factors, then the extension should be minimal and gentle to alleviate pain.
If there is any cause for surgery on the arm when treating a hip fracture, you will take pieces of wood from the pine tree and place them under the areas that have been immobilized, using palm branches for this purpose. Select smaller pieces where necessary, but avoid the knots, and let the length of these pieces correspond to the length of the hip bone and extend from the hip to the foot.
And you wrap each cloth in two layers according to its length, and place one on the division of the leg of one side and the other of the other side, and they should be from the thigh to the foot of the foot.
And you tie the three stones in three places of two extremities and at the middle one, because with this structure the leg is prevented from closing on the left and right sides, and it is good for positioning.
And a cane-like splint has been administered according to the length of the leg; and the leg should be immobilized at that point to prevent movement.
Moreover, you must do this in a fracture, and when it is a wound properly.
And you must examine the leg every day and study it further, and you should keep it from getting gangrene or inflammation, or other similar causes; and when any of these causes occur, you then apply what is necessary until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the fracture of the heel and the bones of the foot and the toes.
A heel fracture does not occur every time; but sometimes a fracture occurs in the foot bones; and in the toes of the feet, a fracture rarely occurs, except an avulsion at times of displacement.
And if the foot bones are fractured and sometimes those bones are raised above themselves, then the patient places their foot on the ground prepared in this way as they walk.
And place one foot on that which is raised from those bones, and press down with the other foot, and hold them in place until they return to their original position.
And place a plaster and stopper on top of it, and place a small table beneath the foot, on which there are two flat plates.
And strengthen it with the foot in this structure, as you have wrapped it with cloths and other means of support that are necessary.
And when three or four days have passed, you then remove the bindings, because you will find the bones bound together, fractured or displaced, and in such a case, the operation on them should be done accordingly.
But if the toes are fractured, you then restore them and bind them as I and recommend to you in the repair of the hand fingers. And place the fractured finger on a table according to the length of the finger, and make it slightly more oblique from below; and place the foot under this table that has been recommended by you, and strengthen it with an appropriate structure.
But if that which is fractured of the bones is two or three or more, you then place a support under each finger according to its size wrapped in linen cloth, and strengthen the table at the foot of the foot, and it should be standing on one of the plates of the table away from the belly of the foot so that it keeps it well.
And it is necessary for you to remember that you do not overlook all the causes that I told you about in the other fractures of accidents that have been mentioned, and apply yourself to every accident with what is necessary.
Chapter XVIII.
On the fracture of the hump of a woman and the pelvis bone and the mons pubis of a man.
When the hump of a woman is fractured, you then cause it to cease bleeding and incline it slightly to the side of two, and hold it behind.
And the midwife fills the hump of the womb with cotton, and you apply it to the hump in this way as you hope; and you press the woman, and raise her hips little by little, because all that is forgotten before it returns in front of the hump as expected and the fractured bone.
And you place a pillow under the hips and when it is necessary to urinate, you remove the cotton with ease and allow her to urinate; and you reduce it as before and return it to its original position, and then return the pillow to its first position.
Do this for seven days or around those days, because it is restored.
And if you wish, take once an oval bladder and strengthen over the groin with a willow cannula; and insert the entire bladder into the hump of it, and inflate the cannula with air until the bladder is inflated within the hump, because the fracture returns.
And it should be filled with cotton and left for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the pelvic bone of a man or woman is fractured, you then administer for its restoration and treatment what we have recommended for the hip bone.
And what is right should not be hidden in these near fractures and which rarely occur, especially to that which has more study, practice and understanding of this book; because the fracture indicates to you in the greatest dispositions the right direction for restoration and treatment of it, and therefore understand well.
But in the mons pubis of a man when it is fractured, you take guarguamela leaves, and put the mons pubis into it; and place it under wraps of linen, and wrap it, and let it rest for three days or around those days, and healed.
Chapter 19.
On the restoration of broken bones when they are infected.
It is appropriate for one who suffers from an infected broken bone, especially if the bone is large like the hip bone or the humerus (arm bone), or resembling one of these, to immediately cut and scrape it, if the conditions for trepanation are suitable as previously mentioned.
And if the infection flows pus, then it is necessary for you to stop its flow by cauterizing it with the powder of three parts frankincense and one part sulfur, unless another cause presents itself.
Then begin the restoration of the broken bone on that day itself, and do not delay it unless an abscess occurs.
But if an abscess occurs cautiously, then you should delay the restoration of it for up to nine days, until the abscess is ceded, and do not approach it on the third and fourth day in total, as you will cause bad events (mishaps).
But if the broken bone protrudes significantly above the dislocated joint, then it is necessary for you to pierce and reduce it with your hands and as little force and extension as possible.
But if extension is not prepared and the situation requires your hands and this tool, then use this tool to reduce it with your hands; the tool is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight fingers, and its width according to the size of the wound; and the physician must take three or four inches depending on the quantity needed for the cure in all types of fractures.
Whether it is round or slightly oblong, ensure that it is not doubled over in the time of the operation.
It should have a sharp tip with an edge at its ends; and the handle of it should be thicker, and from the middle to the hinges.
And this is its shape:
It is called in Greek "labre voluntas atelarem," which means little spoon.
Therefore, the tip of it should be raised above the end of the bone that protrudes significantly.
You should insert it once and withdraw it before the bone is repositioned, and it should be aligned with some accuracy.
Therefore, force the fractured ends together, and if the broken end is fine, do not use the tool for good reason; instead, insert the fracture's edge into it until the tool has sufficient power over it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone completely with the tool we recommend, then use one of those chisels that we mentioned earlier; or it may be one of the saws in any manner possible for you.
Then remove that which remains rough and with small scores on the bone.
When the bone is reduced, and the patient experiences intense pain slowly subsiding, you must know that the bone has not been returned to its natural position; and therefore, do what will bring great benefit to the patient.
Once your bone restoration is complete, immerse a piece of black sterile linen in strong vinegar and apply it directly to the wound, especially during summer; do not cover the wound with any oil or other cause for it to become putrid and rotten.
Apply the steel probes during the time of your patient's bone restoration, and leave the wound exposed so that you can incise it with forceps and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
Be very careful not to stretch the wound with the fracture, for many times fool doctors have caused death or corrosive or suppurating illness on their patients, and it is a sin. If the patient's wound is soft, pliable, and different from other fracture wounds.
If the wound is large or a bad wound and you fear other harmful accidents that have been warned of, and pain occurs in the area, then do not place steel probes there but use hard bandages instead and tighten it with them.
And when the wound begins after one or two days, which is caused by a blister, then remove the cloth that you had placed on it earlier and apply warm compresses, according to our custom we treat wounds with warm compresses such as tetrafarmacon and similar ones.
It is necessary for you to remove the dressing and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and it is important that the limb be prepared in such a way that the purulence flows from it towards the edges without difficulty.
If the wound passes many days without being consolidated or separated from the blister, then you should know that here are the signs of gangrene, and therefore examine the wound with caution. And from those signs that are separated and expelled, those that do not separate but enclose the limb and cause pain, pierce them according to what is possible for you.
And if the wound is gangrenous or suppurative, that is, another type of corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary to stop it by applying one of those remedies described in its corresponding chapter.
And of that which requires the best advice and you present your case: when the bone is broken, make an incision on the limb similar to the bones of the thigh and pelvis and like those of large members, but do not attempt to attract it or extract it, for many times this leads to death; leave it in place until it can be purged, for within about 20-30 days it may collapse by itself. And then cure the wound if you see it, and leave it if not.
Chapter 20:
On the treatment of a nodule that occurs in the trace of any fracture.
Many times this nodule occurs in the trace of healing from a fracture, especially near joints, and is swollen due to the shape of the limb; and strong evidence prohibits the use of the limb for its natural operation.
Therefore, consider whether the nodule is recent and administer medicines that have a styptic effect such as aloe, elderberry, and similar ones; take some or all of them, and compress them with vi stiptic, album of huou, or strong vinegar and place it on the nodule in a poultice, and press it firmly for good compression.
And leave the incision unclosed for several days; then remove it and apply another one until the nodule is gone; or press firmly on a lead plate, since lead has the property of hardening everything that is inflamed in limbs.
However, if the nodule has already become hard and is constricted and requires urgent removal, then cut it carefully along the most superficial part of the limb, excise the excess and eminence, or remove it with sharp scissors until it is gone; and heal it until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
When restoring a fracture, once it is restored and the limb remains subtle and does not follow its nature, [the treatment] follows... (The rest of this line or the next lines are missing to fully translate the text.)
When a bone fracture is restored and the limb remains subtle and does not follow its nature, it is done only for multiple reasons: one of which is an excessive amount of joint solution and ligament loosening that does not correspond to what is needed; or due to an overabundance of tightness in the ligaments before the nutrition is prohibited from flowing to the limb; or due to excessive swelling; or due to unnecessary movement not at the proper time; or due to a lack of blood flow within the patient's body and debility.
The treatment for this is to feed the patient and make his heart tender before the blood is multiplied within him; administer baths; and instill gawe and comfort upon him.
Then place a plaster on the limb, so that the plaster draws in the necessary nutrition, or continue swelling of the limb with warm water, until the nutrition flows and returns to its natural shape.
Chapter 22.
On the treatment of fractured bones that are restored twistedly and prohibit the operation on them as needed.
When the restored limb requires healing of its twisted and prominent fractured bone and nodule, this is due to a deformation in the limb's form, but if the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, it does not need for you to receive the word that the fracture is new.
However, there are many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is highly condemned as leading to great danger with the risk of death being imminent.
If the limpness and nodule are recent, then they should be swollen with warm water in which are placed soft-soothing herbs such as dittany, raspberry leaves, mallow, and similar ones; and it should be made into a plaster with plaster made from the root of dittany or camomile oil, or pressed juices from the leaves of dittany and crushed camomile seeds, and this plastered on; or prepared figs with honey and mixed with pigeon droppings, similar to the medicines known as consolidators.
In some cases it is dissolved with continuous gentle friction using the most humid materials, and the limb's movement should be administered throughout all parts at all times.
However, if the twist has advanced and is strong and converted into a stone and necessitates curing with iron, then it should be cut off at the end and the continuation of the bone should be dissolved, and what remains of the nodule should be removed using fine cutting tools and administered ease in that area with solicitude and study.
Chapter 23.
On the topic of dislocation.
Dislocation is essentially the displacement of one of the joints that cannot move, causing deformation in the limb's shape and causing the patient great pain and severe injuries.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to perform the reduction as soon as possible and not delay it, for if it is delayed, the joint is destroyed and it becomes difficult to reduce the dislocation.
And for this reason it is not good nor straight in the time of the amputation, because many observations bring spasms and slow pain.
However, when this occurs, you should prepare the patient for flabotomy, and the amputation area should be left free until it rests; and the limb should be swollen with warm water and oil, and it should be reduced with ease.
And every member should be healed by the remedy that will come in its place.
And you have already organized the chapters on dislocation according to the precedent in fracture: from the upper division of the body to the lower division.
Chapter 24.
On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
If the two jaws are dislocated and not torn apart; and a dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways: either they are repositioned slightly with little movement, or they are completely dislocated and require complete mollification at the juncture until saliva flows from the patient's mouth and he is unable to hold it nor close his mouth, and the tongue of him is enveloped in his word.
When the dislocation [of a body part] is slight, then in the greatest care, return it to its place with minimal handling.
If the dislocation is complete and complicated, then it requires careful reduction and should not be delayed entirely.
It is said that the assistant should hold the patient's head, and the doctor puts their hand into the patient's mouth, in the direction of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or the doctor places both hands together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the others hold the rest of the patient outside; and commands the patient to stop moving their jaws and let it go from each side; and the doctor guides the jaw and wraps it in cloth until it returns to its place.
If the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer warm water and oil before making the reduction easy, so as not to delay the reduction of both and not to delay the reduction of both entirely, as has been said.
Therefore, when they are returned and wrapped, and the patient's mouth is closed and not softened, then pause over those powdered cloth pieces with wax and oil, make it of wax and rosin-covered linen; and place them with ease on the affected area.
The patient should sleep on their back, and the head of the patient should be between two pillows, so that it does not move to either the right or left side; and do not make them chew any food forcibly; having their provisions be allowed to eat lions until when the pains are reduced and the jaws are relaxed, then do what you want.
That should be administered with ease, and you should not work on the opening of the mouth through eating and drinking or talking, until the jaw is relaxed and healed.
If the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at some time and not returned to their places, then frequent fevers and strong sweating occur, and the stomach of the patient becomes inflamed, and strong bile is vomited.
When you see this, know that it is disastrous; and frequent vigilance is required for the one who experiences this in ten days.
Chapter XXV.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the end of the muscle.
The collarbone is not dislocated on the side through its continuity with the ribs; and sometimes it is dislocated on the outside, and this is apparent by sensation.
The restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms. Place your hand on the affected area with strong compression, as it will return to its place.
Then place a cushion on that plaster and powder, and press it firmly.
If the extremity of that which is cut off and joined with it is not dislocated in any day, then it must be reduced and aligned as I have said and as you are equipped to do so.
Then place your hand on that plaster, and pound, rub, and press it, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
And with this treatment method, reduce the extremity of the muscle when it has been separated from its location.
Chapter XXVI.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated at the insertion of the tendon to its juncture below.
And the second is that it is dislocated at the upper attachment of the muscle, and this is rare; it is not dislocated at the rear attachments by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front attachments due to the nerves.
Furthermore, the muscle is more likely to be dislocated and protrude at its lower attachments, and this is more common in those with less flesh; however, in those with thicker flesh, it may protrude with difficulty.
But it often happens to some men due to a blow or fall, and the muscle of the affected person is surgically removed with a cautery incision, and it is treated as if it were already dislocated.
Therefore, you should determine if you are treating the correct area and proceed with the treatment of the affected part.
It is well known that the dislocation occurs at the lower attachments of the tendon; therefore, you should distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the intact one, because among these differences you will find various manifestations. And you should touch the head of the muscle with a concave surface and on the tendon below the muscle head, where it appears like a knot, and the patient is unable to reduce their hand to their elbow, nor can they move it in any way.
If the muscle is dislocated in the foot or ankle, you should look for clear signs of damage, and it should not be hidden.
With this type of dislocation, a relatively easy reduction can be performed when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
The reduction process is for the practitioner to lift their hand above the affected area; then they place their thumbs below the tendon and lift the joint upward with strength towards its location, while the practitioner lifts their hand and extends it. Then they press down on the tendon, allowing it to return to its proper position more easily.
If, as we have said, the dislocation does not return on its own from its initial occurrence, then, after several days, it is necessary for the patient to be bathed in hot water and administered a poultice that softens and cleanses like if it were made from chamomile, fennel, and marshmallow in water, and this should be administered.
Then the patient should be placed on their back and held in place with linen that is neither too loose nor too tight, and the doctor should place his hand on top of it, lifting the muscle upwards and pulling the patient's hand so that it does not slip out of position, and another assistant should hold the patient's head, ensuring that it does not slip out of position as well, for it may quickly return to its original location.
And if you want to carry out this method, bring a man who is taller than the patient, stand next to that side, and insert your muscle between the patient's thighs and lift their thigh towards the chest so that the patient is suspended in the air, and another assistant pulls the patient's hand from their hips. But if the patient is lightweight, then it is necessary for something or someone to be suspended in order to weigh them down, as the dislocation may quickly return.
It is also reduced in this manner: place a long pole on the ground with its head shaped like a mortar pestle, neither too thick nor too thin, and position it next to the patient; then sit the patient on top of the pole so that they are standing according to the length of the pole, and extend their arm from one side towards the other, while extending the other limb with strength from the opposite side, as the joint returns quickly to its original location.
If the reduction is difficult due to all the reasons mentioned earlier, then use this remedy: take a pole whose length is two forearms and width four fingers, and reduce its thickness in the region of the thigh according to this shape:
Place leather straps around the round head of the pole so that it does not touch the patient.
Position the thigh of the patient next to the pole and extend the arm or arms over the pole towards the opposite side, lash the pole to the assistants and the extremity of the hand.
Position the arms on a ladder of steps according to its width, and extend the hand towards the opposite side, while suspending the other limb from the other side, as the joint will quickly return to its original position.
Once the instrument is complete according to any method that is possible for you, then it is necessary to position the thigh covered with linen of an appropriate size; and apply a plaster prepared from powdered chalk and glue over the entire muscle so that it is wrapped around it, and tighten the thigh with sufficient pressure; the linen should be wrapped over the plaster, and the hand should be attached to the neck and left loose, and the hand should not move for seven days.
It is necessary to restrict the food of the patient for a short period until the member is comfortable, as it is easier for healing in this manner.
And it is appropriate to give more food after seven or five days, and exercise movement; therefore, if it remains firm without being softened, then it has healed.
But if the joint is dislocated for more than several days due to moisture or some other cause, then it is necessary to administer a cauterization with three cuts, as was discussed in the chapter on cauterizations.
If all of the above is done and after seven days the linen wrap and joint are not healed, and the plaster and tightening have been removed several times without healing, and the muscle cap and nerves are infiltrated or extended or softened, then you should know that the joint will never be properly set.
The displacement of that which is dislocated, you must reduce it by applying pressure and extending it with your hands until it returns to its place.
Administer the other bandage (or splint), and care for it until it heals.
If there is grave delay in healing and sluggishness in the movement of the member, then the patient should use warm, observed baths until that gravity is alleviated and it returns to its natural state.
Chapter 27.
On the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated with difficulty and tends to return with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all directions, but especially in front and behind, and a dislocation of it is not disguised because it is felt when moving or touching it according to which figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated shoulder correctly, that is clearly evident because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or touch the muscle.
And it is necessary to catch it and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible, because if you come upon a dislocation with an abscess, it makes the reduction difficult, and a long time will not heal completely; and especially when it is at the back, for all other types of dislocations are worse and more painful, and many observed baths may bring death to that one.
The restoration of it, when that is possible to reduce, is that the hand of it should be extended with two hands, and the arm should be expanded, and the doctor's hands should be on the shoulder and below it, and he should push the joint with the fingers of his hands or with the edge of his palm until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is at the front, it should be returned as follows: bend the arm with your hand, striking the shoulder with the edge of your palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then you should administer strong extension and movement.
And it is that two servants extend the arm, and another two must hold it so that it does not be remounted during the extension.
And turn the arm completely around, because it is wrapped in long cloth wound around its hand or linen.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil to help in the lubricity of the joint and facilitate reduction; then push the joint forcefully until it returns.
And the reduction of it should be paused on a plaster that has astringency and exudation with honey album, and it should be strengthened with bandaging downwards, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and it should be left for several days.
And it should be dislocated; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you loosen the bandage from it and leave it alone.
And if you see that the joint is not strengthened, you repeat the plaster and bandage, leaving it for several days until it is strengthened; then loosen it.
But if there is grave delay in reducing the joint, and its position is moving, then you administer humectation in baths and subtle friction, and compression, until it is alleviated; or place a splint on the joint with greasy motion; and tie it, and leave it over the bones for a day and night. And remove that one, and put it in bath; when it subsides, you scour the joint with tempered friction, and place a splint on it with greasy motion once, twice, and thrice, Corruption has already reached the intestine through the anus, so it is necessary to wait for it to harden.
And if you want, place a cow's wet and scalded hoof over the wound, and press it down; and do that several times, because it is moist and reduces its position.
Chapter 28.
On the treatment of wrist dislocation, that is, the joint between the arm and the hand.
The wrist of the hand is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of the dislocation of it is easy, but the opposite is true for other joints; however, speed in reducing it at the time it is dislocated is necessary, before the location becomes abscessed or an abscess occurs.
The reduction of the dislocation of it is that you place the patient's hand on a table and the servant extends the arm, and places his hand or palm on the edge of the joint, and pushes it until it returns to its place.
However, it is necessary to consider whether the palm has been left on the abdomen of the hand, in which case you place the patient's hands on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is preceded by them, then the position of the hand should be placed internally on the table, so that the doctor's hand encloses the edge of the joint.
And if it returns soon, that's good; but if not, you must apply a plaster to the abscess and leave it; do not repeat this, for otherwise, it will not tolerate nor endure the reduction of it until several days have passed.
However, the joint returns in its crookedness; and you do not notice any cause for the patient, but his hand is softened and cannot tighten anything; then know that the nerves are broken or crushed, and do not attempt to straighten it unless it is strongly cauterized near the injury site and provide some means to strengthen it.
But when the pain returns, you should stop using the plaster that we recommended and leave it alone for 10 days to heal and strengthen itself. Then you should loosen and leave it alone, and exercise the affected area.
But if the movement is obstructed and it happens to be serious, you should soothe it with warm water and massage for several days until it improves.
Capital XXIX. (I couldn't translate the line as there's no text provided after "Capitol .")
On the treatment of dislocation of fingers.
Fingers can be partially or completely dislocated at any joint.
When a finger is dislocated at the back of the palm or the front of the joint, you should compress it with your thumbs and gently push it back into place until it returns to its original position.
Hold the finger's head steady and suspend the dislocated part with your hand for two days.
Then gradually stretch it out until it is straightened in that same day.
When night comes, release it according to the narrative, and do not stop releasing or moving it during the day, but at night you should exercise it gently, and follow this process for several days until it becomes strong again.
If the finger is dislocated at the wrist joint, you should apply the same method as previously described, and carry out the first operation on it until it heals.
And do the same when the finger is dislocated at other joints.
Capital XXX. (I couldn't translate the line as there's no text provided after "Capitol .")
On the treatment of dislocation of spine vertebrae.
When a complete dislocation occurs in one of the vertebrae in the spine or neck, and there are broken vertebrae at that location, do not attempt to treat it, as death is imminent for the patient.
A sign of this is that the patient's excretions are outside of his control and cannot be retained; several days pass with some parts of his body or one or both legs, or an arm becoming soft, or one vertebra is dislocated and several days later the dislocation occurs in four different places.
Therefore, it has been dislocated to the rear joints, and it is called luxation.
But the treatment of it is to consider whether the luxation occurs due to weakness, in which case there is no cure or healing of the entire limb.
However, in cases of luxation caused by trauma or striking objects similar to these, the Ancients described long discourses on treatment methods, but I will shorten it and explain it briefly with fewer words for better understanding, using instruments that I will show you and describe here.
Here's the translation:
And the patient is to be extended on his bed so that he is near the wall, and the foot should be elevated with cushions to prevent swelling there.
Then a straight stick should be placed and fixed into the ground at the foot's end near the head, and another at the other end of the foot to lift it up.
The minister should hold the stick, not fixed in a hole; and another minister should hold the other one accordingly.
Then wrap the patient's head with a cloth or a soft material and tickle him gently until he falls asleep. Extend the end of the ligament to the stick, which should be at his head, and tie it there; extend the other ligament over his buttocks, under his arms, and support his chest; then adjust all the ligaments and tie them to the other stick, which should be at his feet.
Then the minister extends each ligament to the appropriate part of the stick and neither should the two sticks and their ligaments at their respective ends be removed, but rather they should not be fixed like I said.
The doctor places his hands on the spine with strength until it returns to its original position or he places something heavy over it (such as a table) and then adjusts his feet under the table until it returns.
But if it does not return in this way, then take a table whose width or length is about three yards and carve a hole in the wall near the patient, into which you insert the end of the table. Then place the table's edge on the spine and the doctor places his feet at the other end, squeezing it tightly until the spine is compressed and returns to its original position.
And if you wish, turn the head of the patient towards you; and you should be on your knees at the foot of the bed, with two sticks whose length is one arm each, and both ends of the sticks are at the foot of the bed as well, and there should be a space between each stick that is the width of a hand. Then make a hole in each stick so that it can move freely, and ensure they are both firmly planted on the ground to prevent them from moving.
And make a circular stick that goes through both holes of the two sticks.
And at the end of this (circular) stick there is a hole where another stick can be inserted, whose length is one hand's width and rotates around it. The same applies to the other two sticks.
Then tighten the ligaments that you have tied around the patient's foot at the appropriate location (the stick at his head), and the ligaments that you have tied around his thighs at the appropriate location (the circular stick at his feet).
And there should be one turner (a person who twists the body) at each end, and the doctor should manipulate the spine as described earlier.
After the spine has been returned to its original position and the wound is closed, you should apply cold compresses with egg whites and wool, and then place a board of three fingers' width (or slightly more) on the affected area and the area of the spine. The length of the board should be equal to the size of the gout (the affected area), and it should cover the entire spine.
Then tie the ligament that we mentioned earlier and feed the patient with a subtle nourishment until he is cured.
If there is any residual pain or swelling in the affected area after recovery, then medications that soften and cool should be administered for a long time, as we have recommended; and already plaster (or liniment) has been applied to that location.
And sometimes the end of the spine in the back happens to dislocate due to that displacement; and that bone is known for being difficult to reset because it has already begun to protrude, so it should not be forced with this medicine, as it could lead to death.
Chapter 31.
On the treatment of dislocated hips.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the pelvis do not slip out only in dislocation but rather they occur in minor displacement and hollowing, which is more common in other joints.
The hip joint is dislocated in four ways: either it is displaced internally, externally, anteriorly or posteriorly.
And moreover, it is usually displaced internally, and less frequently, in front or behind.
The sign of internal dislocation is that when you align the healthy hip with the diseased one, the healthy bone is longer and its end more prominent than the diseased, and the diseased cannot bend its leg, therefore it should be pulled, and the area where it is pulled should be marked with a cautery mark so that the head of the dislocated joint has been reached here.
And the sign of external dislocation is that the symptoms of it are contrary to this one (internal dislocation).
The sign of anterior dislocation is that the hip bone expands in accordance with its condition, but there is pain at the front without bending it, and if pressure is applied to move it forward, it cannot do so, and the urine retains and the opening is marked, and the patient should walk on their heel.
The sign of posterior dislocation is that the front does not expand or bend, and the hip bone is shorter than the other, and the opening is softened, and the head of the dislocated joint should be in that place.
But the reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider whether the dislocation is old and long-standing, in which case it has become fixed and you administer its reduction according to its position, and therefore it is not in the treatment of everything; and hence, it should not be forced.
But in the case of a recent dislocation, and one of the four species of dislocation, you must then take care to turn the joint and stretch it internally and externally on both sides, turning it to the right and left, as it will return naturally without needing other treatment.
But if it does not return in this way, you must then prepare a strong medication and stretch the hip bone from below or above, or with an iron strap on the surface of the bone; another servant should extend their hand above in such a way that they place their hands deeper into the joint; and another should apply strong pressure with the iron lever on the side of the dislocated joint, while another servant holds the end of the iron strap.
The extension should be from the hip to the ankle or from the front of the hip to the area of the collarbone, or from the back to the spine.
The extension should be in one movement so that the patient is lifted from the ground and remains hanging.
This type of extension is common to all four species (types).
And if the dislocation returns with what has been said, it will be good; otherwise, it is necessary for all species (types) to perform what we have described for their own treatment.
In the reduction of the dislocated joint, if it is internally displaced, the patient should be reclined on their side; and place the straps on the side of the dislocated joint in the area between the head of the dislocated joint and the lower part to which the leg is pulled; and then pull the strap above the ankle area to the uppermost part of the collarbone.
And another strong servant should grab the patient's arms, and firmly hold the large side of the diseased joint and extend it outwards with great force, as it will return to its place.
This specimen is for light healing of pus, by which this member is reduced more than other species.
If the patient is excused and refuses treatment with this specimen of healing, then it is necessary to tie both feet of the patient tightly and firmly, lightly, on top of both soles and both ankles.
Let the length of each one be four fingers, and let the patient's bandage be extended more than the other by two fingers.
Then let the patient be suspended over the post and raised as much as possible, and let the length from the ground be two armspans.
And command a strong young man to chop off the head of the boil, and suspend another young man over the patient, and let the third young man push against the boil with force, as the joint will return to its place quickly.
But in the case of self-reduction, when there is a dislocation outside the part, it is necessary for the patient to push against the ground as recommended in the treatment with hot poultices; and tighten the bandage firmly on the patient's cavity itself and on the legs.
Then two posts are placed, one at the feet and another at the head; and let two more posts be adjusted to the height of the pole that is planted on which wet cloths are wrapped around it, so that the patient is not harmed by the post being between his legs, and thus the extension at the sides should not be drawn in.
Each assistant extends to their part, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is at the front side, it is necessary that the cavity be slightly extended, and as described in this narrative on the pole; and the doctor places his right palm on the patient's groin, and with the other hand, he presses against the patient's groin, and with that pressure, he extends the cavity on the front side to the front hip.
And if the dislocation is at the rear side, it is not necessary for the patient to be extended on the back side and raised above the ground; instead, it is necessary to press down on a hard surface, as is also done if the ankle is dislocated on the front side, as described in the treatment of the ankle on two pillows; and it should be placed face-down and the bandages are extended, as mentioned earlier, there will be no benefit.
And it is necessary to administer a compression with a board on the location of the joint.
Thus, since the reduction is complex, as you know from the sign of the reduction of that member, which is not hidden from you, and you extend both sides of the patient's cavity, and when you see them tightened and the patient extends their cavity without objection, then you will know that the member has returned to its proper place  and then you adjust two cushions and apply paste and hold with bandages so that the ankle is not damaged on any side; and let the patient rest for three or four days.
And then unbind and remove the paste and compare the two cavities.
Then, if you see them tightened in the proper way, then you will know that the dislocation has been healed, and at that point let the patient go.
And if you see any sign of swelling or inflammation, then you return and apply paste to it, hold it as before, and let it rest for three days.
And then unbind that one, and let it walk slowly on each side for several days until it is comfortable.
Chapter 32.
Treatise on the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle can be dislocated in three ways, namely, it is dislocated outside, inside, more to the front than the rear; and it is not dislocated at the front.
And the sign of the ankle dislocation is to command the patient to press their cavity against something; then you will know that the ankle is dislocated.
And the restoration of all types of ankle dislocation is that you press the patient's chest straight, so that he extends his cavity if possible; and hold your two hands to the front side of the ankle, and place the foot of the patient between your feet; and have another assistant hold the ankle with their palms on it, and retain them firmly on the ankle with your fingers, and another servant extend their foot into it until the ankle returns to its place.
The sign of reduction is that the patient's cavity adheres to the chest without effort or pain.
Then you apply paste to it and have them press their cavity against the chest, and hold them there with bandages for three or four days; then unbind them.
And do not let the patient walk for several days until he is healed and comfortable.
If the reduction (of the hernia or intestine) is not possible for you, then administer strong traction on the bandages mentioned in the treatment of hernia's preliminary narrative.
This line indicates that we are moving onto Chapter 33 of the treatise. It's customary to number chapters in Roman numerals (I, II, III, IV, V, etc.) but this text uses Arabic numerals instead (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc.). So, this line means "Chapter 33."
This sentence translates to: On the treatment of ankle dislocation. The text is discussing a specific medical issue related to the ankle joint (dislocatio del talo).
The ankle joint is sometimes reduced through minor manipulation and other times it is dislocated due to complete displacement. Dislocation of the joint can occur inside or outside the ligaments (fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo).
The sign of joint dislocation is that the ankle swells, resulting from the displacement at the site of the dislocation.
The treatment for reducing the dislocation is simple traction, performed with ease and the joint should be guided back into its original position (engualhat entro que retorne).
However, in the treatment of a complete dislocation, it is necessary to immobilize the patient correctly and have a strong and capable assistant behind the patient at the correct location (cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu).
Then position yourself with your right hand on the patient's heel (de la pus sobirana part) and your left hand above the ankle (de la part pus dejos del pe) in the location of the cavity (en le loc de la cavilha).
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand (E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tuya mano derecha), and push with your left hand for two counts, extending it (e aprop am la sinistra por dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra); and push the leg of the foot against the bed with your right hand (empelleys le pietz del pe am la mano derecha sobre la cama sin trabajo).
Do this for two counts as previously stated. This line indicates that the actions mentioned in the previous sentence (pulling, pushing, and pushing against the bed) should be performed twice, for a total of four movements. It appears that these movements are part of the process to reduce or reposition the dislocated ankle joint.
Then push the leg of the foot against the bed on the third count, and you should be at the ankle (cavilha). This line indicates that after performing the initial pulling, pushing, and pushing against the bed for two counts as instructed earlier, the medical practitioner should push the patient's leg against the bed one more time on the third count. The purpose of this action is to maintain the position of the ankle during the reduction or repositioning process. It also ensures that the medical practitioner is in the correct location (at the ankle) for the following steps.
If the joint returns to its original position during this method (una veguada or in two counts), that's good; otherwise, continue with the procedure as the dislocation may return. This passage suggests that if the dislocated ankle joint is successfully reduced or repositioned during the described actions (pulling, pushing, and pushing against the bed), then the process can be stopped. However, if the dislocation does not appear to have been corrected, the medical practitioner should continue with the procedure as it may still need further manipulation to achieve proper alignment. The text emphasizes the importance of monitoring the joint's progress during this process and being prepared for potential complications or recurrences of the dislocation.
However, if reduction (remocio) of the joint is not possible due to factors mentioned earlier, lay the patient on their back on a firm surface (Jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra), and place a small pillow (paysel mot) under their buttocks. Then position a box or case between their legs so they are securely held in place, and wrap them loosely with cloth to avoid causing discomfort to the patient (e tu ya has envolopat sobre lu drap para que no le moleste al malade). This passage offers an alternative approach when reduction of the dislocated joint is not possible. In this case, the patient is placed on their back, and a small pillow or cushion is placed under their buttocks for support. A box or case is positioned between the patient's legs to hold them in place, while loosely wrapping them with cloth (drap) ensures their comfort during this immobilization period. It appears that this positioning helps to stabilize the joint and may potentially allow it to heal without further manipulation.
The assistant should hold the patient's legs, and another assistant should extend the foot with their hands or a rope that lies on top of the neck of the foot (am liament que lie sobre le col del pe). Each assistant should then extend their corresponding part (contrastente extencio del sieu par) against the extension of the patient's leg, and the pillow should remain between the patient's legs to prevent the patient's body from being pulled apart at the displacement site (per so quel cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio).
The physician should then carefully align the dislocation using their hands (enguala la dislocacion am las suyas manos), and another assistant should hold the healthy limb at the site of displacement to facilitate the reduction (otro ministro tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacion retorna am la facilidad).
And so, if the dislocation returns and is declared to be corrected, you should apply a plaster (emplastre) and tighten it using strong bandages (extrenha aquella am liamentz fortmente), and then bind the foot with bandages to the bed (ligua le pe am liament a la cama).
You must be careful or protect the nerves that are located at the back of the heel, so that the ligaments on top of it are not too tight and press on it forcefully.
Leave it like this for two or three days, and if the ligament is softened, remove it.
Loosen it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from walking for forty days. But if the patient must walk in that space, it is not certain that the dislocation will not be worsened and become corrupted, so this should not be allowed to receive treatment.
If an abscess forms cauterized, then it is necessary that you administer the medicine in the area where the previous narrative mentioned it, at another location for treatment and dressing, until it is healed.
Chapter .xxxiii.
On the treatment of dislocation of the toes on the feet.
The dislocated one should be bound loosely without much extension; and that which is not difficult can be moved easily.
But if the dislocation is in one of the toes of the foot, then it should be necessary for the patient to rest their foot on a flat surface such as the ground or table, and stay like someone walking.
Then you should stand on one foot and rest the other on something that supports the joints, then walk with it as usual until it returns, and watch to make sure that it is still bound and does not appear in the prominent area.
Then rest the belly of the foot on a table that supports the entire foot with two legs, and strengthen it with a suitable structure for three days; then loosen it and allow it to rest from walking for several days until it is strengthened and recovery is ensured.
Chapter .xxxv.
On the types of dislocation that are caused by wounds, fractures or any combination.
When any of these causes occur, and you proceed with the treatment and restoration of it, many times death occurs.
And therefore it is not necessary to proceed with the treatment of it presumptuously, but rather someone who is wise in the art, long experienced, merciful and compassionate, should be slow, neither hasty nor presumptuous; and use medicines that only cure abscesses cauterized at first, and allow the patient to divine judgment, rather than to the one for whom you hope salvation from destruction, or relief from illness, and where there is some hope. And therefore it is best to quickly perform the reduction at the beginning of the cause, before an abscess forms cauterized.
And if the limb returns as we wish, then administer a regimen that will cure an abscess cauterized and heal the wound with what is appropriate for drying up the exudates.
And if dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and there are separated fragments in the bone, then perform the setting of them, and do what has been said about simple illnesses that follow in their respective locations.
And be careful and avoid what is appropriate in the path of fear as has been described in my preaching; for that is better for you to your Creator, and more persistent to your glory, and more healthful to your true body at your time. Thus ends the words of Albucasis perfectly in whose praise God be blessed. Amen.
