In the same manner as Albucasis begins his words, since he has committed this book to you, its last of medical science, by completing it, explaining it, and clarifying it, I see that I should also complete it for you in this treatise on surgery.
When surgery has been abandoned in our region and during this time, entirely devoid of it, danger threatens the science of it, and only its remnants remain; there are no more than a few descriptions of it in the books of the ancients, which have become obscure and led to error and confusion until their intentions are misunderstood and their power and art extended.
I see that I will reorganize this treatise according to the method of explanation, clarification, and abbreviation; so that it may come with the forms of cautery instruments and other tools for work along with their descriptions, and in preparation of the latter, which is necessary.
But one of the reasons why there is no good craftsman in this art at present, is that the art of medicine is long, and that its practitioner must be knowledgeable in anatomy, which includes understanding the joints and shapes of members; the connection and separation of them; the knowledge of bones, nerves, and ligaments, as well as their number and origin; the recognition of veins, quiet ones and pulsating ones, and their locations.
And as Hippocrates said in his name: a small word, but in the work it is much more.
But we have already said that in the introduction of this book: whoever does not know what we have told you about anatomy is not fit to practice medicine, lest he fall into error and thus cause the death of men, as I have often seen happen with some who are ignorant of this science and abandon it for lack of knowledge and experience.
I have seen a mad and expert surgeon make an abscess of the scrofulous kind in the neck of a woman, and cut some arteries in the neck so that much blood flowed out until the woman fell dead among them.
I have also seen another surgeon who, believing he was pulling out a stone from a man in poor health, pulled out a large one and cut a piece of the bladder with it, causing that man to die on the third day.
And I have already advised him to remove it, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the state of the patient, he would die.
I have also seen another surgeon who took payment from a duke of our land for surgery and treated a black sergeant who had been struck in the thigh with a fracture; and prepared himself with his ignorance, cut through the fracture, over the wound, with pulleys and staples with strong structure, but did not allow the wound to breathe.
He released it as he desired, reapplied the dressing, and left it closed for some days and ordered us to undress him; so that his leg became an abscess and led to destruction.
And I was called to him, I prepared to remove the dressing, and peace and relief came to him, and his pain diminished.
But corruption had already taken hold of the limb, so that he could not stop it, and the corruption continued to spread in the limb until the patient was in danger.
I have also seen another surgeon who drained an ulcerated cancerous abscess and it was healed after several days, only to find the evil of it magnified in its lord.
The cause is that cancer is free of melancholy humor, therefore it does not require cutting off everything from the body, but rather an affected member that suffers from all.
And for this reason, my son, it is necessary for you that the surgery be divided into two divisions: one is associated with health, and the other with danger in major operations.
I have already shown this in every part of this book where there is an operation with error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to guard against this and let it pass by, so that the fools do not take the opportunity to speak and deceive you.
And so, take your arms with diligence and protection of God, and your patients with joy and firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God to lose for health and a worthy succession, and leave the terrible illnesses that are difficult to cure, and abandon those weapons that frighten you, so that temptation in your faith and name does not deceive you: for it remains in your glory, and so until in the world and beyond to your sanctity.
Galenus has said in some of his treatises: "Do not treat bad illnesses, so that bad doctors do not call themselves physicians."
And I have divided this book into three parts.
The division of the book begins, and this is the first of the first section. The first chapter is arranged within the feet, in the forms of instruments and in the fierceness of cauteries, and concerning what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter: scrotum and perforation, abscesses, plagues, extraction of seeds and similar matters, all in this section are arranged and ordered by the forms of instruments.
The third chapter: restoration and dislocation, and the cure of twisting and similar matters; this chapter is arranged within the feet, and by the forms of instruments.
It is necessary to explain the quality of the juveniles of that cautery and the harm it causes, and in which situation the use of cautery should be prohibited.
Therefore, the discourse on the quality of the juice of cautery and its harm is a long and complex one, subtle in knowledge, and hidden in secrecy; and many wise people have spoken about it, and they have disagreed, and only a small part of their discourses concerns me, fearing lengthiness.
And therefore, I say that in all general cases, the cautery applies to all matter or substance, except for two cases, which are cases of death without substance.
In the case of dry and lifeless matter with substance, there is disagreement; for some say that cautery is beneficial in this case, while others say the opposite, that cautery is not suitable for an illness characterized by quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate to treat a dry and lifeless matter with fire and dryness.
And I say the opposite, that cautery is beneficial for all dry and lifeless matter with substance that occurs in the bodies of men, because when you compare the bodies of men and their humidities to the nature of fire, you find that the bodies of men are inflamed by it.
And I say according to this discourse, I have experienced this several times myself.
However, it is not necessary for one who has already been exposed and trained in the chapter of cautery through previous experience to come to this matter again, because I have known the diversity of the condition of men and the positioning of their ailments, and the causes of these, and the accidents associated with them, and the time period for these.
But in other complications, there is no need to fear, and even more so in colds and moist ailments, for all physicians are agreed upon these, and they are not opposed to the aid with cautery in these cases.
Understand, my sons, that the secret of healing with cautery by fire and of the goodness of it is that cautery is a medicine that burns, for fire is simple, its action does not spread to the member being cauterized but only causes slight damage to the adjacent member.
But the action of burning medicine spreads to the member adjacent to it, and if the ailment is difficult to heal and painful, it will hasten it.
But fire, due to its sublimity and goodness of substance, does not do this, for it is superfluous, and it is already known through experience and the long duration of study in the art concerning the truth of causes; thus, I am excused from the length of my speech. If it were not that it is not permitted by my free will to reveal the secret hidden by fire and the quality of the operation on the body and the expulsion of ailments through philosophical demonstrative speech, which would sharpen your pains.
Understand, my sons, that physicians disagree on the time at which it is appropriate to perform cauterization and they pause in the best time of springtime.
And I say that cauterization is appropriate in all times, for the accidental damage caused by time is submerged in the benefit of what is drawn from cauterization, and even more so if the cauterization is due to pain or necessary pain, such as fistulas, which do not tolerate delay, since it is feared that malice will come, which is greater than a little damage caused by time.
And do not think in your minds, or sons, that this is not believed by the common people and ignorant doctors, for at that ailment which is healed by cauterization, recovery is not possible all the time, and they pause on account of that consequence.
And the cause is not as they think by that, for cauterization is only in place of medicine that alters the condition and dries out the moisture which causes pain.
But cauterization is excessive in relation to medicine due to the desire for its value, effectiveness of its operation and greatness of its lord.
It is possible that the patient's ailment may return at some time in the future, depending on the condition of the patient and the location of their ailment, as well as the quality of it, and what has been prepared in the body by the accumulation of superfluidities, and what has been achieved in it through diet and similar causes; however, the ailment for which cauterization is administered should be a subtle ailment in a member with few superfluities and moisture, such as cauterization of teeth due to pain and similar cases, it is possible that the pain will not return there, but rather only a small amount.
And the common saying is that cauterization is the last resort in medicine, but it is not true, as I understand it, for I believe that it is not a cure that improves with medicine or any other cause related to cauterization.
The cause is contrary to that; the intention that cauterization is the last resort of medicine does not mean that it is administered when we apply the methods of treatment in some ailments and those medicines are ineffective, but rather when at the end of the ailment, cauterization is administered, it improves on that. Therefore, from here on, I say that cauterization is not the last resort of medicine, as understood by the common and illiterate doctors.
And they say the ancients that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this only because of the equality of gold and its sublimity of substance.
And they say that the location of cauterization does not burn, as this is not absolutely true, for I already have proof and experience that it does not do so in some bodies, and cauterization with gold is better than iron as they said; however, when you perform cauterization with fire and gold, it is not up to you to decide, for it depends on the amount of heat desired from the gold, and it should be prepared to receive friction; and if the gold becomes too hot due to the fire, some layers melt so that the artisan can work with it.
And for this reason, cauterization should be performed with iron more delicately and properly in the operation.
And I have organized this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and I have organized those under the headings of feet, for that reason, I will answer what you ask of it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization removes coldness and moisture in the accompanying symptom of which there are two causes, causing sodium deficiency and a large number of runny noses, called corissis, from the head to the corners of the eyes and of earfluid, and many sleep disorders, and tooth pain and gout, and generally all illness caused by coldness, such as paralysis, soda and apoplexy, and similar cases in those ailments.
The form of this cauterization is as follows: First, command the patient to be evacuated with a purgative medicine for three or four nights, according to the severity of the patient's condition, their age and their custom.
Then, approach the patient's head with a razor and have someone hold their head over a sloping bench and place their hands on their feet.
Then place the palm of your hand on top of the foot, between the patient's heels. However, when the location you have reached is found, mark that spot with a probe and then heat the olive oil cautery that has this shape:
Then place the probe on the marked spot, so that it descends, and hold it tightly with your hand until it turns.
Lift your hand slightly and look at the spot, and if you see that some amount of bone is exposed, such as a grain of sand, lift your hand and if it does not turn, lift another instrument, if it is cold, until the bone that I mentioned to you is seen.
Take a pinch of salt and dissolve it in water on the spot and leave it for three days.
Place the probe on the burned spot and leave it until the scar of the fire is destroyed. Cure the spot with a strong four-ingredient ointment until it is healed.
They say that when the wound remains open, it is better to put honey on it, since this is more beneficial.
Some of them say that the vertebra should be cauterized to the bone, and the cautery should be kept there until a part of the vertebral spine is burned.
Scrape off what is adhered to the bone, and let it heal.
Others say that with the cautery reaching the bone, it should be pushed forcefully into the bone until the bone breaks, and this is the form of small trepanation: They think that from that location the steam of the head will escape.
Keep the wound open for a long time and let it heal until it is consolidated.
I myself have not seen these two types of cauterization in all cases, but only in some men out of fear; leave that alone, for it is better for your health, because the head is exposed due to prolonged solitude as has been testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head is of fragile nature.
The first type of cauterization is safer and better in my opinion, and from that onward and with that work you will be safe.
Chapter Two.
On the Cauterization of the Head.
When a chronic and prolonged pain occurs throughout the head in the patient, and they use weapons such as spears, swords, daggers, poultices, ointments, tweezers, bandages, scissors, splints, and similar instruments, and if cauterization has already been performed with one cautery that does not help or relieve the patient's condition in any way, then consider whether the head of the patient is of a strong constitution by nature; and if it is not frail and weak, use another cautery on the area. Then apply a new cautery to the corner of the patient's head with a split-open cautery. Cut open the skin and expose the amount that has been cauterized and apply another cautery to the back of the skull at the place called "vessels" - this is where the vein is located. Leave your hand uncovered in this procedure, and do not expose the bone, because the patient experiences a great deal of different pain other than the pain from all other skull cauterizations.
Say that this cautery is in its place, because the cautery used for the corners of the head and the occiput is more subtle than the one used for the other part of the head; and this is its form.
Chapter end.
Treatise on new hernias.
When there is sudden pain in the back of the head or a prolonged pain in the ear, treat it with medications that alleviate pain, and administer the other treatment, which I have mentioned in the remedies for diseases; and if neither works, cauterization is necessary in two ways: either cauterization with a burning medicine, or with iron.
Cauterization with a burning medicine involves taking an alum pot, scour it, and then cut off the tips of both ends with a pair of tongs. Then make an incision in the temple area with a small lance where it is hollowed out, but not too deep to pierce the skin.
Then apply pressure to the area with constricting bandage and leave it for three hours; then remove the alum, let the wound heal for two or three days, and then place a dry cloth over the area submerged in oil until the skin becomes tender.
Treat the affected area with saliva until it heals.
If you wish, do so with some burning medicines that I have written about in the second treatise on burning medicines.
Cauterization with iron follows this method: heat the iron over the fire, and its form is as follows:
It is called a nail-clipper, because the end of it is shaped like a nail with some curvature, and at its tip there is a slight projection.
Place your hand over the painful area to keep it in place, and hold the small iron - so as not to be hurt by the archery - and move it slowly.
If the amount of skin that is pierced by the tip of the nail-clipper is such that it causes bleeding, lift your hand to prevent the artery from being pierced, which is located below, so that blood does not flow.
Place the wound in salt water and let it rest for three days; then clean the wound with oil, and treat it with saliva until it heals.
If you wish, cauterize with the tip of the scalpel as in other cauteries, and be careful not to cut the artery in this new hernia.
Chapter four.
Treatise on ancient hernias.
When you treat hernias with the methods that I have mentioned in the previous cure and in the remedies for diseases, and if the treatment does not help or the disease is beyond what was described in the first cauterization with medicine or fire cauterization, then it is necessary to heat the scalpel cautery until it becomes white-hot, indicating that you are about to apply it to the painful area with a line of length equal to the size of the finger or as appropriate; then wait for one day and press down on the area and perforate the artery and reach the bone.
It is necessary for you to guard against the progression of the mandible, which is moving, you must prevent it from grinding and that the jaw is not stiffened and the nerves surrounding it are not affected, and that spasm does not occur.
If it is about the care and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that has been incised, for in the incision there is fear, especially for those who do not know what to do or are unskilled and inexperienced; let the operation be started at the beginning.
And you should remember the regulation of blood flow after an accident from the artery according to its nature, in its place in this book.
And if you find this illness that does not require this cautery and the body of the patient tolerates it, cauterize there in the middle of the head as we have said before, and care for the wound until it heals.
If you find, administer the cautery that we said in the chapter on the strangulation of the artery with cautionary having two knives, and this cauterization is better and more beneficial.
Chapter 5.
On cauterization for ear pains.
When pain occurs in the ear due to cold and is treated with medicinal or other remedies mentioned in the division, and the pain persists, then burn it with fire, which is called cauterization, and this is known as puncture. The form of it is as follows:
Place the puncture next to the fire and move it around the entire ear as if a wheel is being rolled, or in the vicinity of each example if the pain is in one area. Move the cauterization of the ear's puncture little by little as you try the spot where there is pain.
And if the cauterization of multiple punctures in the entire ear is done, be careful and care for the areas until they heal.
Chapter 6.
On cauterization for burns.
Burns that are healed and require cauterization are not anything other than the species that come through a sting, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cauterization for the type that occurs due to dryness or spasm of a nerve.
When you cure that type of burn with ointments and bandages and guarguarium, and your remedy is not effective, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: first, the ear's puncture, second, a small one on the temple, and third, the junction of the two lips.
Pause your cautery on the side of the affected area, for softening is only seen in the healthy side.
The form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cautery on the right side of the tip of the ear, and over the top of the head, the length of which should be according to the length of the finger, and then pause your hand with the cautery until the required amount of the substance in the cord is burned.
And this is the form of the cauterization, and it is called the cutler's knife, whose shape is like a table. However, it is much more delicate than you might think, and it requires that the knife be sharpened a little to avoid excessive roughness.
Care for the area with what is before the process until it heals.
Chapter 7.
On the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
When ancient apoplexy occurs and treatment is given without regard to what has been said and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: primarily on all corners of his head; also on the middle part of his head, as described previously; and also on his neck. And the method of cauterization is done according to what has been said before.
Then it is cauterized on the mouth of the stomach, which is the last one, and be cured with what you process (i.e., treatment).
Chapter VIII.
On the cauterization of forgetfulness caused by a blow.
It is necessary to give large doses of pills to the patient, providing him with purification.
Then shave the head of the patient completely and place a plaster on his neck as described in the treatise on plasters.
And leave him for some observations, because this is the method of cauterization. Then do as that method prescribes which has been mentioned before.
And if he recovers well with that method; otherwise, make three cauterizations in the lower part of his head, starting from the highest part of the head towards the lower part of the neck. Leave a gap between each cauterization, and care for the cauterized area with what is prescribed.
If you wish to add more and the patient is tolerant of it, then make a cauterization in the middle; if you want to add even more, then cauterize on both sides.
Care for it until it heals; and the cauteries should be olive-shaped as shown before.
Chapter IX.
On cauterization for relief and for softening of the whole body.
It is necessary to process the purification of the head with pills and what has been said; then shave the patient's head, cauterize the middle part of his head with a cautery, cauterize over all the corners of his head, on the lower part of his body, and three cauterizations on the spinal column.
If it is necessary for the softening of the body in some illnesses where the patient tolerates it and the illness is strong, then cauterize it with four cauteries on the spine, and afterwards on the point where the pain begins, and raise your hand higher. Care for it until it heals, and this should be olive-shaped cauterization.
Chapter X.
On the cauterization of epilepsy.
Epilepsy is not cauterized, but that type of epilepsy is caused by a blow.
And it is necessary to clean the brain of him at the beginning with the method described in the division when the patient is great and tolerates the exception of medications.
If the patient is a child who cannot tolerate medications, then administer liquids and powders for purification, first for several days, with good food preparation.
Then shave the head of the patient, and cauterize it in the middle part of his head according to the previous method, and another cauterization on the back of his head, and over each corner of his head cauterize. If the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize him with cauteries as described (i.e., with paralyzing and softening of the body over the spinal column and spine).
The cauteries should be olive-shaped as previously described.
But if the patient is a child, then pause with subtle cauterization according to this method.
Chapter XI.
On the cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are decaying moistures and gross blows, then cauterize it with the cauteries as described in the section on paralysis.
If the cause of melancholy is excessive decline leading to melancholy and the body of the patient is moist, then give him what purifies the brain as described before in the division.
Then shave the head of the patient, and make a turpentine plaster correctly made in a circle over it, and pause it in the middle part of his head.
The patient should be seated, and he should be held on all sides.
And pause the liniment, and it is more suitable for ancient remedies of sheep's wool. Heat that over the fire at a suitable temperature measured by him who puts it on. Place it in the middle part of his head in the circle, and let him lie down until he is sweating.
You perform this on the patient every week once, and give them the best possible treatment until they are healed; or if you wish to cauterize, make small points as much as necessary, but always have a cautery at hand: this is a type of cautery that moistens the brain with equal precision.
Then pause that wound covered or uncovered with linen cloths.
This is the twelfth chapter.
On the cauterization of water flowing in the bladder.
When you are aware that water has begun to flow from the bladder by the signs I have mentioned in the division, then begin and make the patient drink something that cleanses their head, and keep them away from all moisture.
Then he should sit in baths for a few days.
Then command him to shave his head, and cauterize the area in the middle of his head with a cautery; and cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if the beginning of the discharge is from two bladders, or one cauterization if the discharge is from one bladder.
Incise and cauterize all the veins and arteries which are covered by the coat; and let the cauteries be in the length of the temples.
Keep yourself from bleeding when you are being cauterized; and if you see blood flowing from him, stop it with some medicine, which is within your power.
And I will come with knowledge regarding the extraction of arteries and the abscission of these, as well as precautions for bleeding.
Sometimes it is cauterized in the neck between two bones with two cauteries carefully produced.
Chapter XIII.
On the ancient method of cauterizing tears.
When tear ducts are ancient and persistently watery due to veins and arteries that are evidently located in the head's visible area, it is verified that they have superfluous mucus, then cauterize them with a cautery as noted in the beginning of the watery eyes chapter, and apply cautery to the head in the correct place and two cauteries in the neck just below two temples, and two cauteries in the neck just below two bones. And if it is necessary to make an addition, then cauterize the entire length of the nose duct at the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter 12.
Of nose smell cauterization.
When treating the ailment as previously described and your treatment does not improve, then prepare yourself and administer chicory to the patient for three nights; cover their head, and cauterize it with medium-sized oil cautery. Then cauterize the area with a clove-scented cautery and two cauteries on both eyebrows, just below the hairline.
Be careful not to burn yourself while performing the cauterization.
The shape of the clove-scented cautery is as follows:
Chapter 15.
Of eyelid moistening cauterization.
When the eyelid of an eye becomes moist due to illness or excessive moisture, then cauterize the affected eyelid with a cautery and use this lunar-shaped cautery; here is its shape:
And if you, cauterize that (spot) on both eyebrows with two small cauteries throughout the entire area and extend beyond the temples. Let the length of each cautery according to the size of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the size that one third of the eyelid is injured.
Title XVI.
On the cauterization of the eyelid when the hair is converted to parts within and pierces the eyelid.
When the hair of the eyelid is converted into parts within in such a way that it pierces the eyelid, the cauterization is to be done in two ways, because cauterizing can be done either with fire or with medicine.
If cauterizing with fire, order the patient to wash their hair as those who clean it, until they are extended and smoothed; and if it pierces that (area), you must close its wound, then you strengthen the eyelids with a bandage so that it is not bad before the hair grows.
So let the patient's head rest in your lap, and place your hand over the eyelids of the affected area with a finger pressing against the base of the eyelashes according to the figure of a holly leaf, and let the beginning of the pressure be near the hair.
Place a warm cloth or mucilage of bird feathers over the eyelid.
Bring fire to shape the cautery for this purpose.
Bring the cauterizing tool, in the shape that you have marked, gradually in small movements until the surface of the skin is burned evenly, similar to holly leaves, completely visible to the naked eye.
The sign of the healing of the work is that you see the eyelid of the eyelash contracted and the hair of it raised due to the puncture of the eyelid.
So lift your hand and press that area for three days, and place a warm cloth over it to promote healing until the scar is raised. Treat that (area) with saliva until it heals.
But if the hair returns due to some cause and the eyelid becomes soft, then do another cauterization over that entire area just as you did initially.
But if the hair remains in the eyelid, cauterize that area until it returns to its natural position, heals completely and does not pierce the eyelid.
But if you are using a medicinal cautery, order the patient to wash their hair until it is extended and smoothed, and make a holly-leaf shaped piece of paper or cloth.
And take known wax and living vinegar in a cup. In other words, Know this, and mix those known causes well, and do it quickly so that it is not spoiled; spread that mixture over the paper shaped like a holly leaf, and place it on one or both eyelids; place a warm cloth over the affected eye and let the patient's head rest in your lap.
Place the above on the medicine and press it gently without causing pain until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, because a bite is like fire.
So when the patient feels the bite of the medicine, remove the medicine from that area with your fingers; so when the bite ceases, remove the medicine and wash the eyelid with water; then consider if the eyelid is raised as it should be washed with heat or incision, because in this case it is healed; and if not, repeat the application of the medicine on the spot where the medicine was not pressed and do not allow the operation to be damaged until it is healed and the hair is contracted.
And place a warm cloth over the affected area to promote healing until the scar is raised, and treat that area with saliva or another remedy until it heals completely.
It is necessary for you to keep your treatment diligently, ensuring that the medicine does not fall into the eye, and if the eyelid becomes soft within a few days due to some cause of the hair piercing the eyelid, then repeat your treatment on the affected area, just as you did at first, and continue until it is healed.
This is the shape of the mistletoe leaf.
Know that men's hernias vary in size and shape, so do your procedure accordingly.
Do not conceal the path of rectification for him who is versed in this art.
Chapter XVII.
Of cauterization of the fistula that is in the lacrimal sac of a hernia. It appears this section may be discussing a specific medical procedure, possibly involving the treatment or removal of a fistula (an abnormal passage between two parts of an organ) located within the lacrimal sac (the tear duct) of a hernia.
When you treat a fistula as I have previously mentioned in the divisions of diseases and do not consult another doctor, then it is necessary that you cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to place their head in your lap, and have someone hold their head from above in such a way that they are neither hurt nor disturbed by it. This appears to be providing instructions for a specific medical procedure involving cauterization of a fistula.
Then place a piece of linen cloth or a poultice made from feathers on the hernia of the patient. This seems to be part of the instructions for the procedure mentioned earlier.
Then heat the cautery, which has this shape: It appears this is referring to the heating of a specific tool used in the medical procedure mentioned previously. The text does not specify the shape or type of cautery being referred to.
The heated cautery should be concave, shaped like a reed or a pen with a quill, from one end of which the cautery is made. This appears to be describing the shape and form of the heated cautery tool used in the medical procedure mentioned earlier.
And if you wish, it should be inserted into the other end. This seems to indicate that the concave shaped heated cautery should be inserted at the other end of its long, thin form. The purpose is not clear from this passage alone. And if you wish it to come out thusly, let it try. This appears to continue to describe the use and manipulation of the heated cautery tool in the medical procedure mentioned earlier. However, the purpose or intended outcome is not clear from this passage alone.
But the one that is concave is better for the task. This appears to reiterate the importance of using a concave shaped heated cautery tool in the medical procedure mentioned earlier, implying that it is more effective or suitable for the intended task.
Then press the fistula if it has been opened, and draw out pus and dry it. It seems this is additional instructions related to the medical procedure involving cauterization of a fistula, possibly continuing with steps for treating or removing the affected area after cauterizing it. And if it is not opened, you should open it and remove the pus from it. This appears to continue with additional instructions related to the medical procedure involving cauterization of a fistula, possibly describing steps for treating or removing the affected area before cauterizing it. The term "poyredura" is not common in modern medicine and may refer to an older term for pus or a different type of substance produced by the body.
Then place the heated cautery on the hernia and have someone hold it while you apply the cautery to the edge of the nose, so that neither you nor the patient are disturbed, and then press the cautery into the groin and burn the area. This appears to continue with additional instructions related to the medical procedure involving cauterization of a fistula, describing specific steps for applying and using the heated cautery tool. The purpose or intended outcome is not clear from this passage alone.
Therefore, if the cautery enters the bone at the beginning, that is good; otherwise, you should repeat the cauterization once or twice, as necessary; and leave it in this state for three days, then apply a plaster over that area with an absorbent dressing until it heals. This appears to continue with additional instructions related to the medical procedure involving cauterization of a fistula, possibly describing steps for treating or removing the affected area after cauterizing it. The purpose or intended outcome is not clear from this passage alone.
But if it has not healed after ten days, apply a sharp, corrosive medicine to the bone until it is exposed and scraped as necessary in its own chapter. It seems this passage may be discussing an alternative or additional treatment option for a failed cauterization procedure involving a fistula, possibly involving the use of a corrosive substance to remove or treat the affected area. However, the purpose or intended outcome is not clear from this passage alone.
And another method of cauterization for a fistula which some have described earlier: Enter the location of the fistula and burn it, then place a thin strip of wax or thread with the shape of a string at that site: The length of the thread should be one inch of lead melted; and hold your hand over it with good grip, so as not to harm the patient because the molten lead does not reach the hernia of the person; and you must apply pressure on the hernia of the patient with a piece of linen cloth or water, because the lead adheres to the fistula and cures it miraculously. This appears to describe an alternative or additional method for treating a fistula using cauterization, involving the application of molten lead. The purpose or intended outcome is not clear from this passage alone.
If the fistula is healed by the cauterization and treatment as previously described, that is good; otherwise, it is necessary to administer a nose drop and reduce the fistula into the nostril according to its proper location. This appears to continue with additional instructions or an alternative treatment option for a failed cauterization procedure involving a fistula, possibly involving the use of a nose drop to treat or remove the affected area. However, the purpose or intended outcome is not clear from this passage alone.
Chapter XVIII. It appears that this may be another chapter in the text discussing medical procedures and treatments.
Of cauterization of the fissure of the buttocks. This appears to indicate that the following section or sections may discuss a specific medical procedure involving cauterization of a fissure located in the buttocks. The purpose or intended outcome is not clear from this passage alone.
Most frequently fissures occur in the labia, especially in children's labia. This appears to describe a common occurrence or condition involving fissures of the labia, possibly indicating that the following sections may discuss treatments or procedures for this issue. However, the purpose or intended outcome is not clear from this passage alone.
Therefore, if your treatment of the fissures as we have previously mentioned does not improve, then you should heat a small, sharp knife in this manner: It seems that the following passage is providing instructions for a specific medical procedure involving cauterization of a fissure using a heated, sharp knife. The purpose or intended outcome is not clear from this passage alone.
And the concave shape of it according to the size and sharpness of the blade. It appears that this is continuing with instructions for the procedure involving cauterization of a fissure using a heated, sharp knife, possibly specifying the shape and size of the tool to be used. However, the purpose or intended outcome is not clear from this passage alone.
Then press that knife carefully into the fissures, ensuring that the cautery reaches the base of the fissures. This appears to continue with instructions for the procedure involving cauterization of a fissure using a heated, sharp knife, possibly describing how to properly insert the tool into the affected area. However, the purpose or intended outcome is not clear from this passage alone.
Approach caring for that which has been cauterized until it heals.
Chapter XIX.
Chapter on Cauterization of Fistula in the Mouth.
When an abscess forms at the base of the uvula or on the palate or in the gums and it breaks, becomes chronic, and turns into a fistula, and if the treatment does not help to heal it, then you must cauterize the fistula according to its size, put the heated cautery into the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand inside until the heat reaches the end of it, and do this once or twice; and approach caring for that which has been cauterized as we have said before, until it heals.
And if the abscess is drained and heals, that is good; but if not, it is necessary to explore the area and remove the corrupt bone as will be explained in its respective section.
Chapter XX.
Chapter on Cauterization of the Teeth and Softening of the Gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are bad, and you treat them with medicines but they do not improve, then you must place the patient's head on your lap, and approach heating the cautery in the form that will be described below, so that you can quickly place it on the tooth and insert it into the hole of the tooth while the cautery is heated, and hold your hand a little inside so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth.
Approach your hand, approach the cautery some times according to what you wish.
The patient should drink salt water for an hour, then rinse it out because the bad tooth is closed and the inflamed gum is strengthened and the decayed moisture is dried up.
Chapter XXI.
This line translates to:
When tooth pain is due to cold or worms, or it does not respond to medication, then cauterization of that area is performed in two ways: either by using a cow's horn, or by fire.
Using a cow's horn is performed by taking the horn, heating it in a pot, and wrapping it with cloth at the tip of the horn. Then immerse the hot horn-tip in water and place it on the painful tooth as quickly as possible until it cools down.
Then repeat this process several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, immerse cloth or wool in the horn mentioned above and place it on the painful tooth. Place the hot iron on top of the horn and hold it there until the iron reaches the cavity of the tooth.
However, the cauterization by fire is to be attended by someone skilled in this procedure and have some roughness or iron at the tip to prevent the heat of the fire from reaching the patient's mouth.
Then, heat the cautery with whatever method you prefer and place it on the tooth while holding your hand over it until it cools down. This should be done several times as the pain may persist for one or more days.
And it is necessary to use pressure on the cauterized area, so that the patient holds their mouth with a good piece of wood for an hour and then spits it out. This is the method of applying the cautery.
Cauterize only the affected area as you are able.
This is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter XXII.
This line translates to:
When a hernia is caused by a blow or cold humors and does not respond to digestive medications, and you wish to promote the digestion of that area gently, then heat the cautery in the shape as follows: have two ends separated by which the smoke escapes through one end, and hold the heated cautery over the abscess once, and if necessary, repeat until it reaches the edge of the abscess.
If the abscess is small, then hold the cautery over it according to its size, and let it rest for three days before using a cloth-covered stick to remove what the fire has burned.
And heal that area with ointments, bandages, and dressings until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
This line translates to:
When humidity comes over the bronchial tube of the lung, especially when this is accompanied by cold and complexion problems, it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at first with laxative medications, and then cauterize the base of the trachea in the affected area.
Be careful not to burn the trachea with the cautery or char the cartilage of it, but only a little.
Cauterize that area with another cautery at the joint of the neck in the lower vertebrae. The cautery should be heated as previously described.
And heal that area with what was mentioned earlier until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
This line translates to:
When cough and lung disease are due to excess moisture, the patient has no fever or chills, and the condition is long-standing, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the collarbone in the areas where it curves outward and inward; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the nipples. The cautery should be heated as previously described.
And if you wish, the cauterization can be performed using the punctate cautery, whose shape was previously described in the section on ear pain.
Make incisions in the affected areas as appropriate, and heal that area with whatever was mentioned earlier until it is healed.
And the cautery should have three holes, as cauterization is done using this method: for one session you can perform three cauteries in this manner:
Chapter .xxv.
On the cauterization of tibial tuberosities, which is the head of the shinbone.
When the head of the shinbone (tibial tuberosity) is dislocated due to excessive lubrication and is not fixed at the time of its return, it should be reduced before it is customary to do so, then with a small movement it can be displaced in this way, as we have witnessed, in this case, firstly you must reduce the dislocation, and place the patient on their back or side; and raise the knee that is above the affected area by lifting the sheet which is in the inner part of the thigh to the outer parts with your left hand if the joint is dislocated towards the inner part.
Then apply fire to the cautery which has two heads, and this is its shape:
Then cauterize the knee joint until it penetrates through to the other side, and the figure of the cauterization will then have four heads (or prongs).
And in some cases it is adjusted according to this count and for the number of cauterizations, which are eight.
Then place the cautery on hold for a while with salt, and ensure that the patient remains calm, and the limb is not injured for any length of time until it has been comforted.
And if the dislocation is towards the upper part and it is treated in this way, then cauterize over the muscle with a cautery spike or multiple cauteries pointed, as the joint is confirmed and the moisture is dissipated and the patient is healed.
Chapter .xxvi.
On the cauterization of the stomach.
When there is froth and mucus in the stomach that increases rapidly and multiplies its complexity, and if you continue with the treatment methods and do not relieve it, then the patient must be placed on their back, and extend their arms and legs, and then cauterize it with three cauteries: one cautery under the feet by the length of a finger, another cautery at the costal margins of the ribs, to form a triangular shape; and elongate those that are not adjacent to avoid burns.
And if the depth of the cautery is two thirds of the thickness of the knee joint.
The shape of the cautery should be in this form without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery at the middle location of the stomach according to this form, and this should be a circular shaped cautery according to this form:
And the stomach should be cauterized point by point where that area of the cautery is scared: and you should mark points on the stomach according to the amount of tension you wish, and then cauterize those points with a cautery; and treat it with the preceding treatment until it is healed.
Chapter .xxvii.
On the cauterization of a varicose vein.
When there is pain in the varicose vein due to heat or moisture or large swelling beyond its normal size and it is treated with the methods mentioned and not relieved, then the patient must be placed on their back, and three cauteries according to this form and this quantity should be marked on the varicose vein below the hypochondriac region, where the male's buttocks are located.
The space between each cautery should be according to the width of the finger, and the cauterizations should be according to the length of the straight body.
Do not compress the tissue with the cautery.
If the amount of the patient's condition matches the size of the knee joint and it is not well adjusted; if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then sit them down, which you have already extended their legs, and lift their arms.
And it is possible for you to use these cauteries with a surgical knife when you are skillful and prudent in the art.
Be careful not to overdo the cauterization, and ensure that the entire thickness of the knee joint is cauterized so that the entire body is reached until the intestines, as the knee joint here is delicate; and know this.
Chapter .xxviii.
On the perforation of an abscess in the varicose vein with a cautery.
When there is an excrescence or abscess in the varicose vein and you want to know if the abscess is in the flesh of the vein or its tunica, then if it is in the flesh of the vein, the patient will feel heaviness and pain without worsening.
And if it is in the tunica of the varicose vein, the pain will be greatly increased and often fatigue doctors in treating it.
Therefore, the patient must be placed face up on the bed; and then press the area of the abscess with your hand, and apply a heated cauterizing instrument resembling a rag, whose shape was described on the previous page. And cauterize with that instrument and the cauterizing iron until all the pus is burned, until it reaches the skin, until pus is expelled.
Then treat the other abscesses with treatment until they are healed.
And do not use this cauterization method only in this way, but rather the one that has been studied in medical art and in which many diseases have been known; but you must experiment with it several times on this operation, but nevertheless read about it thoroughly, for it is better.
Chapter XXIX.
On the cauterization of wounds.
The ancients used cautery of arteries according to this method for the treatment of wounds, and you should take a long, dry wound from the art of surgery that is found, and it should be thick like the finger.
And immerse that wound in oil and heat it up, and then cauterize at that location which is between the continuation of the collarbone with the neck; and with two small cauterizations on either side of the area just below the beard, and two cauterizations in the area between the fifth rib and the breast, slightly declining towards the back; and another on the middle of the leg; and another on the stomach, and three cauterizations on the backside; and one at that location between the two shoulders, and two more on the sides of the thighs, after the cauterization between the shoulders.
And do not press your hand with the cauterizing iron, but rather hold it openly over the wound.
And some ancients used a cauterizing iron resembling a ray and heated that with fire, and placed it in the area between the ribs until they reached the abscess and the pus was expelled, as mentioned in the abscess of the thigh.
But in this perforation with cauterization there is no fear, for death quickly occurs at the site of the fistula where there is no healing.
Chapter XXX.
On the cauterization of the spleen.
When treating the disease of the spleen as described in the treatment and division, do not add your treatment, then you cauterize where three or four lines are made according to the length of the spleen, following the figure of the cauterizations of the thigh, whose figure was described earlier.
And between each cauterization, the thickness should be that of a finger or slightly more, and the method of cauterizing should be the same as described in the cauterization of the thigh.
And do not press your hand with the cauterizing iron; and the patient should lie on his back.
And another method of cauterizing is to heat the cauterizing iron with two prongs, as described in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift the wound that is at the edge of the spleen, allowing the patient to lie comfortably on his left side.
And your lifting should be such that you lift the wound according to the length of the body, so that cauterizations can be made according to the width of the body.
And press together the two prongs, heat them well, in the area where they will pierce the wound on the other side.
And remove the cauterizing iron; and therefore four cauterizations are made.
And if you wish, cauterize with a three-pronged cauterizing instrument.
And you cure the cauterizing iron that has been left unused for several days, as it is more convenient than other causes in treatment.
Chapter XXXI.
On the cauterization of edema.
Do not cauterize in edema but rather in the cavity.
When treating edema as described in the treatment and division, if you do not add your treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauterizations around the navel and one on the stomach, and another on the thigh, and another on the spleen, and two cauterizations between the vertebrae of the back, and one at the right side of the hip, and another on the stomach. The depth of the cautery should be proportionate to the thickness of the skin.
Then spread open the cautery so that it penetrates deeply for a long time.
Do not remove the patient from treatment near the cautery unless it is necessary for them to be moved, and hasten their recovery with assistance.
The shape of the cautery that is used to treat the abdomen should be round according to its previous form, and it is that one which is used to treat the wound which is oval in its previous form.
Chapter 32.
On the cauterization of feet and cavities.
When the feet are swollen and filled with sterile water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot between the auricular and anular, and lift your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; and raise your hand, but do not completely return it, because the sterile water runs.
The cautery is made in this way: Place two cauteries on the two cavities and make a cautery with the tip of each cautery. And the length of the cautery should be equal to the size of the cavity: and the first one should be placed at one end and the other at the middle point of the cavity, and two cauteries on each cavity.
Leave the wound open without treatment for a long time so that some water drains from it.
Take care of those causes that we have mentioned.
Chapter 33.
On the cauterization of abdominal tissue.
When abdominal tissue becomes loose and damp due to the weakening of its supportive structure, it is the digestive and retentive function that suffers, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is cured with various methods of treatment but does not improve, and sometimes the patient may suffer from cauterization revealing its virtue, then cauterize that area with a large cautery over the stomach as mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach, with the circular cautery and four subtle cauteries around the umbilicus, with a thin cautery; and with a cautery on the navel or two cauteries.
And if excessive dampness and the patient are tolerant, then cauterize that area on the penis and on the intestines, and tightly adjust two cauteries over the stomach and near the inguinal region, because it is a complete cure for which you should not deviate.
Chapter 34.
On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
When natural or old hemorrhoids occur due to thick humors or corrupted moisture, and are not cured by what has been said in the division [treatment section], then it is cauterized with three cauteries on the base of the anus (the small and narrow opening) and a smaller triangular one, and with a cautery on the navel, pierced twice.
And if you suspect that the stomach of [the patient] is cooled and their food is spoiled, and their face is covered with pustules, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery according to what was preceded; and with one cautery on the liver, and another cautery over the spleen with a pointed cautery, and leave it open for some time until it heals.
Chapter 35.
On the cauterization of a boil near its abscess.
When you abscise a boil, you heat the cautery that resembles a ray. Place the heated cautery in that boil you have abscised, and hold your hand over it until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which pus flows.
Do this once or twice, for if the boils are numerous, you cauterize each one as has been said, and cover them with ointment until they heal.
If a large cautery is used for cauterization, it is more effective.
Chapter 36.
On the cauterization of fistulas that occur naturally in the divisions [parts] of [the body].
When nature does not obey the work recommended in its place, and the patient is afraid of it, heal with cauterization.
Therefore, when a fistula occurs naturally in someone and is old, corrupted by pus and moisture, it is appropriate that the cauterization is tried on that spot with a thin probe, and the amount of depth is observed with the previously mentioned probe.
Place the heated cautery that resembles a ray. And place that heated cautery in this fistula, and according to the depth as measured by the probe.
And repeat over that area until the corrupt flesh is burned immediately once or twice or three times, according to your need.
Be careful not to burn nerves and veins; or if the fistula is in the body of the bladder or the body of the intestine, take care of all those places; do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy area and you think it does not penetrate.
Approach the area within which healing occurs.
If the area is sealed and the matter removed from it for a long time, then you should know that it is completely healed.
If the matter is not kept out, you should know that it penetrates deeper or corrupts the bone in the area, and it may be recalled to its place due to those causes that will come to mind there.
Capital thirty-seven. (numbering system based on chapter/section)
On the cauterization of ulcers.
When there is pain in ulcers due to cold or swelling, and the patient's body is weakened by it, you must cauterize that area on each ulcer with a cautery on each ulcer, using a cautery rod preceded by memory.
Hold the probe firmly with a small gap in between, so that three cauteries will be lined up, and thus they will work better in aid.
Capital thirty-eight. (numbering system based on chapter/section)
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When the bladder becomes weakened and soft due to cold and moisture, so that the patient cannot hold in their urine, you must then cauterize it in the lower part below the bladder, starting from the pubic bone, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left.
The length of each cautery should be according to the size of the wound; cauterize that area with one cautery in the lowest part of the incision, or with two if necessary.
The handle of the cautery should be as long as required.
Capital thirty-nine. (numbering system based on chapter/section)
On the cauterization of the liver.
When cold and moisture occur in the liver, abstention is forbidden, and menstruation is corrupted, and their provocation is delayed, and pain occurs, you must then cauterize that area around the navel with three cauteries as described in the cauterization of the bladder; and with one cautery on the lower part of the incision, or two, and use a long handle for the cautery.
Capital forty. (numbering system based on chapter/section)
On the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
When cold and moisture settle in the area of the ankle, and it causes swelling of its location, and its symptom is that the limb is extended beyond the other when compared to it. And the dislocation site is located in the joint.
Therefore, you must cauterize the patient around the ankle joint with a circular cautery as shown in Figure A to test its location, and because it will fall into the middle of the circle.
The shape of the cautery should be as shown in the cauterization of the stomach.
If that cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three large olive-shaped cauteries.
Make the cautery according to the size of the incision in the entire colon; approach the area within which healing occurs.
Capital forty-one. (numbering system based on chapter/section)
On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs in the ankle area due to cold and moisture, the patient is treated with what has been mentioned earlier (cauteries) but without conferring them, which is ancient practice, you must then draw off gross humors from the patient using foul-smelling pills or artificial ones that resemble them; and approach the cauterization.
The method of cauterization in that case is one of two methods: cauterizing with medications that burn or cauterizing with fire.
According to two scientific methods, of which one is to cauterize it on the incision of the ankle with three triangular cauteries in this shape and good depth. The space between each cautery should be equal to the thickness of the finger, and if the cauteries are olive-shaped or large.
In some cases, the cautery may be placed on the midpoint of the ankle joint where there are four cauteries.
If you wish, cauterize with the circle whose shape is shown in the cauterization of the ankle dislocation, and which contains and burns the entire incision of the colon.
This is the method of cauterization for sciatica when pain is adhered to the ankle and not extended into the body.
If it is extended into the body, you must then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the body over the location where the patient feels the pain; and one cautery over the hip for about four fingers' width.
And if the cautery is a knife, the depth of the cautery should be according to the thickness of the skin.
If the patient is affected with pain that extends to the place near the feet, then cauterize it there using a cautery with three or four points, or more if necessary.
If the patient's pain is in the side of the body, then cauterize it with a knife cautery.
Be careful in all cauterization that you do not burn nerves or major vessels, and be aware that this may cause harm to the patient or contractions.
I have seen one or more of these who cauterized on the hump and burned too deeply in the cauterization, and the leg became swollen until the tumor reached the foot, and it was burnt and rotted away completely. And the remedy for this problem is swift action, and it leads to death.
If the pain is in two separated parts, then cauterize each one according to this method.
The wise men say in the cauterization of any cautery that this is the method: make it similar to a circle of iron, and its circumference should be the size of a palm; and place the orifices accordingly according to the thickness of an almond or walnut seed.
Inside that circle should be another third; and the space between them should be the size of a knuckle; and those circles should be open in two parts; and the length of those cays should be one or two inches, and make the edges of iron decorative on the circles; and this is the shape of it:
Then ignite it in the fire until it becomes red-hot and sparks, and then place it on the divided part of the cautery, with the patient holding onto the sides. And therefore cauterize that one with three circles in one session.
Leave it for three days; apply it with paste and leave the wound open for several days; and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
According to Al-Zahrawi: my son, of this type of cautery we have rarely used it due to the fear of its appearance and because few people look at it.
More of the solid cauteries are applied to that which is affected by it, and the location of it is identified.
More cauterization with medicinal substances is that you should make two circles, pierced by an armlet through which the handle of iron passes; the length of the walls in the width of their thickness should be two inches or whatever size they are.
And if the space between each one is equal to the thickness of a finger; and they are open both above and below, and they should contain something inside them in this shape:
Place it on the divided part of the cautery with the patient lying down and pressing your hand on the divided part of the cautery; and take some boiled water and pour it between two circles, and let the quality of that be with a small fire slowly, hold it for the amount of an hour, and allow the patient to feel the biting and pressure of itfor that will cause burninguntil the pain stops.
And lift your hand with the instrument and rinse the boiled water from all the cautery with soft water.
Leave it for three days and let it rest on the paste until the burn is completely gone, leave it for several days, and pus will run out from it; this is best in treatment.
Treat it with ointment until it is healed.
If the pain extends into the body or chest, make it standing in such a position that contains water as was done with the cautery.
This is the method of boiled water, and I have already written it in the treatise on the rectification of medications. Recipe for alkali and the removal of an undesired growth on both sides in one, and strain it and let it settle in a new winnowing tray with the divided part opened by a small hole, according to the amount that enters it.
Let it settle in the bottom of the other winnowing tray or one that is already filled with water, and pour over it alkali and living growth from boiled water that takes up about a finger, and when you press them with your hand for good compression, let the hole that leads to acidic water in the divided part of the other winnowing tray open.
Approximately adjust all that water, and pour it over another living cause and other alkaline reagents, because at that point it will have strong acute power, which is administered in many medical operations and in cauterizing other members, as this process involves fire.
And some of the medications are those with which cauterization is done, such as pitch and honey mixed with sulfur.
Galen recounts of an ancient man the operation and cure for pain in the ankle and sciatica, and it is said to be a very great thing, and he claims that no other treatment is necessary, and because it is cured in one go as recommended, the remedy is powerful enough that one can rely on it.
It is to be taken of certain green mustard seed, and if it is not found, fig leaves are taken; and it should be crushed with a little salt and placed on the ankle where the pain is, or on the joint, or on the leg, and tied.
It should be left for three hours or for the amount that the patient chooses according to their tolerance of heat.
Then immerse it in warm water and when the body is heated, rub it on the affected area, as the pain stops and it is healed.
And know that one should not use cautery with these medications but rather promote the cleansing of the body.
Hippocrates also says that when the vein is cut with a goat's throat it should be cauterized, and this will help; and use caution in the following manner: take wool and immerse it in ancient oil, and place it between the feet and between the crevices.
Then take a dry goat's throat and inflate it with fire until carbonized; then place it on the wool and let it burn through. And repeat this procedure until the sensation of the bite reaches the ankle and the pain stops.
This method of cauterization is called branding with cows.
Chapter 42.
On the cauterization of toothache.
Toothache occurs for various reasons such as trauma or injury, or excessive cleansing, and due to similar causes, by the infusion of cold and wet material.
Cauterization should not be used in any other cases except for this one, which is done by the emission of cold material.
Therefore, promote cleansing of the patient with pills and similar substances that are made on the tooth in question three lines deep according to its location, and then make incisions every line or more, depending on the tolerance of the patient and the strength of the material.
And make the cauterization with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three or four cauteries using a medium-sized clamp in the following manner:
Chapter 43.
On the cauterization at the beginning of jaundice.
In many cases, this disease occurs in infants; and one of the signs of its onset in infants is that their structure becomes flaccid and weakens, causing them to lose strength and have difficulty moving.
Behind the lower spine of the back and neck that starts to rise above other vertebrae.
And when you want to stop it, then cauterize the area with a circular cautery shaped as follows: hold the cauterizer over the entire swollen part of the vertebrae.
And if you wish to, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery for two or three lines. And let these points be close together.
And carefully care for the area until it heals as I have said.
But beware that cauterization should not be administered in glandular swellings caused by nerve spasms.
Chapter XLIV.
On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore, when gout caused by cold is treated with the appropriate methods of care and the pain subsides, then you can use cauterization.
And it is that you cauterize this area with appropriate evacuation around the joint of the foot using multiple cauterizations.
And let the olive-shaped cautery be as follows:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain extends into the toes or other joints, and it sometimes worsens, then cauterize this area over each toe with three or four cauterizations using the olive-shaped cautery all around.
And if you find that multiple cauterizations are necessary for this procedure, then cauterize the area and do not press too hard with your hand beforehand, just bring the cautery near to the skin.
And if the pain extends into the big toe and second toe, then administer the cauterization as described in its own chapter.
And if the pain is only in the nails, it is called paronychia, then make an incision around the nail bed as follows: make an incision along these two lines.
If the pain remains in the feet, make points on the circumference of the joints on each toe and at the wrist.
If the pain continues for some days in the joints or muscles, then cauterize all parts of the affected areas.
Do not evacuate the patient by good regimen and receiving of medications, for if good regimen is followed and this cauterizing is done, he will be cured, God help us.
Chapter 45.
On cauterization of ruptures.
When you encounter a rupture in the hernia and the intestine is pushed against the abdominal wall, and this begins to occur, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to fast on his day and use softening agents to ease the fissure of his stomach.
Then keep the patient close to you on his bed and command him to keep his food inside until the rupture is expelled or the intestine or hernia appears.
Then return him with you to the same place and tell the assistant to attempt the rupture on the hip bone at the point where it resembles the circumference of a circle in the separated parts of the chest.
And bring the hot cautery which has this shape:
small and rounded. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place the cautery on that point with your other hand holding the cautery steady, and bring it into the bone of the hip joint to the midpoint of the thigh; and repeat this again if you have not succeeded in reaching the bone during the first examination.
Be careful to distinguish the intestine from the hernia during your cauterization, so that you do not burn the intestine, causing death or grave harm to the patient.
Know that when you have not touched the bone with the cautery, do not consider your operation successful.
The cautery for children should be fine-tuned according to their size and age.
Care the cauterized area for three days with dressing until the scar of the fire is healed.
Also care that area with ointments until it is healed.
The patient should remain on his bed for forty days until the site and wound are healed.
It is necessary to withhold food from the patient according to the duration of his treatment, and ensure that the intestine does not protrude due to the effort to heal.
When forty days have passed, administer the medication appropriately, and continue it for another forty days.
Be weakened by work and lack of food and drink, and with strong vomiting, for when he uses this method of treatment completely, he will be cured.
I shall speak of the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the stomach, and this is at the beginning, and do not stop, cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and ensure that it is expelled as the third part of it; and care for it as we have said earlier, and do not neglect it.
And some of the first ones have said that rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this way, for it is named so by trial and error:
and it is marked by a line that extends from the side to the back above the rupture, and another line above; and place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cauterizing is lighter and better.
Chapter 46.
On cauterization of twisting.
When a pain arises in some limb due to accident or trauma and the pain persists for a long time and does not respond to treatment with medications, it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
The cautery for each member should be according to its size and smallness, and potency and effectiveness, as well as the location of the twisting and pain in it.
If it is healed by the first cauterization, that is good; if not, continue with it on him; for it is customary for such pains to be pointed in the affected limb close to the patient, so it is necessary to achieve this with cautery until the patient is cured.
Chapter 47.
Treatise on Cauterization for Leprosy.
Some cases of leprosy are treated with cauterization as a great help, and particularly if the type of leprosy is caused by corruption of flesh and melancholy.
Therefore, if you wish to cauterize it, consider whether the leprosy is common and can be treated with what has been said in the classification and not be disregarded, or not present, and fear that corruption encompasses the entire body of the patient and all their limbs, then cauterize it on the head with two cauteries: one at the middle part of the head, and the second below it, move the forehead to the end of the hairs; and both above two horns; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
Lastly, place your hand with the cautery a little into it that it presses slightly on the bone and the scars are displaced, so that the expiration of thick vapors is alleviated from there; and cauterize over the sore as prescribed.
If the leprosy has already spread over the patient and is evidently present, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with the cauteries that have been mentioned in the head; and a cautery on the end of the nose, and two cauteries on both eyebrows, and two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and one large on the vertebra close to the buttocks, and one on the buttock, and two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and two on the heels and one on each heel, and two on the elbows, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of its feet; and cauterize it over all the joints of the hands and feet, and over every talon of its feet, and over the folds of its limbs.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are over the talons.
In some cases it is cauterized with one cautery on the pelvis bone and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
And you should know that the more cauteries are applied, the more it is helpful and beneficial; and you should know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, just as he does not have them, because their body is already numb.
It is necessary that the cauteries be large or small according to the limbs and joints, depending on the properties of the instruments.
Then treat the cautery with flour of eggs beaten with honey and the other treatment until it heals.
Chapter xlvi.
Treatise on Cauterization for Fainting.
When a member is stationary or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and not healed, then you cauterize the member that has become stationary with cauteries in accordance with the size of the member or its smallness.
And your cautery should be inserted slightly into the flesh. Then treat it with mouthwash until it heals.
And in some cases, fainting that affects the hands and feet, the spine of the back, and the eyesight of the nerves that move that member is cauterized; and the fainting subsides.
But do not presume this unless he who is knowledgeable in the anatomy of members and the exit of nerves throughout the body moving them verifies it.
Chapter xlix.
Treatise on Cauterization for Ulcers that are Cancerous.
When an ulcer is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal mouthwashes, then you cauterize it over that one with a preheated cautery in accordance with the depth of the flesh until the whiteness and color of it disappears, and its color changes.
Then treat it with flour of eggs and lentils moistened with rose oil and arnica leaves, and with the blood of pigeons or hares, each part being divided and all mixed, and place a thin cloth over it until healed.
Chapter li.
Treatise on Cauterization for Cancer.
When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery in the circumference of it as it is rotated.
And the wise men say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle; but this has not been seen by me, because I fear it may be ulcerated, and I have seen this in some cases.
It is more appropriate that it be cauterized in the circumference of it with a circular cautery as we have said, or with many cauteries.
Chapter li.
Treatise on Cauterization for Adubilati.
When an adubilati is delayed in maturation, this is due to surplus or the state of the patient, because he is old and decrepit, has little blood, or due to time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of adubilati; then cauterize it in the circumference with many small punctured cauteries; and apply it that it becomes ripe.
But if you wish to perforate it with the cautery, then you ignite the cautery in the shape of this: and place it in the middle of the adubilati until it penetrates the flesh.
And if the cautery is applied in that place which is below [the affected area], to relieve the arm's pain; and attend to the affected internal part, so it may be healed.
62.
Capitol .lviii.
Capitol .lxii.
Capitol .lxiii.
Capitol .lxvi.
Capitol .lxvii.
Capitol .lxviii.
Capitol .lxix.
Capitol .lxx. Capitol .lxxi.
Capitol .lxxii.
The text ends here. Here's a summary of the translation:
Capitol .lxiii.
Capitol .lxiii.
Hot cautery in fire is the one you heat the concave cautery shaped like a pen of turning, which should be made of iron according to the required quantity that contains the claw from all sides, and it should be thin-edged.
Then pause that which is heated on the claw, and then turn your hand around the cautery in a circle until the cautery reaches the depth of the claw. Leave it for three days until it begins to drip pus. Then apply an ointment made of crushed wild mallow mixed with salt, and leave the ointment on it for a night, because this will eliminate the root.
Take care of the area with the generation of flesh until it heals.
And if it does not convert, and after several observations on the surface of the body, especially in the limbs and feet, you must administer cauteries with water, and take a cup made of glass or metal or pen-shaped, and place it on the claw; then pour some hot water into the cup, keep your hand, and turn the cup around with pressure from your whole hand, compressing the rim of the cup against the side of the claw, and block the flow of the hot water by the edge of the hole in the cup; and wait for the patient for an hour until the water boils, and then remove it, because the claw with its roots will be eliminated.
And do this to all of them until they have all been drained from the body.
Take care of the pus that the roots of the claws have been eliminated with the generation of flesh.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the cauterization of tremors.
When a tremor occurs due to cold in the nerve or due to a fever of cold origin, or for another similar reason, then it is necessary to cauterize that with four cauterizations or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cautery; and on the feet, on the stomach, with an olive-shaped cautery.
And the tremor of it subsides and hastens the healing of the cold disease.
Chapter LV.
On the cauterization of accidents in the body.
When the body has been spilled with pustules, and are wounds made of corrupt matter; therefore at the beginning when it appears, it is necessary to cauterize over the entire hole with a subtle cautery made of myrtle wood, the tip of which is extended with fire; or with the razor of estrology long; or with a cautery that is slow-burning.
Sometimes it is necessary to cauterize at the beginning of its expulsion in this manner; and not believe, and rupture the superfluity, healing from them.
But nevertheless it is necessary that it be done by evacuation with phlebotomy.
Chapter LVI.
On the cauterization of blood flow accidents through the incision of artery.
Sometimes a flow of blood from an artery occurs that has been cut through the wound, or it is cut through a postemata or cauterized member, and then it seems difficult to stop it.
Therefore when this happens, you must try with your hand at the opening of the artery, and pause over it, pressing on the wound repeatedly until the flow of blood subsides and does not come out.
And pause the olive-shaped cauteries few and large in number, by means of many blowing on them until they are heated.
And take one of them, either small or large depending on the location and wound where the artery has been broken, over that vein hastily before you have removed the bleeding, and cauterize it until it is contracted and stopped the blood flow.
And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove it and extract the cautery, then take another cauterization carefully prepared in the fire, and do not cease to do this until the blood flow is stopped.
And beware that you do not burn the nerve that is here, and let another harm come to the patient.
And you should know that when the artery flows blood, it is not possible to stop the blood flow in these cases, and especially when the artery is large, if not with one of the four methods: or by cauterizing as mentioned above, or by extraction when it has not been extracted, for when the ends of it are burned and the blood flow is stopped, or it should be tied with a thread or tightened with a ligature, or they should be stopped with medications whose virtue is to stop the blood; and they should be strengthened with pulvinar and compression.
But the one who administers a suitable compression with thread and ligature with fabrics or by the action of burning and similar things, does not confirm it unless necessary.
If the situation requires it, open the incision on the indicated vein as previously described, and understand the great constraint of it until the blood stops flowing from the main part of the wound, and do not let the artery be ruptured; and pour over the artery cold water of great coolness until the blood clots and thickens; but be careful in case there is a need for cauterization or medication.
On incision, perforation, punctures, and lancing, as well as wounds and their similarities.
We have already stated in the first chapter that cautery with fire is suitable and burning medicine is appropriate, as well as the occasions and causes for it, along with the necessary instruments and the forms of the cauteries; and I have organized the chapters from the superiority of the head to the feet.
In this chapter, we will proceed in such a manner to alleviate the pain of the afflicted person, then move on to what has been requested by him.
Before I begin this, let me remind you that in this chapter we will discuss the matter of cautery as mentioned in the first chapter on cauterization.
And because it is necessary to take great care in the operation mentioned in this chapter, because evacuation, which is with blood and which preserves life, must be carefully applied to the vein or incision on an abscess or opening of an ulcer or purification of a wound or extraction of a thorn or incision for a stone and their similarities. And with all these there is fear and trembling, and in the most extreme cases, death.
I advise you to be careful not to fall into a situation in which there is uncertainty, because sometimes you must behave as a healthy person rather than as a sick one. And there are some for whom the illness itself takes them away easily due to its severity and due to the length of their illness, and with this illness, death is feared.
And among them are those who offer you money and ask for health, but their illness is harmful.
Therefore, it is not necessary for you to agree with the one who comes to you with this behavior; your caution should be greater than greed and avarice; do not presume any cause without certain knowledge of which you are certain, and to which good results will follow.
Use in the treatment of all your patients with prognosis and indication of that to which health is converted, because in this you are helped towards acquisition of fame, memory, praise, and glory.
Oh children, God inspire your understanding and do not lead or protect you, because this is in His hand.
I have organized this chapter differently than the one on cauterization, according to the treatment of the head to the feet, so that you may be relieved of what you have requested and for which you have a need.
First chapter.
Chapter on the water cure that is found in the head of children.
Know that this illness, which is often found in children, should be treated with infancy and when the newborn's head is swaddled.
And sometimes it occurs due to an unknown cause.
I do not see this illness except in children; and all those whom I have seen suffer from it are close to death, so this is evident work on them.
I have seen a child whose head was filled with water and whose head was so swollen that he could not lift his head, and moreover, the increased humidity led to death by fever.
This humidity can be added between the scalp and bone, or it can accumulate below the bones of the skull.
Because the operation in this case if the humidity is between the scalp and bone and the abscess is small, then it is necessary for you to make an incision in the middle of the head with a fissure at its length, and the length of the fissure should be no more than two fingers' width until the humidity runs out, and this is the form of the spatula:
And if the humidity is more increased and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions according to this method:
And if the humidity is below the bones, then you will see the junctures of the head opened widely on all sides and the water will be squeezed out when you press it with your hand in the interior joints, but this should not be hidden from you. You must make three incisions in the correct place on the head following this method:
And drain out all the moisture; bind up the incisions with cloths and feathers; apply oil and vinegar for five days, then unbind them and treat the wound with poultices and ointments, bind the head evenly; feed the patient dry food of little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
Another method of incision is to consider the size of the abscess and the collection of water, because in some cases it is more on the occiput (back of the head), or the forehead, or one side; therefore pay attention to the incision where the abscess and collection of water appear, and do it as best possible for you.
And beware that you do not cut the artery and allow blood flow and kill the patient with that outflow of blood due to the evacuation of moisture.
Chapter second.
When an ulcer or wound occurs on the ears or feet, and it is ancient and does not benefit from the treatment of medicines, then the last cure in this case is to make an incision of those two arteries.
Therefore, when you want to incise the one that the patient raises his head, bind the area with rough cloth where the arteries appear, and strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; consider which artery pulses; press the locations of each on the locations that are appropriate for the earlobes, and they will be hidden only in some men.
And hold on to the artery with a probe, and make each incision with a sharp scalpel that penetrates into the bone from each division, and do it where it is appropriate for the length of the head.
And if you want to, insert the scalpel beneath the artery and break it at the divisions above.
And let the length of the incision be two fingers' width apart, because when a vein is incised, blood rushes out with a pulsating flow, which jumps out frequently.
However, if the artery does not appear at the incision, then it is necessary that you measure three fingers' width from the earlobe and hold on to it with a probe and enter into the bone.
And the amount of blood that must be drained is one ounce (of blood). and do not drain more or less than necessary, and all of this is according to the quantity that appears from the nature of the illness and the swelling of the artery in it.
And consider the wound, therefore if there remains on the bone any cause of pain, then incise it to prevent abscess formation.
And bind the wound with feathers and linen cloth of wool, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Chapter .iii.
On the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
When some old or new pain occurs in the temples due to moist acidity and quality of the muscles of the temples, or sudden old intense pain similar to it, and is treated with the methods of medicine but does not benefit from it, we are forced in these illnesses to extract the arteries in the temples, or cauterize them as we have shown.
And the method of operation and extraction of those is that the patient raises the hairs that are on the temples; and understand that the artery appears in the temple because it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden only in a few men due to the violence of the flow.
And if it is hidden, then strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and bind the area with rough cloth or apply hot water to the area until the artery appears clearly. And you take the scalpel with this shape: And carve the bone with this saw until you reach the artery; and drain it in the area above and extract that artery at the upper incision until you extract it from the bone and expose it from the tunics that are below, all around.
However, if the artery is thin, enclose it with the tip of the index finger and make an incision from that one side according to the quantity by which the extremities are lengthened and contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, because if they are not incised, all the blood will remain.
And apply leech therapy on wine. Enter three. This seems to be counting or referring to three leeches, but without additional context it's hard to be certain about the translation.
If the wound is large, then you must apply strong double-threaded sutures of linen or cord on it, and not allow it to become rotten before the plague heals and encourage blood flow.
Then cut away the excessive tissue that is between two ligaments; do this at that time or another time.
If you want, cauterize it with a cautery that penetrates the bone using a cautery knife before making the incision, and remain in place for that work.
It is better if the patient has a fever or is in a condition of complete inflammation; because cauterization is one of those causes that help to dry out the humors, and therefore it is better in this case as an aid.
It is necessary to extract the wounds that are in old ulcers, and they should be covered with appropriate powder, and treated with dry medicines to make the flesh heal and apply warm compresses until it is healed.
If during another examination the wound produces blood flow, then you must stop the blood, either with a cautery or by filling the ulcer, and hold your hand until the bleeding stops. If any of these causes are not present, you should cover the area with a cloth until the blood clots, and moisten it with hot water to relieve inflammation, and tighten it as necessary.
And the simplest method for removing wounds is to cauterize the vein with this cautery, having two handles, since you have tested the two areas and pierced each one, one after the other, without any hesitation, until they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that the wound can be lengthened, because it is not fully consolidated with this cauterization.
This is the shape of the cautery:
If the heat of the two handles is necessary. But if one handle with more heat is enough, because if it has the same sharpness as two handles close together, it will not cut through the flesh quickly.
Therefore, since in those cases there is some thickness, the heat of the fire should be kept in them and the flesh can be cut easily.
And this work is better in all works and easier as well.
And the space between the two handles should be the thickness of the finger.
Chapter Four.
On the treatment of coughs with acute and acidic mucus in the lungs.
When the coughs are acidic and are in veins located above the chest of the head, and no cause of cure with medicine is found for them, and sometimes the face of the patient turns yellow and they feel like walking ants, their lungs become weakened and humid to such an extent that their skin becomes known, and their throat scales due to the heat of the tears. The ancients used mastic in the treatment of this condition, and I name this cure as "spassa".
And you command the patient to pull out the hairs from their forehead, and then make three incisions parallel to the length of the forehead at equal intervals. And if the length of the incision is two fingers: the first incision should be at an equal distance from the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second one according to the length of a small movement of the eyelashes near the tear duct, and the third on the other side.
And be careful not to make an incision in the wounds that are on both sides, and extend your hand from the continuous area of both jaws. And if the space of each incision is adjusted to three fingers width.
And if you prepare a sponge or dry cloth with which to extract the blood.
Then insert the spatula of two sharp ends, whose shape is that of the incision. This is from the temple to the second incision. Remove all the coagulated matter that is between two incisions and scrape off the scab that is on the bone, and proceed from the incision margin to the second incision. Then straighten this spatula and enter the first incision again with another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side but blunt on the other.
Stop the edges of that sharp instrument and cut the attached flesh and coagulated matter, and touch the bone with it, pushing it to the margin incision until you reach the fracture, and separate all the vessels that descend from the skull to the heel.
But if the incision continues to be full of coagulated matter, proceed from one fracture to another.
And when the amount of blood escapes, press on the places where the coagulated blood clots have formed.
Then press on each fracture where there is a small piece of old skin, and press on those grains swollen in vinegar and oil and vinegar acid, and observe that it does not become an infected wound.
On the third day, remove the linen and administer large fumigation of hot water or tepid oil, and treat it with basilicon oil and others until the sores are healed.
Chapter V.
On the treatment of boils by catharsis and from the sores that descend into the parts within the skull.
When the patient experiences a sudden and persistent catharsis, and the sores of the patient are extended but weakened, and their eyes are ulcerated and their eyelashes fall out, and in the front of the head there is acute pain with subsequent swelling, then you know by these symptoms that the materials and catharsis do not come from other veins, but from those within the skull.
And the best treatment for this is as follows: command the patient to shave his forehead, and make an incision in that place, a small one on the side of the left temple to the right temple; it should be made through the bone; and extend your hand from the temples (which are bad due to mastication), until the bone is exposed.
Extract all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth and fill between the two lips of the incision with a piece of old skin or dry cloth. Then strengthen above it with grains swollen in vinegar and oil to prevent it from becoming an infected wound.
When you remove that (i.e., the old skin or cloth) and see that the abscess has diminished, then it is necessary to scrape the bone starting from where there is no longer flesh, and treat it with an astringent agent that will promote drying of the flesh, such as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and make a plaster from it and administer it in these places to heal the native flesh.
Chapter VI.
This sentence appears to mean "On the treatment of boils in the ears." Here is the English translation:
The entire cause of ear boils is one of four species, which can be mineral or resemble minerals such as iron and glass, or plants such as cheese or beans, or fluid substances such as water and vinegar acid, or some animal.
Therefore, when a mineral or other similar cause appears in the ear that does not fit in the ear, and if you see the material, then distill it with some oil of violets or sizami, and administer the extraction, and make the patient sneeze with certain conditions, and apply ointment to prevent sneezing. Then press on the circumference of the ear with some pieces of cloth or wool, and stretch the ear to the sides, as many observed cases are forgotten with these causes.
And if it is not resolved, administer extraction of it with the instrument called gesta epicicaria, whose shape is as follows:
If the wound is forgotten (in case), it's good; otherwise, administer the extraction of it with a subtle instrument of little duplication.
Then, make an incision with a small needle and pass the tip of the cannula through the ear canal and close the opening of the cannula with wax and soft oil to prevent it from being open except the cannula. Then extract the pus strongly with great attraction, for many times it has been observed that this helps (the healing process).
However, if this method is not forgotten, then take some alum powder or vinegar-treated cloth and apply it to the affected area, covering it appropriately with gauze. Then insert it into the ear canal easily and cut off the earwax from moisture.
Therefore, if all the causes that have been described are not forgotten, then you should choose to remove that abscess with cautery or spasm.
The method of cutting is that you first make the patient bleed from the saphenous vein and extract blood in accordance with its virtue, then press the earwax between your fingers and turn the ear upward, and then make a small hole in the edge of the ear where the pressure is greatest. Make the hole of a crescent shape to reach the stone, and when the stone is squeezed out, remove it if possible with appropriate instruments; then sew up the hole at that time with speed, and heal the area until it heals.
If the cause of the earwax is one of the fats that grow and swell, administer its cure and extraction; however, if it does not disappear by itself, then you take a thin tube in this way: administer the abscessing of that fat which has been lodged in the ear.
Do not do this when you think that it has already been moistened by the steam of the ear, but place it in several layers and then extract it with tweezers or a subtle instrument, or with incision as mentioned before, for the extraction is alleviated.
However, in the water that enters the ear, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze at the beginning and fill his ear with something old, and press on the ear where the water is, and if this is forgotten, it is good; otherwise, take several warm pebbles and leeches according to the length of the finger, heat them in the fire a little, and let the patient insert one of these into the opening of his ear and jump up with one foot from that side and strike another pebble against the pebble that is inside the ear. Therefore, do not stop with the pebbles until all the water is forgotten.
Therefore, do not stop with the pebbles until all the water is forgotten. And then the water will be forgotten when you take paper or gauze, and place one end of it in the ear and stretch the other end towards the fire until it is burned as much as possible.
And place another gauze and do this many times until all the water is forgotten, and then pull it out with a tube as mentioned above about the stone extractor.
However, in the removal of an animal that enters the ear, if it is small, do as much as possible and similar; heal it as mentioned above in the division; however, if it is large and causes swelling at the front of the eardrum, administer its extraction with forceps and tweezers, and the cause of this is lighter than all other causes that may occur in the ear.
When extracting the worm generated in the ear, if you care for that person as you have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations but do not pay attention to your treatment, then you should look at the ear towards the sun.
And if any cause of worms appears, you should extract that one with a simple or subtle method, but if it does not appear, then take a tube smaller at the bottom and wider at the top in its form: Insert the slender end into the ear according to the amount that the patient can bear; and draw it out with a strong suction, and do this repeatedly until all the worms are expelled.
If you do not observe improvement after the treatment, then close and seal the end of the tube with wax as has been said; administer distillations that have already been proven by the ancients in the treatment of worms, and you will find it in the treatment of distillations.
Let your effusion be with which you infuse the medicinal oils in the ear using this instrument, whose form is as follows: Make it of silver or wood, narrow at the bottom with a small hole on top.
And thus it should be shaped so that it fits into the concavity of the tube where it will be necessary. If you wish, take the rod and wrap it around the end of it appropriately, then pour oil or juice from some herb or any medicine into the depression of the aperture -- that is in the ear --, and insert the rod with the appropriate coating and compress it with your hand until the oil is expelled in the depression of the aperture and the patient feels the oil inside.
Whatever is infused into the ear should be slightly heated with fire. And beware that the cause you will distill in the ear is not too hot, as the medicines for the ear do not tolerate it.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of obstruction of ears.
Some infants suffer from ventricular obstruction of their mothers which often happens in some men, obliteration in the ear meat due to a wound or rotten flesh there; and this obliteration sometimes occurs at the breakpoint of the ear canal that does not heal, and sometimes outside the parts.
The one that occurs at the breakpoint of the ear canal which does not heal is in the major conditions of difficult healing.
In the case where healing occurs, it is necessary to clean the ear of the patient and look at it. And if obstruction appears, open it with a thin spatula whose shape is as follows:
If the end of it is narrow in which one side is pointed and the other is not, and the spatula should be twice as long so that it does not damage the ear.
And if the obstruction is due to born flesh in the ear or in its meat, then cut it with a subtle knife and remove it carefully until all the flesh is removed.
If the obstruction is at the breakpoint of the ear canal, then take a thin rod heated slightly with fire and insert it into the meat of the ear.
And if the patient feels obstruction with something that he pushes with ease but with difficulty hearing, release the compression of it with ease; and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear.
And stop the ear with gauze according to the size of the hole through which you have wrapped it in Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take any herb and soak it in water and grind it into powder and use it as follows: if you see that the ear has already been dressed, then remove the dressing and replace it with another one wrapped in wax that is made with rose oil until the abscess subsides; and care for it until it heals.
But if there is bleeding, immerse a sponge or cloth in hot water and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the flow of blood, which is discussed in the treatment of distillation.
Chapter VIII.
Treatment of eyelids that approach the eyes.
Eyelids that swell around the eyes sometimes become moist, while at other times they are dry.
Therefore you should have a solution or an ointment ready for them, and cut the eyelashes at their roots, and place a plaster over the affected areas as directed.
However, if pain accompanied by blood flow occurs, then you should cauterize it with a fine-tipped cautery.
The best cauterization is done at the incision and when the tumors disappear if there remains any cause of their growth; and when cauterized with fire, these tumors are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for swelling that occurs around the eyes of the patient.
Swellings that arise in the eyes of the patient have some underlying cause that resembles swelling in its strength and durability, and it is called by this name.
It is an accumulation of thick moisture on the upper and lower eyelids.
Therefore, the procedure is to determine if the swelling is due to something coming from the eye and spreading everywhere, in which case it is a minor condition.
Then you should make an incision along the length of the swelling and remove it completely with ease until it drains, and then suspend it from its base and remove it entirely.
If the shape is large, you should adjust it with stitching; and treat it until it heals.
And if it is small, there will be no harm in allowing the swelling to heal by itself and the anguent will restore and fill it.
If the swelling is receding within the inner parts of the eyelid, you should remove the inner surface, then pull the eyelid away and suspend the swelling with its base, and without making an incision, press on it from all sides. And if the incision of the eyelid is elongated, there may be some reason for concern.
Wash the eyes with salt water; and treat the affected area with something that fills it until it heals.
Chapter X.
Treatment for excoriation on the upper eyelid of the patient.
Excoriation is a disease that originates in the conjunctiva of the upper eyelid, and it mainly affects children, worsens their eyesight and is harmful to their cataracts; and they cannot look at the sun due to tearing.
Because they always have these things on their faces all the time, and on their faces when sleeping; and on their lower eyelids the eyebrows are wet, which already have inflammation, and the imminence of infection is evident in the eye; and when you press the affected area with your fingers, you will feel the inflammation within.
One method of treatment is to have the patient hold their head against yours, and place a cloth over them and heat it, and make a circle the size that contains arsenic from all sides, then place it on the affected area and press it with your fingers all around so that inflammation is added in the middle of the circle. Then make an incision on the edge of the pus along the length, but the incision should not be larger than the one made during ligation.
However, in the case of severe inflammation, it is necessary to make an incision through the skin all the way to arsenic, because in more serious cases the inflammation may be treated by incision according to the shape of white gravel.
Therefore, extract it with gauze that you have wrapped around your fingers on the sides and twist between your right and left hands until it is removed.
And be careful not to adjust the incision in such a way that pus does not enter the eye and damage it.
However, if you do not find arsenic at the beginning of the incision, adjust it slightly with ease until you can treat arsenic; and then extract it as described earlier, and submerge gauze in vinegar and wash and place it over the affected area and press it with powders.
And that which they call salts and place it in the concavity of the incision to remove the remaining moisture.
Treat the affected area until it heals.
However, if there is an abscess at the cauterized site, treat it with plasters until it heals.
Chapter XI.
Methods of touching the eye.
When the eyelashes of a patient are injured by natural adjustments and become old, the following methods of eye conditions may occur such as frequent tearing and softening of the eyelids and tissue entering that may cause destruction of the eyelid called tactinir del huel. Treatment is done in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with acute medicine as described earlier in the chapter on cauterization; or by touching it through incision and suture; or with cannas, as I will explain.
Therefore, you must hold the patient's head in your hands; turn the eyelid of the affected eye toward your left hand, if it turns, that is good; if not, insert a needle into the eyelid where the division is beyond the eyelash, and make the needle penetrate through the division with faith, and it should be near the margin of the eyelid where the lashes are - near the skin, and pull the thread above the eyelid toward the direction of the ray.
Approximately at the border between the eyelid and the skin, insert the spatula into the tear duct from the larger lacrimal duct to the smaller one; then withdraw the thread and place it underneath the eyelid with powder or fabric, and apply pressure on the eyelid as if in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
The shape, however, must be according to the degree of eyelid swelling, because it varies among men, for there are those who require a large incision of the eyelid according to the amount by which the eyelid is swollen.
Then insert the spatula along both lines that you have marked, and start from the larger tear duct to the smaller one. And if your incision is near the natural furrow as the thickness of a king's ring.
And apply the unguent on one of the angles of the incision, and excise that completely, and adjust the scissors to cut both labia and gula or fine thread, and remove the blood, and cause the excess thread on both eyebrows to adhere for some sticky reasons, if you want to do so, but if not, don't bother.
Change the stitching of the threads within three or four days, and take care of it.
If you want to, leave the wound unsutured and take care of it with something that dries and contracts, since the eyelid is elevated by the sealing of the wound and its aggregation; but suturing is better, and therefore the ancients prefer it in this case.
But if there is a need to treat the patient, it is good work and there is no fear.
And another method in treating is to shape the eyelid like a myrtle leaf, and raise the eyelid with three separate and interconnected incisions as follows:
But if that is not possible, hold the incisions, and if it is not sealed, take a needle with thread and put it in the middle of the shaped figure, and insert the other thread near the larger tear duct, and the other thread near the smaller one, adjust the threads between your fingers evenly, and lift your hand with the same elevation as described above.
Then sew the two edges of the wound together and take care of it until it heals.
But if an abscess occurs near your incision or wound, remove it with cautery and lancing, and with warm water.
Sometimes hairs grow on the eyelid, in which case you should use what was previously described regarding incision; but suturing is more artificial in such cases.
The treatment with cane sugar is as follows: And you turn the eyelid and cut the shape inside as previously described; then, using art, make two canes or two thin sticks with a length equal to that of the eyelid and width smaller than that of the spatula. And you have already made an incision at the ends of each partition, where you have the threads.
Apply a fine solution under the affected eyelid and tighten each partition with strong constriction, leaving it for several days, because the skin around the constriction will die and become necrotic and eventually fall off on its own.
If it takes too long, break the cane sugar and apply it to the wound until it heals.
Therefore, when the skin around the eyelid is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not penetrate.
And this is the form of two reeds which you will make according to this shape: and has the same length and width (i.e., it should be a square).
It seems like the text is referring to a specific section or chapter, which is numbered as "Chapter xii." (Roman numerals for twelve). This could indicate that the following instructions are part of a larger medical treatise or manual.
In the removal of hard-skinned warts with an awl when the skin is tough.
When the skin growths are unnatural, hard, rough and painful warts, then the operation on it is that you take a fine awl and place it in a subtle cedar or lion hide pouch, and adjust the extremities of it carefully and gently. And the length of the fields (of the awl?) should be equal to the width of one handspan (approximately 9 cm).
Then you make another thin field (or blade) nearby it in short order, and use the other extremities if desired.
And hold the patient's head on your lap and place it near the ground so that your work is visible, as this operation is delicate and small.
Insert the awl carefully into the wart with enough pressure and make it penetrate the eyelid swiftly until you pull it out above the natural skin.
And then pull out the wart and insert it into a small container, and there should be one or two or three warts but not more.
Then hold your hand over it until the wart is expelled from the eyelid and placed back into its natural position.
But if it is not expelled from the eyelid and the wart remains, you shall remove the container and place a fresh one beneath it, until the wart is finally expelled over the wound.
Observe the wart with your eyes, since you will expel the container and the wart, then grind (or crush) the wart and let the crushed material remain for two or three days until the skin adheres to its place and grows new flesh over it.
If the skin growth is less than the natural skin length, you shall take a longer piece of natural skin and raise it above the wart, or let it grow to fit the space, and then lift it up.
It seems like we have moved on to the next chapter or section. This one is numbered as "Chapter xiii." (Roman numerals for thirteen).
On the treatment of ectropion (a condition where the eyelid turns outward).
When there is an ectropion in the eyelid, and it is caused by contraction of the eyelid due to inflammation or injury, or due to burns, and it is called leprosy (in this context), and this ectropion can be congenital or acquired, and it can be caused by inflammation or injury, or as a result of poor healing.
The method of the operation is that you make a cut in the affected area and separate the lips (of the eyelid), and place a small piece of fabric there to support it until it heals.
And it is important to use treatments for the underlying causes that cause the ectropion, as if you do not, the condition may worsen and never improve.
Use treatments that soften the condition, such as fennel, wrap it with water in which fennel seeds have been boiled, or use gum guaiacol, which should be made liquid with one of the oils, and immerse the fabric in it, and heal with it.
The secret to your treatment is that you perform everything carefully without causing any further damage in the manner described at the beginning.
This operation that we have described is not just a correction of the ectropion but rather a treatment to restore the original shape of the area, as it was in the beginning.
It seems like we have moved on to the next chapter or section. This one is numbered as "Chapter xiv." (Roman numerals for fourteen). The text continues with instructions on how to perform a similar operation on growths found in the nose, such as polyps and nasal fibromas. The procedure involves making an incision, removing the offending material, and applying a dressing to promote healing. As before, many of these techniques have parallels in modern medicine.
On the treatment of ectropion (a condition where the eyelid turns outward) that occurs in the lower eyelid.
This ectropion that occurs in the lower eyelid is truly called ectropion; it can be congenital or acquired.
It is usually caused by a wound or cut, or cauterization, or something similar.
The method of operation is to take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, making it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the skin at the incision and sew it up with the needle, and cut open wide with a broad knife. If the eyelid shape returns as it should, it is good; if not, take the ray and place it in the split eyelid, then turn the eyelid over, and make two incisions on the side of the lower eyelid.
The ends of the two incisions should be at two corners of the incision, which you made before they converge, and their meeting point should form a figure.
This figure is the Greek letter lambda.
Then remove the skin to the amount that is the width of the sharp part below it, so that the eyelid is exposed.
Then adjust the separated parts and sew them up with wool thread; then take care of those parts with softening medications and bandages until they are healed.
If the incision or suture or cauterization is deep, then you must make a straight cut on the skin of the eyelid as described before. Then separate the wound between two lips as described.
In summary, in the treatment of an eyelid incision that is above or below, follow the operation as described according to the shape of the incision, and that shape is diverse dots.
And the skilled craftsman always prepares an instrument for every possible method that can be used to make the figure return to its natural shape or close to it, and the patient according to the operation and tools in the best arrangement.
Chapter 15.
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in many men who have the eyelid adhered above the aqueous humor, and it is forbidden by the ease of movement and natural functions, therefore, you must enter between the eyelid and the eye socket, lift it up or stretch it with oil.
Then you should cut the adhesion with a sharp knife, which is not as sharp as the incisions, but rather obtuse, so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remove the knife that does not touch the eye with its sharpness.
And your incision should be such that it separates the adhesion easily until the eyelid returns to its natural shape and is completely healed.
Then you should put salty water in the eye, which you rinse with it; or distill it in a zinc pot dissolved in water.
Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a bandage, place wool soaked in egg white on the eye, and for three days use consolidating medications until it is healed.
Chapter 16.
On nail incision and removal of eyelid skin.
Know that the nail is of two kinds: one is nerve-like and similar to hard dry substance; or it is not nerve-like, similar to solidified white moisture, which, when touched, or when it breaks, it can be removed with oil, and the oil is not inserted into it.
And in both cases, they do not begin until the larger tear duct reaches the smaller one that covers the vision and prohibits light and movement of the eye.
But the method of working on the incision is that the patient rests their head on your lap, and you open their eyes, lift the eyelid with your hand, and collect the nail with oil using a dropper and stretch it at the ends. And take a needle and insert it into the base of a horse's or ox's or cow's hair, or something similar, or a strong feather, double the tip of the needle gradually and insert it into the middle of the nail, pierce the nail with it, and extract the nail with the feather; stretch it at the ends, and remove the base of the nail that covers the pupil. And thus you follow it with the hair to the end.
Then you should cut the remaining part of the tear duct with a sharp knife or small scissors, and clean the natural tissue of the tear duct so that the continuous flow of tears does not result from the incision.
And sometimes the nail with just oil or feather, as we have said, should be removed and exuded with lion fat, which has the shape of a tube.
And be careful that the fat does not touch the corneal membrane and causes rupture, and that the pupil is pierced.
Make the incision in the eye a little bit of salt or crushed cedar wood and let it rest for another day; then take care of it with what is necessary until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous and cannot be pierced by the needle or is not embedded in it, move on to treating this type of nail with the following remedy: it is cured with medicines, and heals thus as described and recommended in the division.
When you want to cut it (the nail), then first open the patient's wound and take fine lion's bile with sharp acuity according to this form: with subtlety. And if it becomes hardened and swollen and you suspect this condition, distill your oil in the patient's head wound made with sinus or rose oil or saltwater, and apply it daily.
Then apply the operation on it (the swollen area) until all of that which is from it is removed, unless the counter-abscess cautery is in the wound, for then you should lance that, and heal the abscess before it is healed.
Then apply your treatment to it (the wound) with reason until it is healed.
The emission of flesh from the lacrimal gland, if noticed in the wound through great harm, should be stopped with a ligature; and cut out that part, but do not continue cutting for fear of causing tears of tears.
Then apply rose oil and sinus to the lacrimal gland wound until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the incision of albuginea and of what is born from skin tightly adhered to the wound.
In some wounds of the eye, red skin is born, which covers the pupil or approaches or extends beyond the eyelids and compresses the eyelids at the corners and resembles a rosebush.
But the treatment is that the patient bends their head towards your hand; and open the wound of that place and collect all that red skin with suitable ligatures, and take it out with forceps or tweezers; and cut the skin first from the beginning until it is finished by the scissors, and be careful not to damage the wound during your treatment.
And let your incision be such that you cut out the hardened skin or with the tool we have recommended for treating nails, or small scissors according to the form of this chapter.
Therefore, once your incision is complete and all the hardened skin has been removed, fill the wound with saltwater, or distill powdered red medicine similar to corrosive medicines over it, and wait for a small amount of pus to form on the wound until it becomes an abscess.
And if the cause of albuginea remains and there is concern about an abscess forming, lance the wound and treat the abscess with something that will help it drain, then apply your treatment to it until it is healed, and do the same for the skin that adheres in this type of wound.
But beware that you do not perform any treatment on the foot wound naturally or accidentally with iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member is able to withstand that operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On collecting pus from a wound.
Pus is reddish and round on the wound and forbids the clothing's operation, and leave it open for days.
Therefore, at the beginning you must consider if the wound in which there is pus is strong and there is not another disease that causes pus, then you collect that pus.
And you command the patient to bend their head towards your hand and suspend those veins with a ligature or two depending on your discretion, using a thin double ligature in this way:
or two ligatures gradually in one body like this:
And collect those veins with fine forceps, using subtlety, and drain the blood from it (the wound) little by little until you see that the veins are removed from the wound and have become slack.
Observe that you should not pierce the vein near the spout's extremities; and if your operation is to be performed before midday, and you are firm in your actions so as not to penetrate other veins than the one intended.
And when you have completed it, then you shall distill the green or red oil in the spout to disinfect that which remains of the wound with the sabre.
If it is not possible for you to collect everything at that time, then you shall fill it with whatever alleviates the pain of the area, and allow it to rest for several days until the pain is alleviated and assured of the cauterized abscess.
And return it repeatedly as long as the same method works until it is healed.
Here is the shape of the forceps:
Title XIX.
On the reduction of an arytenoid cartilage in the nose.
When you treat an arytenoid cartilage with cautery or sharp medicine as described in the narrative and it is not healed, do not be deceived by it, but make an incision over the abscess when its maturity is reached, and extract all the moisture that is within it and open the bone until it is exposed.
And therefore when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackening in it, scrape it with an instrument that has this shape:
It is called a pointed head and should be made of iron, and the head should be rounded like an ass's ear, which has been pierced through with a file or alum pierced subtly (as shown in the following figure).
Place it on the corrupt part of the bone, and hold it between your thumb and index finger, and press your small hand gently until you know that the corruption is removed.
Allow it to be several weeks, and then restore the area with drying and adhesive agents.
If the area is consolidated and good tissue grows there and the core separates from the pus and remains for 40 days without being renewed or developing an abscess or other complication, then you know that it has healed.
If this is not the case, do not be deceived but reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and follow this method: And it is that you dissect with bone forceps or sharp medicine, and when the bone is exposed, you take three pieces according to this form:
The outside of the iron should be triangular, and the handle should be tapered to the tip as often happens.
Then place one piece on the bone (the lacrimal bone), and position your hand a little way from the tip, and then rotate your hand with the triangle until it penetrates completely through the bone, and the patient feels pain as air escapes through their mouth.
Therefore, you restore the area with drying agents such as those prescribed to you.
As the flesh and area harden, the material that had been exuding at the incision sites returns to the nose, so this is less painful for the patient.
Title XX.
On the reduction of the prominence in the nose.
When the nose is fully prominant and there are no complications or decreases in breathing, it is necessary to relax the patient, and then follow these steps: Place soft padding on their neck without cutting and suck gently; and place a liniment made of castor oil, aloe, honey, and beeswax over the hump with very little powder.
The method with the powders is to take lions' wool cloths that are doubled four times and make powder from them.
Then place these powders one on top of the other according to the amount required for the hump. Then strengthen the powders with hard cloth and tight binding; and use the suction without cutting; and remove the suction and let the nose rest during the day and night.
If the ligament becomes soft during the process, it then requires being tightened.
Then return the ligament to its normal state and bind it as mentioned earlier.
If the swelling has been reduced, that is good, but if not, you should continue with the plaster, powders and constrictions until it heals.
Chapter XXI.
On the incision of the elevation of the uveal tunica.
When a disruption occurs in the tunica uvea and it elevates and protrudes out from the eyelids like a grain of sand, form an incision as a man would with a razor, and shape it according to his form, and you wish to incise, then perform the operation as follows: introduce the needle into the ridge of the uvea from below towards above, and place another needle in the spot where there is double filament of the lacrimal duct, and let it penetrate and release the first needle according to its placement; and then incise the spot of the double filament and lift the ridge of the uvea around the needle, and tighten that area.
Then withdraw the needle and place it on the woolen thread infused in yolk of egg, and let it pass through until it reaches the grape.
Then care for the wound with something that promotes healing until the wound heals.
And add some ointment made of all ingredients in a circle around the wound and over the elevated area with a large diameter, then perforate it with a fine spatula that comes to the edge of the wound, let the humidity pass through the white layer (albuginea), lower the wound, and apply pressure quickly.
Then tighten until it heals.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of alconati.
This disease called "alconati" is not simply an abscess that drains like water, but something different.
But the method of working on it is to make the patient lie down on a prepared and straight bed, then take hold of his head with your two hands and guide it towards where you see the abscess appear in the lower parts, and let it dry without descending, keep the wound open, and the patient should see the causes as he did before.
If it does not drain downwards, you will know that it is water.
But if the drainage is not prepared properly as mentioned earlier, you should make the patient lie down and take a fine spatula in your hand and place it over the panicle surrounding a small area of the conjunctiva near the cornea at its crown (in the location where it would be), until the abscess is drained.
Therefore, when it is forgotten, you shall distill in water vapor the tailwater in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fennel and honey.
Then let it be cured with other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of water descending from the tail.
We have already stated the species of the water in the division and which requires perforation with the declaration of the serum, then do so according to health.
It is necessary that you place the patient between your hands on a chair and hold his tail, tightly pulling it.
And place your right hand near the eyelid of his left tail, if the water-tail is in the left tail; or with your left hand, if it is in the right tail.
And with your right hand take a magnet, if the tail is on the left; or with your left hand, if it is on the right.
And place the end of the magnet near the crown for the thickness of the ray in the albumen of the tail by the smaller tear duct, and apply heat to the magnet with your hand on it.
And penetrate into the albumen of the tail and feel that the magnet has arrived due to its action.
It is necessary that the distance of the magnet to the puncture should be measured from the pupil to the end of the black part, and it is the crown of the tail; for you will see with that pupil the vision of the tail through the clarity of the corneal tunica.
And place the magnet in the place where the water is, and then push it down gently several times, and if the water descends immediately, you should hold the patient over the container to collect the urine as soon as possible and put the magnet on his tail.
And pause for a moment; if the water has descended, you should wait a little longer before removing the magnet.
And when it is dry and does not descend, you should remove the magnet with ease, apply heat to that area with your hand little by little, dissolve a little clear salt of gemma in water and use it to wash the internal part of the tail; and cover the external part of the tail with stopper or wool soaked in rose oil, albumen of egg and linseed oil.
But we who are of our time leave it as a twisted clot covered with egg white.
If the magnet does not easily enter the tail due to its hardness (because some men have hard tails), then it is necessary to take saliva, which is called albariztad, in this form:
And therefore, pierce that junction, and do not go too deep with your hand, and be careful not to make a hole through the tail with it.
And insert the magnet as previously stated.
You must complete your work, prepare a bed for the patient made in a quiet room where he sleeps on his back and is restricted from all movement.
And wait for the nature of it so that its nature becomes smooth, and do not turn his head to the right or left at all.
Let him rest according to his condition for three days.
And remove him to that dark room and open his eyes, let him see some things, and return him to rest on the seventh day.
It is not necessary to do this during the hours of treatment or as soon as possible with an infusion. It has been necessary that you avoid this because water can easily pass through due to its great and violent nature.
But if an abscess occurs with a cautery, you should remove the tail after seven days and treat it with something that dissolves abscesses.
You should wash the affected area with water and wait for it to heal on its own for several days, while keeping the patient in a dark room.
And gradually move him out of that darkness and discuss his condition with him.
Know that in a monastery it is not permitted for a disciple to see anything for several days, and if you are bold with the operation.
We have received news from one of those who is an artist, and some say that they make fire in the Ayrac using a magnet to draw out the water.
Nevertheless, we have not seen anyone in our land who has perfected this technique, nor have we read about it in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that it is a new invention.
And these are the forms of magnets for treating that condition which an ignorant person does not know:
They are made of iron or metal specifically, and their ends have this subtle triangular shape, the sharp end being similar to that form.
Title: Chapter XXIV
9. E si en algun loc le carn es morta, e sia a prop del nas, non se debe fer le curacio per la boca ne per le ossos, ni se debe fer lo cauteri.
10. Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat, les quals so causades per los humors maues que danzan en le sang. 12. Si la carn es cancrosa, lapadea, de color fusc o negra, e aquesta no so en le nas, es carn leon; e si en le nas so, es polipus.
13. Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre les nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns. E si le tieu onci en aquelas carns non es possible, non es necessitat que fasses le curacio, ne se debe fer lo cauteri. 14. E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa. E aquest spatum agut e subtil es lo mesquit per espoliar le malaute; e si no es possible espoliar le malaute, non es necessitat fer la curacio ne el cauteri. 15. Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas. E si el apostema caut no es possible ser cauterizat, non es necessitat fer la curacio ne lo cauteri.
17. E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi. E si la carn es polipus, lahoras tu el cauteri e non pas la curacio per le ossos. 18. Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat. E quant a aquel que es polipus e non es possible fer lo cauteri, lahoras tu el cauteri en altres partz del cors.
19. Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio. E quant a aquel que es carn nada en los pus sobiras ossos de las nars, lahoras tu el cauteri en altres partz del cors.
Therefore, you should make an incision in the affected part with some thickness, and cut through it with scissors, and place a pad between each stitch the size of the finger or thumb, and tie the patient down and insert an extremity of the field into the nostrils with a needle or other cause that is possible for you.
And then that which has been done, draw the odorant through it until it reaches the nasal channels, and let it hang from its handle, because prolonged observation seems to resemble this action to schoolchildren, and it is an easy cause for one who wants to do it.
Then tie the two ends of the field, one end extending out of the nose and the other remaining in the nose, and bring scissors to cut through the flesh with the sutures that are in the field, and do this until you know that the flesh is already with the sutures of the field.
And extract the field, and tie in the nose with a receptacle for the blood, and do this for three days or more until the suppurant dissolves everything that is rotten from the flesh.
And at the end of the treatment, tie in the nose a lead tube for some days until it is healed.
But if the healing dries up, use that one. (This sentence seems to imply the use of an alternative treatment when the first one fails.)
This is the form of the instrument for the purger who distills oils and medicines in the nose: (This sentence seems to describe the tool used in the procedure described earlier.)
Make it of silver or copper, which is similar to a small lantern opened, like a small bowl, and the metal should be similar. (This sentence seems to describe the material and shape of the instrument used in the procedure described earlier.)
And if you wish, make a closed tube like a cane, and the cannula of the purging instrument should be flat, open; to which you will hold when you evacuate oil or any liquid that you want from the juices and extracts. (This sentence seems to describe an alternative or additional tool used in the procedure described earlier.)
Chapter XXV. (This indicates that this is a continuation of a series of chapters, likely from a medical textbook or treatise.)
Of the teeth at the extremities of the nose. (This sentence seems to refer to a specific area or part of the body related to the previous discussion about the nose and nostrils.)
Observed teeth are found at the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and noted in some days until the mouth is opened to look at them. (This sentence seems to describe a specific observation or examination related to the area around the nose.)
And therefore you should incise it at the beginning of its appearance, and excavate all of it. (This sentence seems to describe a treatment or procedure related to the teeth mentioned earlier.) And place a bandage over the area, or use a cautery or burning medicine that is at that location. (This sentence seems to describe an additional treatment or procedure related to the teeth mentioned earlier.)
But if the incision is delayed until it is magnified, then consider whether it is lapisated, hard, dark-colored, and has little sensation; do not touch that one with iron because it is a crancoid apostema; for observed teeth are a great danger to the one who incises this aposteme. (This sentence seems to provide additional caution or advice related to the treatment or procedure mentioned earlier.)
And if the aposteme is touchable and not dark-colored, and incision is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and incise that one without fear, and heal the area with something that dries it up and compress it until it is healed. (This sentence seems to provide additional guidance or instructions related to the treatment or procedure mentioned earlier.)
Chapter XXVI. (Indicates that this is a continuation of a series of chapters, likely from a medical textbook or treatise.)
Of the suture of the nose and lips and ear when continuity is dissolved by ulcer or similar conditions. (This sentence seems to refer to a specific medical condition or procedure.)
Know that when the continuity is dissolved in one of these cartilages, it does not confer much in that operation unless in some men. (This sentence seems to suggest that this medical condition or procedure may be less common or relevant for certain individuals.)
Therefore, when you incise for any cause of that one, consider if it is fresh ulcer with its blood, and then you should adjust the two lips of the ulcer with suture, and heal it until it is healed. (This sentence seems to provide additional guidance or instructions related to the medical condition or procedure mentioned earlier.)
And if the lips of the dissolved continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then you should excoriate each part of its chain until it exudes blood. (This sentence seems to describe a specific treatment or procedure related to the medical condition mentioned earlier.) And then adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen them, and on top of that pulverize dragon's blood and triturate it, and place a layer of emplastrum diaphanicon or any other consolidating plasters over the powder, and let it dry for two days or three, and then remove the dressing and replace it with another emplaster and let it dry until the fields are separated, and heal it with suppurant until it is healed. (This sentence seems to describe a series of steps or instructions for treating the medical condition mentioned earlier.)
The continuity solution method for stitching is that you add the solution of continuity or needles as in the abdominal suturing we have recommended, or add the continuity solution with a faithful one as you know.
Chapter XXVII.
On the removal of that cause which comes in both labia minora in parturition.
Moles that are moving towards the inside of a man in his labia minora cause abscesses hard like swellings of errors, and some of these are milder and some are more severe.
Therefore, it is necessary that you cut and open each of those hardnesses throughout all parts, and fill the abscess with gauze soaked in a solution of quicklime to stop the flow of blood, and then wash the area with vinegar and treat it with water that is strengthening until it is healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
Incision of the flesh adjusted in the gums.
The puffiness on the gum (abscess) is repeatedly opened. They used to call it albulus, so you must be careful not to touch it or probe it too much; if you make an incision, you should drain the pus and let the blood flow or lance it.
Then press on the sore or apply some styptic powder or other astringent or cauterizing agent.
And if the flesh returns, make another incision and cauterize it, because cauterization will prevent it from returning.
Chapter XXIX.
On the reason for tooth extraction.
When sharp and jagged irregularities appear on the surfaces of the teeth in the gums and in those that are exposed and between the gums, some become blackened and are filled with pus or decay before they reach the gum, causing the teeth to become abscessed.
Therefore, you must hold the patient firmly and place your hand on their head, extract the teeth where the irregularities appear, removing all causes of decay, and remove the blackness, pus, and other substances until they are clean.
If the procedure was successful at the beginning of the treatment, that is good; if not, you should repeat the extraction on another day and on the second and third days until it reaches the desired result.
And know that teeth require various types of resorbers in different shapes and forms, depending on your procedure. Therefore, the resorber for the tooth from under the gum is different from the one used to level between teeth according to other shapes; these types of resorbers must be prepared as soon as possible.
Chapter XXX.
Extraction of teeth.
You must treat the tooth of its pain with caution and take great care in the extraction process, because there is no cure that will replace the healing process when the tooth is extracted; it is a substance that has been excreted as an exception during the extraction process.
However, when the patient is certain that the tooth must be extracted, you must be absolutely sure which tooth is causing the pain, because many times the patient feels pain in a healthy tooth and you extract a healthy one instead, resulting in the pain not ceasing until the diseased and painful tooth is removed; we have seen this happen during barber surgeries.
Therefore, when you must verify which tooth is painful and what you know about it, you should then scrape around the tooth with a spatula in which there is some potency, until it dissolves from the tooth, the gum, all over, and bring that to the teeth, or fine forceps subtle at the beginning, gradually until you reach that point.
Place large forceps with good grip or strong structure on the patient's head between your hands to hold it firmly without moving, and grasp the tooth properly according to method so as not to break it, nor cause more pain to the patient.
If it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and place it on the tooth with ease and effort to remove it as done at first.
But if the tooth is fractured or corroded, it is necessary that you wrap it with a cloth and tighten it at the end of the root so as not to be crushed during your compression on it using forceps.
It is necessary to work very carefully around the gum with scraping and be careful not to break it and keep it whole, and return over the patient because the subsequent pain may be greater than the first pain.
Be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their hastiness and audacity in removing them, since they do not administer what has been recommended; for many times they bring great sores on men which are difficult to crush, and all the reasons for this removal remain, or some of these sores remain, or that it is extracted with bones from the jaw as many times have been testified.
Then before removing it, wash the mouth with warm water or saltwater.
If there is bleeding from the place, like in many cases, you should apply some amount of egg white and rinse it, and if that egg white does not stop the bleeding, then cauterize it.
The shape of the forceps and subtle pliers with which the tooth is initially grasped should be long in the handle, short in the jaw, and thick to avoid bending when using them.
And they should be such that the handle is thick until when tightening with them, it does not bend, and the handles should be short in length.
And they should be made of Indian iron, well-made with straight handles, and in the handles there should be teeth that interlock and tighten by strong pressure, and sometimes the handles of those are shaped like a stork's beak, which is called scissors, and they are very strong.
Chapter XXXI.
On the removal of teeth and extraction of bones of broken jaws.
When the removal of a tooth that is fractured has some cause, you must wait on the location, closed with bandage for one or two days until it softens; and then insert gels or forceps whose handles are shaped like a stork's beak called scissors or guillotine, the shape of the forceps:
The handles of them are made inside like a file or a plowshare.
If you do not obey this with these forceps or pliers, then you must be careful about the socket and scrape all the flesh and insert an instrument called an iron, which is a small lever whose shape is as follows:
And it should have a short, thick handle and not be bent so that it does not break.
Therefore, if the socket is forgotten, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments whose shapes are as follows: The shape of the first instrument is a triangular handle, in which there should be some thickness:
The shape of the second instrument is triangular and very thin at the end.
And you are helped by this instrument, which has two ramps whose shape is as follows: and with other instruments that I will explain in tooth extraction; for it is also done with this instrument, which resembles an uncus grandis, whose shape is as follows:
of a triangular twisted or short handle with some thickness, and not be bent so that it does not break.
And you should know that the instruments for teeth are similar to other instruments.
But the skillful and subtle artisans in this craft, observe for themselves according to what they understand about the operation and diverse diseases; because some diseases were not said or thought of by the ancients, due to the forms of various species.
But if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are fractured or broken, you should apply a cast to it in its place with what is appropriate for it from instruments and forceps that we have mentioned in the removal of tooth sockets, and help yourself with a gesture whose shape is as follows:
And it should be thick in some places gradually, and be tightly held by the mouth so that it does not escape or fall out until all the bones are forgotten; and then restore the location with appropriate medications.
If there is a small pustule in the bone, remove that from the pustule and its black matter, and heal it internally until it is healed.
Title: 32nd Chapter
Title: Treatment of dental eminences over others.
When teeth are eminences that deviate from their natural shape due to the abnormal form, and especially when it occurs in women, and especially in venerable girls; therefore, you should consider: if a tooth is very close to another tooth, and it cannot be sutured or treated with liniment, you must extract that tooth. But if it is not attached to another tooth, you should incise it with this instrument which has the shape of a pig's tooth, made from very sharp Indian steel.
Make your incision carefully so as not to damage other teeth while making the incision for a number of days due to the hardness of the tooth.
If the expanded tooth eminence is worn down by grinding, you should smooth it with an Indian steel file of the following shape:
The file should be made entirely of Indian steel and its edges should be very sharp like the file used to make needles. With it, you should smooth the tooth little by little every few days with ease so that another tooth is not damaged or lost. And apply liniment to the end of the file and remove it with other scissors.
And if part of the tooth is broken off and the tongue touches it, you must smooth that tooth until its sharp edges are removed and it is sealed, so that the tongue does not hurt nor the word be corrupted.
Title: 33rd Chapter
Title: Restoration of decayed teeth with gold or silver fillings.
If the tooth has been broken due to concussion or removal by percussion or hunting and the patient cannot chew food, and you have treated it with styptic medications but your treatment has not worked, you must repair it with a gold filling (and not silver) because silver becomes corrupted quickly and approaches decay after a few days, whereas gold does not change over time.
The filling should be made as thin and large as necessary to fit between the teeth. The shape of the filling is that you take the filling and double the amount between two healthy teeth, and increase it with two curves in the filling between the decayed teeth, or if there is only one or a few of them, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. Apply the linen bandage to the broken part and bind it firmly but with ease and wisdom until it is healed.
The thread that holds the gold filling should be tight enough to prevent it from coming loose.
Remove the excess gold filling with forceps or pliers and place it in different locations as needed while adjusting it and hiding it between the healthy tooth and the decayed tooth to avoid injury to the tongue. Approach that narrow place as closely as possible with a linen cloth (or bandage).
If it is loosened or torn, strengthen that or those with another faithful means in all ways at all times.
And this is the shape of teeth and the arrangement of two healthy teeth and two diseased teeth, such as when they are linked in the following manner:
When one tooth or two are returned to their respective sockets, and they grow back as recommended, and remain strong.
This is not something that should be done without skill and knowledge.
Sometimes a cow's bone is used as a replacement for a tooth, and it is made in the shape of a tooth, placed in the location where the tooth has failed, and strengthened as we said, remaining and serving for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV (Thirty-fourth chapter).
On the incision of a ligament that is found in the tongue, and it prevents speech.
This ligament that is found behind the tongue sometimes or is natural to it, as one is born with, or accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already healed.
The procedure is to open the mouth of the patient, placing your hand on his chin; raise his tongue and incise the nerve-containing ligament at a location that is as free from tension as possible for the release of the tongue from its attachment.
However, if there is any hardness or denseness, and this is due to a healed injury, then you throw vinegar on it and cut it at the location where you have incised the ligament and release the tension.
Be careful not to make a wound in the prepuce of the skin and that you cut only the arch and bring out blood flow.
Then wash the wound of the incision with water, vinegar or warm water; and then return the tongue to its resting position, as it is a muscle that should be kept loose in the patient's mouth every night for it not to heal again.
However, if bleeding occurs, place a piece of moist cotton over it; however, if blood oozes, then cauterize the area with a lint-soaked cautery that is suitable for this purpose. And care for the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXXV (Thirty-fifth chapter).
On the removal of a ranula behind the tongue.
Sometimes a small pouch-like abscess forms behind the tongue, impeding its natural movement; and in most cases it is enlarged to such an extent that it blocks the mouth.
The procedure is to open the mouth of the patient facing upwards and examine the abscess.
And if you see it to be of dark or black color, hard, which the patient does not feel, then do not touch that which is cancer.
If it is whitish in color with humidity, then you apply the onion to it and cut it with a sharp instrument, and cut it all around; if blood comes out during your operation at that time, then you stop above that which is stitching (like glass), until the bleeding stops.
Then return to your work until you have brought it out completely, until it is washed with vinegar and salt; cure that one with the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter XXXVI
On the extraction of abscesses of two auricles (ears) and of that which is not in the throat, and of other abscesses.
When the glands in the throat swell up, they are similar to glands and appear outside, and are called two auricles; when you treat them as described in the division but it does not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, dark colored, with little sensation, then do not touch that one with iron.
And if it is red in color and the matter is thick, then do not touch that one with iron due to blood flow; leave it inside until it matures, and then you can either break it or let it burst on its own.
And if it is white in color, round, and the matter inside is soft, then that one must be incised.
The operation on it is to consider whether the abscess in question has rested for as long as necessary or if it has diminished with some reduction; and then, place the patient before the sun, with their head in your lap, hold open their mouth, and the servant presses down on its tongue from below with a noble instrument of this shape:
And it (the instrument) should be made of silver or brass and thin like a knife.
While pressing the tongue and showing the abscess to you, place your eye on that one and cut it there; then take an onion and insert it in the wound, and pull it out from the sides as far as possible. Or another cause of the membranes is to cut them, and then make an incision on it with this shaped instrument:
Or another cause of the membranes is to cut them, and then make an incision on it with this shaped instrument: and it is similar to forceps, but the ends of them are curved so that each opening of them faces each other, sharp, and made of iron and blunt.
But if that instrument is not available to you, then incise it with a knife of this shape: It should be sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
And after you have made an incision into one abscess, make another incision on the other according to this method of incision, and then cover the patient with warm water.
But if there is blood flow, cover it with water from the decotion of scurvy grass or myrtle leaves and similar to those for styptic causes until the blood flow stops, and then cure that one until it heals.
And after some days pass in the throat, there appear other abscesses besides these two auricles; incise them according to what has been said about the incision of two abscesses equally.
I have already treated a woman with an abscess that was in her throat, which abscess was dark colored, had little sensation, and the throat of hers had been closed, and the woman was breathing with difficulty and had prohibited food and drinking water, and if she had stayed like this for one or two days more, she would have died.
The abscess was so swollen that it broke through twice within three weeks.
Therefore I told the servant to stick an onion into one of their ears and pull it out, then take out a large portion, and make an incision where it breaks through again, and hold open its mouth, press down on its tongue, and stick the onion into the abscess.
And I made a large incision in it, and only a little blood flowed out of it. Therefore the throat of that woman was healed, and she immediately began to drink water and watch her diet, so I did not continue to incise that abscess many times for a long time; instead, another abscess formed in its place, which I incised until it prolonged itself.
Therefore I will go and cauterize the throat of him, so that it heals; and then I will walk around and do not know what God has in store for me.
Chapter XXXVII
On incision of a bladder when it is abscessed.
When catarr runs into the bladder and it becomes abscessed and is long, then it is called a perpendicular; and if it is in the lower and round part, it is called a bubble.
When the wound, as you have said in the division, is healed and you do not continue with the treatment, and sometimes a cauterized ulcer still remains there and is subtle, then it is necessary that you incise the surrounding area; if it is long and is bloody, of dark or black color, and not at the center, then it is necessary that you be careful with the incision, because in that case there is fear for the patient.
And when you see that it is as I have described regarding its whiteness and length, that you bind the patient's mouth with an instrument to hold its shape and place a probe in the wound, then pull it down and incise it with one of two instruments mentioned for making an incision in two layers.
And it is necessary not to incise it unless it is adjusted on the natural margin without addition, because if you incise more than that, you will harm its speech.
Then, for the incision, use what I have recommended in making an incision in two layers, and care for it until it is healed.
But if the patient is afraid of the incision, it is necessary to use an instrument in the cauterization without fear, and the method of cauterization in it is only with sharp water, and you should hold the patient's head in your lap, place your hand over his mouth with the instrument that I have mentioned, and take some of the sharp water mentioned in the section on cauterization, and make a live coal with it, and hold it not too thick or too thin, and fill the concavity of the instrument with this coal:
Let the outside of the concavity in which the medicine is placed be like the cavity of a spoon handle, and place the instrument with the medicine on the tongue, and let the patient gargle over his own side to allow saliva or nasal mucus from his mouth to pass through the internal medicine, so that it does not cause harm to his throat and damage that.
And place your hand with the medicine and press it on the tongue for as much space of an hour or until you see it become darkened and numbed by the bitterness of the medicine.
And if you wish, take a piece of cotton and wrap it around the tip of the ray, immerse the cotton in the medicine, introduce the ray into a cannula with the cotton at its end until the cotton adheres to the cannula, and do this as many times as necessary for what you want from the cauterization of the grape, and afterwards let it dry and fall off after about three or four days.
If you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and let the cauterization be cleansed in the grape's surroundings with cotton dipped in a solution of alum, linen, and vinegar, and clean it with that which is around the medicine, wash it with hot water, and heal it outside with a plaster, and inside with gargling until it is healed.
And this type of treatment is more dangerous than incision and long cauterization.
Sometimes the grape is cured with something subtle that cauterizes and incises, which is healed by subfumigation in this way: prepare the following ingredients, yarrow, origan, ruda, scicadus arabicus, camomile, crushed and similar to those of the herbs, and mix all or some of them in a pot, immerse them in vinegar and boil; let the pot be well beaten with a wooden spoon, and place a hollow implement made of iron according to this method at a suitable location within the pot; make it from silver or iron.
Let the tip be inserted into the patient's mouth up to the point where the steam reaches the uvula through the cannula, until the uvula is slightly obscured.
And repeat this treatment as necessary until it dries, and be careful not to perform this cure at the beginning of the emergence of ulcers, because it will aggravate the ulceration, and you should not do this, but rather make the declaration of the cauterization of the ulcer.
But if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a cane and make a hole in its end to enclose vinegar, so that the patient's mouth is narrowed, because the stopper of vinegar prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter 38.
On the extraction of thorns and what sticks to the throat and other causes.
Sometimes thorns, splinters from feet, or some other cause stick in the throat.
Then it is necessary to extract what is evident from them, observing it, because you should press the tongue with an instrument held between the teeth, so that it is clear to you what is in the throat.
What the text means is: "And whatever is hidden in the gallbladder must be made to make the patient vomit before the food has been digested in the stomach, because a strong wind causes the gallbladder to be forgotten through vomiting; or if the patient swallows a pill of opium or rye or a piece of dry bread; or take a dry piece of sea sponge, soak it strongly with oil, and make the patient swallow it, since when it reaches the place where there are spines and is extracted, it will be forgotten." "And take an eel and soak it in oil, then place it inside the meal and let it be swallowed and passed through; or take a cup and put it in and pull it out."
"If the cause is not forgotten as mentioned earlier, then use an instrument made of lead in this manner:"
"And it should be as thick as a finger and have a concavity on the outside that you insert into the throat easily."
"And let the patient lift their head up and watch to ensure that the tip of the instrument touches the bone of the throat, so that it pierces through the bone or spine, or that the doctor does it with their hand."
"However, it is better that the patient themselves insert it, because of their knowledge of the location of the attached cause and pierce it downwards, then pull their hand with the instrument upwards, all this according to the amount prepared before it is forgotten."
"Chapter thirty-nine."
"On the extraction of blood from a gallstone attached to the gallbladder."
"When the gallstone is medicated with what has been said in the division of the cure and does not improve, consider that you should observe the patient's gallbladder on a full stomach, because you have prepared the tongue of the patient with an instrument recommended by us."
"Therefore, if you see the gallstone, extract it gently with a small tool or a delicate instrument."
"And if it is not possible for you to extract it, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the gallbladder of the patient, place a hot iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this repeatedly (until the gallstone is dead and comes out of the gallbladder) and let the patient abstain from water all day."
"Then take a vessel full of water and open the mouth of the patient with it, rinse their mouth with it; and do not let any cause pass through it or foul the water for an hour, because the gallstone will soon feel the water."
"However, if the aforementioned is not forgotten, then fumigate the patient with cumin or asafoetida using the instrument recommended for fumigation of the uvula."
"Do this, and it will fall."
"Another method of operation in fumigation is to take an oil containing charcoal and cover it with a cloth on one side with a hole, and insert the end of the instrument into that hole; then apply the fumigation; place the patient's mouth over the end of the cannula and hold their mouth closed so that the fumigation is not forgotten until you know that the fumigation has reached the gallstone, because the gallstone will soon fall."
"If it does not fall, you should repeat the fumigation multiple times and let the patient abstain from drinking, eat salty and alkaline foods, and not drink water, and this regime must be forgotten."
"And this is the shape of the instrument with which gallstones in the gallbladder are treated when they are seen; it resembles forceps somewhat, but has a certain curve:" "The handle should be towards the gallbladder, and the end is similar to a stork's beak, with a groove for holding it, so that when any cause is inserted, it does not slip."
"Chapter forty."
"In which is the summary of the speech on opening and sectioning of abscesses."
"Abscesses are many species, of many types, as we remember in this book."
"And they are diverse in perforation and sectioning of them by two methods, one is for the species of abscesses that contain pus; and by what we collect from their liquids."
"And the second method is for places where accidents occur, because an abscess that occurs in the head is different from an abscess that occurs in the buttocks; and an abscess in a soft tissue area is different from an abscess at a joint; and each of them has its own treatment by operation."
"And some abscesses should not be perforated but allowed to mature or healed."
"Other abscesses should be drained when they are hard, and not healed according to their course, such as abscesses that occur near joints, because an abscess occurring near a joint takes longer to heal until the fluids surrounding it have resolved, and strong winds or nerves of that joint are corrupted, causing contraction of the limb; or is an abscess of the main member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it has matured, it will harm the main member; or is in the buttocks, so drain it before it matures; and you should not cut open a hard abscess without complete digestion, but rather that which is in the buttocks, because if you protract the pain from it and let it prolong until the edges of the buttocks, and make a fistula or perforate at the edge of it, it will not heal." The correct translation of this sentence from the given text into English is: "Moreover, you must know the time for the perforation of the abscess, and that is when it is ripe."
"Moreover, you must know the maturation when pain and fever cease, redness and pulse decrease, the head of the abscess sharpens, and other signs appear."
"Furthermore, you must know the perforation should be made in the place deeper than the abscess and where the pus flows during healing of the surrounding area."
"Perforation should often be made through the length of the flesh or body, if abscesses are in the muscles or feet, and in locations of ligaments, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all areas where it is not reflected; because in those that are reflected, use perforation according to that member."
"Moreover, if the abscess is in a fleshy location, it is better to postpone perforation until digestion of that area is confirmed as complete, as we have said; because if you perforate it before that, prolongs the duration and discharge of pus from it, and hardens the edges and deepens its depth."
"Moreover, some abscesses should be perforated according to the thickness of the flesh or body as necessary, or according to the need of that member."
"It is necessary to make small perforations for smaller abscesses, large and wide or multiple incisions according to the size of the abscess."
"And others are of abscesses in which the cavity should be opened and drained, when this is done it is called lancing or cupping, meaning that it has been closed again, such as those that occur in twins and buboes."
"And of those that are incised with three corners and of those in which it is incised as if the figure of a myrtle leaf, such as abscesses of gout."
"And there are those in which circular and crescent incisions are administered, similar to these."
"Moreover, for those that do not fall into any of the aforementioned categories, such as superficial abscesses of lions, you should perform surface or flat perforation."
"It is necessary when the abscess is large and has already collected pus that you perforate it and do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that time; having extracted a portion, return the abscess into another day, and extract a larger portion, and make multiple small incisions until it is healed."
"Moreover, if the patient is a child, woman in labor, or elderly person in decline, because animal spirit resolves with the discharge of pus, and the patient dies quickly, you should operate on them."
"Take great care with this chapter and consider the size of the abscess when you perform perforation; if the wound of the abscess is small or a flat incision, then administer some oil or ancient medicine; but if the abscess is large, and the wounds of perforation are multiple, you must pause at each interval until they heal together."
"If a portion of the abscess's cavity is detached or hollowed out in a circle, you must close it with old oil or thread made from linen cloth, like when bandaging wounds or dressings, without moisture; and leave it for three days; and process it and care for it until the wound heals."
"Moreover, if bleeding occurs during the operation, administer hot water and wine with a linen cloth, and wait for the bleeding to stop at intervals."
"Moreover, if bleeding persists, you must administer treatment and care and apply the powders that I have recommended in many places of this treatise."
"Moreover, if it is winter and the abscess is in a location of many nerves, you must administer powders in wine and oil of caution, and apply them to the area."
"And if it is summer and the location is fleshy, you must pause powders steeped in water or wine and oil, and leave it for three days as we have said, and then you should lance the abscess, clean it, and administer treatment to it until it heals."
"This is what is necessary for the understanding of the treatment of abscesses universally, but according to the differentiation I have already said for each type of abscess in specific ways."
"Chapter 41."
"On the incision of abscesses that occur in the skull."
"In the skull, small abscesses and those of various types that contain tunics that are formed for them; and these types are multiple."
"And from them come blisters, and from those that contain moisture similar to lime." "And from these are those that contain moisture similar to powder and like them; and from these are the hard, stone-like ones."
And in the section of everything, and in the extraction of those [things], there is no fear, for the extirpation of those does not counteract archery.
The operation in the section of those [things] is that you hold them with an instrument having a shape similar to this one, which is called forceps, until you know what it contains.
If what it contains is moisture, then cut it with section along its length following the surface section according to this shape:
The section starts along the line of .B. up to the line of .G. Therefore, when moisture is evacuated, you scour off that part which contains the moisture, and do not leave any cause of it, because too many watched eyes return, if there remains any cause of it.
Then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill it with that and leave it inside for another day, because with this it will dissolve everything that remains of the skin.
Then apply the Egyptian ointment on the wound repeatedly and clean it if necessary, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that skin; then care for the wound with the ointment until it heals.
And if an abscess contains fatty nodes, you incise it according to this shape: with a section having the shape of a cross, and make an incision between the two lips of the section and scrape it all around, and use your strength in the extraction of the tunica that contains it.
But if this counteracts your archery, you do what I told you first.
And you do the same with the lapified abscess of section and care according to what I told you; and incision on a lapified abscess is easier because it has little blood and little moisture.
And some times these abscesses are found in the head of certain men who have none of this moisture; which is caused because I incise an abscess on a woman's head as if it were stone, rough, white, which could not be pressed, and if someone hits that one, it will wound him.
But in other abscesses occurring on the head, this is not the topic, such as the abscesses that come to children's heads and you must remove the aurelhas; but the section of all these should be surface section.
And pause the perforation from the lower part of them to relieve the body in the lower parts.
Then care for those with what is appropriate for healing.
Chapter XLI.
On sectioning of scrofulas that occur on the neck.
These abscesses are often found in the neck, ears, and angles; and some occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur on the neck, and those that are generated between them, and every scrofula of these is first its own tunica, as in nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recommended.
And the types of these scrofulas are nodules, as some are lapidescent, and those that contain moisture, and among those are malevolent ones which do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, in the one that you see in good condition in the palpation, whose color of what is manifest is similar to the hinge, and is bad on all parts, and it is not attached to the neck nerve, nor to the veins, nor to the archery, and is not prominent; you must incise it with a superficial section from the upper part of the body to the lower part of the body along the line of .G. up to the line of .B., and scrape it all around, and separate two lips of the hinge with an incision or with multiple incisions if necessary, as we have said in abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is more careful not to be incised the vein or nerve.
If the sponge is not moistened, do not immerse your hand in it or disturb the patient, and avoid making incisions that are not necessary; for if you make an incision on a vein or artery and prevent your operation, then stop at the ulcerous wound or other powdery substances which cause bleeding, and press the wound, and let it rest until the acuteness of the abscess subsides and the wound becomes soft and pus-like. When blood is drained.
Therefore, return to your operation until you have completed it.
And ask the patient if there are any other small scrofula causes, so that you may incise them and clean them.
And if the large scrofula is due to a vein, then you should not incise the scrofula from its origin. Be careful when folding it strongly and let it fall on itself without harm.
Then fill the ulcer with old linen cloth that you have previously soaked in Egyptian ointment and take care of it.
And if you incise the entire scrofula, then you should ensure that the lips of the wound are closed and sutured immediately to prevent any excessive outflow.
But if you see that there is excessive outflow due to the size of the scrofula, then you must understand where to incise it, extract it and administer suture and what has been said.
And those scrofulas containing humidity, make a surface perforation at the place of growth of the tumor and stop the perforation of that which secretes pus from the body as we have said.
And apply perforation with lime and similar substances to eat away what has been removed from the rot. And when you see the wound cleaned, then take care of it with a meat-based ointment until it is healed.
Chapter 43.
On the incision of the pimple from an external abscess in the groin area.
The ancients performed this incision on the pimple and I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those people.
However, in men with inguinal hernia, the incision of the pimple should be avoided, because it is not beneficial and all the veins and major vessels of the patient are here.
However, in those who have abscesses or tumors in the mouth or groin or both areas, when the disease is not in the anus, it is necessary to perform the incision of the pimple to avoid the danger caused by suffocation.
Therefore, when you want to perform the incision, incise the pimple about three circles around the circumference of the pimple or four with a small incision along the length between two circles according to size, and the incision should be in the cavity, not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for incision because it is devoid of flesh and the vessels of blood from it are nearby.
And if the doctor is poor, then you should extend the bandage of the groin area about an inch and make an incision in the bandage to reach the anus, but avoid blood vessels if possible.
And make an incision in the scrotum as recommended, and it is located on the section of the anus for the small opening which is caused by disruption or abscess of the bladder.
Leave the wound open for a certain amount of time.
Therefore, since the danger has passed in the time of perforation, close the lips of the scrotum wound with sutures, but without the cartilage.
And apply medicines that make the flesh heal until it is healed.
And Al-Zahrawi said that the sum total of the sermon which we have recommended is nothing more than the case of some of those with abscesses who had opened the groin area of the patient and the patient died, and the opening was closed, and then someone would incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe through the wound for some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
And for this reason, I command that the wound be left open until the malignancy of the disease is consumed; and it lasts for three days; therefore, after this time, I command you to close the wound and take care of it until it is healed.
And what I have seen through my experience is that a servant took a knife and inserted it into his own groin and incised a part of the lung in the canal, and I was called to treat him, and I found him in such a state as the dead, and I uncovered the wound and found blood coming out of the small wound.
Therefore, you were confirmed that he had not incised a vein or guiding, and the wind came out of the wound, and I cured it until it was healed.
And the servant did not go to the bladder unless it was necessary in the case of urinary retention, and then he should return to his own care after several days.
Speak now, say there's no fear in the section of the epiglottis.
(Title missing)
On a boil that occurs near the gallbladder, which is called a gallbladder hernia.
This large boil known as a gallbladder hernia is serious according to the body's color and it is a dangerous condition for women.
It can be either natural or accidental in two ways.
In the case of a natural hernia, there is no need for treatment.
An accidental hernia can be either similar to fatty lumps or an abscess caused by the thickening of an artery, and in this case there is fear. It is not necessary to suspect it unless it is small. If you suspect it and find that it resembles fatty lumps, and is not suspended by any veins, then cut it in the same way as one would remove a lipoma, extracting the contents with a small burr; otherwise, thoroughly examine its entire structure and treat the area with whatever is needed until it heals.
(Title missing)
On the incision of types of lipomas.
Of lipomas there are many types, and I have already mentioned all their species in the division.
It is important to distinguish between a lipoma and an abscess when there is doubt.
So you say that an abscess is characterized by heat, fever, and intense pain until the boiling of excess fluid subsides; then the putrefaction ceases, the fever, pain, and heat subside.
But a lipoma is not characterized by heat, fever, or pain, and it contains a cystic fluid that is white in color.
It starts out as a small cyst that grows like a blister, either large or small, and there are two types: fatty and containing fluid, which can be either white or red, as I mentioned in the division.
Therefore, when treating a lipoma, you must first excise it and examine the cystic structure within it, as described in the relevant chapter.
This method of examination of abscesses and all lipomas is to take this instrument (cystic structure) and introduce it into the moist area that you find within the abscess, and you will rotate your fingers around it little by little until you feel the instrument has penetrated through the cyst wall.
Then place your hand over the abscess according to its size, and extract the cystic structure, considering whatever comes out as evidence of it.
If the fluid flow is absent, regardless of its color, then you should cut it open with a shallow incision as I have mentioned in other abscesses.
If there is no fluid coming out of the cystic structure, then you will know that it is fatty.
Make an incision in the shape of a cross as follows: Thus, as you have been taught, suspend that one (the patient), and cut open the abdomen from all sides with ease, and keep the skin or bag, if possible, over it and extract that pus with the knot.
But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract the healthy (tissue), and move carefully around that area, and then you shall extract it in pieces before any cause remains.
However, if some cause remains, either more or less, tie the knot according to your discretion.
And if you see that some small part remains, you shall fill the wound with some sharp and corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and place a cauterizing plaster over it and cure that (part) with another treatment until it is healed.
If the wound is large, you shall sew together the two edges of it and cure that (with) what causes healing.
But if the vein pulses in the opposite direction, or does not pulse, you shall tie and fill the area with linen saturated with vinegar and let it stay for two to three days until the wound can be opened again and stop the bleeding from the cut. Then return to sewing that which was broken apart.
Chapter 46.
On the shapes of instruments necessary for cutting and perforation.
Of these are the shapes of probes, and there are three types, one large, one medium, and one small.
The shape of the large probe is as follows:
The shape of the small probe is as follows:
Use iron, brass, or copper tips carefully sharpened, to make the probe suitable for use in abscesses.
And these are the shapes of the forceps, and they are called pliers, and one of them is called "pliers with teeth."
There are three types, for there is large, medium, and small.
The shape of the large forceps is as follows:
The form of experienced physician, form of it: (This sentence seems to be saying that the form or manner is that of an experienced physician.)
The form of experienced foot, form of it:
It's necessary that they are for those abscesses and eruptions, fistulas and boils because within those there are bones and other causes. (It seems the text is saying it is necessary to address certain issues such as abscesses, eruptions, fistulas, and boils because these can involve bones and other underlying causes.)
And make them round, large, or lion-shaped with large needles that are sewn through the skin and made of iron, copper, or silver, and the best ones are those made of copper. (It seems this sentence is giving instructions for how to treat abscesses, eruptions, fistulas, and boils by making them round, large, or lion-shaped using large needles made of various materials, with the best option being copper.)
And they are treated by experienced black plum (possibly a type of ointment or remedy) practitioners, who agree that fistulas should be opened in the cavity of those fistulas, with the reflections being reflected back onto themselves with their lightness. (It seems this sentence is describing how fistulas should be treated using a black plum-based remedy and reflecting its contents back into itself.)
And it is of three types: some are long, some medium-sized, and others short, according to the size of the fistula and its narrowness (or constriction). (It seems this sentence describes that there are three different sizes or types of treatments depending on the size and severity of a particular condition, such as a fistula.)
Form of experienced large lead practitioner: (It seems this sentence is describing a type of medical professional who specializes in using large amounts of lead for treatment.)
Form of experienced medium-sized lead practitioner: (It seems this sentence is describing another type of medical professional who uses a medium amount of lead for treatment.)
Form of experienced small lead practitioner: (It seems this sentence is describing yet another type of medical professional who uses a small amount of lead for treatment.)
The forms of incisions are of many types: some are simple with a single curve, and there are three types: large, few, and medium-sized. (It seems this sentence is describing the different shapes or sizes of incisions that can be made for various medical treatments.)
And some are open wounds, and there are three types. (It appears this sentence is continuing the description of incisions, stating that some are open wounds and that there are three different types of them.)
And of those open wounds, some have two curves, and there are three types. (It seems this sentence is providing more details about the different shapes or sizes of open wounds, stating that some have two curves and that there are still three types.)
And of those open wounds, some have three curves, and there are three types. (It seems this sentence is continuing the description of different shapes or sizes of open wounds, stating that some have three curves and that there are still three types.)
And all of these are necessary in their place. (It appears this sentence is summarizing the various treatments described previously, implying that all of them may be useful depending on the specific situation or condition being treated.)
Form of simple small incision, form of it: (It seems this sentence is describing yet another specific type of medical procedure called a "simple small incision.")
Form of large incision with two curves: (It seems this sentence is describing a specific type of medical procedure called a "large incision" that has two curves.) Form of medium-sized incision with two curves: (It seems this sentence is describing another specific type of medical procedure called a "medium-sized incision" that also has two curves.) Form of small incision with two curves: (It seems this sentence is describing yet another specific type of medical procedure called a "small incision" that has two curves.)
Form of large incision with three curves: (It seems this sentence is describing a specific type of medical procedure called a "large incision" that has three curves.)
Form of medium-sized incision with three curves: (It seems this sentence is describing another specific type of medical procedure called a "medium-sized incision" that also has three curves.)
And these are the forms of scalpels with which they cut and scrape abscesses and boils, and there are three types: large, medium-sized, and small. (It seems this sentence is continuing the description of various medical procedures or treatments, stating that scalpels have three different sizes for cutting and scraping abscesses and boils.)
Form of large scalpel: (It seems this sentence is describing a specific type of medical instrument called a "large scalpel.")
Form of medium-sized scalpel: (It seems this sentence is describing another specific type of medical instrument called a "medium-sized scalpel.")
Form of small scalpel: (It seems this sentence is describing yet another specific type of medical instrument called a "small scalpel.")
The edges of those (abscesses or boils) where incision is made are sharp and the other edges are not sharp, and they should not be cauterized in this way but rather used to aid in the scraping of the abscess while avoiding the risk of cutting a vein or nerve. The patient will heal and achieve some relief from discomfort due to the cauterization which stops the drainage of the abscess. (It seems this sentence is giving instructions for treating abscesses or boils by making incisions with sharp edges, but avoiding cauterization so as not to risk cutting a vein or nerve.)
And these are the forms of cauteries, and there are three types: large, medium-sized, and small, as you can see. (It seems this sentence is describing various shapes or sizes of cauterizing tools, stating that there are three different types.)
They are made of iron and resemble a ray that is used for alcohol. (I'm guessing this refers to some medical instrument or treatment)
And it is in the side with small holes pierced and covered with sponge on one side and runs to the incisions inside and outside as desired, just like you do when you see it (I'm guessing this refers to some surgical procedure)
The forms of sponges, which are hidden between the teeth for the perforation of abscesses and not perceived by the patients, come in three types: large, medium-sized, and small (continuing with the assumption that it refers to medical instruments or treatments) And these are the forms of the following [instrument or treatment]:
The forms of bloodletting cups which are used to drain the flow of blood and come in three types: large, medium-sized, and small; the forms of these [instruments or treatments]: (continuing with my assumption)
They are made of iron citrus fruits, round with some length and they are subtle (I'm guessing this refers to medical instruments or treatments)
You must have these types of bloodletting cups: large, medium-sized, and small, so that you can quickly drain the flow of blood in cases of necessity, and when at first there is no medication (continuing with my assumption)
However, do not use these [bloodletting cups] to drain blood in any part of the body, and only use them on fleshy areas, such as the armpits, thighs, chest, breasts, belly, and groin, and similar places where there are fleshy areas (continuing with my assumption)
Some vessels are made of those smaller instruments resembling fish scalers according to this form; with which blood is drained when it is done through phlebotomy or the opening of veins or arteries (assuming this refers to medical instruments or treatments related to blood drainage)
Some vessels are made round according to this form:
Chapter .xlvii. (I'm guessing that the text has now shifted from medical instructions to a new subject)
On the care of male breasts, which resemble women's breasts (continuing with the assumption that we are discussing a different topic)
Some vessels are swollen in the breasts of certain men due to excessive sleep and the breasts become similar to those of women, with abscesses appearing (continuing with the assumption that we are discussing a different topic)
And for the one suffering from this condition, it is necessary to incise those areas with a lunar section according to this form, from line B to line G, and remove all pus, apply a layer of carrot-colored medicine, bring the two edges of the wound together with sutures, and care for it until it heals. (Assuming we are still discussing male breast conditions or procedures)
If the breast descends towards the groin and softens like a woman's breast, then it should be cut in two halves, with two incisions resembling a lunar crescent, with each one containing the other at its end until the larger line contains the smaller according to this form (from line B to line G). Excise the pus that is between the edges of the wound and remove any pus, administer as you have said for suturing and powders until it heals. (Assuming we are still discussing male breast conditions or procedures)
And if you do not complete the incision that is necessary to be made due to the anxiety of the patient and bleeding, then it is necessary to apply a dressing soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it until the ointment has dissolved the hardened tissue, and care for it until it heals (Assuming we are still discussing male breast conditions or procedures)
Chapter .xlviii. (I'm guessing that the text has now shifted from medical instructions to a new subject)
On the perforation of abscesses arising in the groin area (continuing with the assumption that we are discussing a different topic)
Abscesses arising in the groin area belong to the species of scrofulas, hard abscesses, which contain pus. (Assuming we are still discussing a different topic)
And of those abscesses that contain moisture; those containing moisture must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from line G to line B. Once everything inside the abscess is evacuated, you should apply a clean bandage and leave it for another day. (Assuming we are still discussing scrofulas or abscesses)
And the dressing should be changed and treated with appropriate ointment until it heals. (Assuming we are still discussing scrofulas or abscesses)
And if the abscess of the species of lymph nodes or scrofulas is, then you should incise it as we have said in the section on scrofulas (Assuming we are still discussing different topics related to medical procedures)
If the wound is extended in such a way that it exudes pus, then administer cautery as mentioned earlier (Assuming we are still discussing different topics related to medical procedures)
Chapter .xlix. (I'm guessing that the text has now shifted from medical instructions to a new subject)
On the incision of abscesses caused by artery or vein (continuing with the assumption that we are discussing a different topic related to medical procedures)
When an artery is ruptured and the pus is consolidated on top of it, then vessels appear as abscesses and signs that indicate inflammation and abscess are caused by the artery or vein: for when an abscess is due to an artery, it is usually extended in the front of the body; and if you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a grating sound. (Assuming we are still discussing different topics related to medical procedures)
The one who is vein-related returns to the manifestation of the body. (In modern English: The one affected by a vein condition should return to the manifestation, meaning back to the body.)
Cutting this boil is wrong, especially in those with open wounds, strangles (swollen neck), colic, and many other places on the body; it is a great error, so its healing must be avoided, and one in the extremities or head should be avoided. (In modern English: Incising this boil is a mistake, particularly in those with open wounds, swollen necks, colics, and various other parts of the body; it is a grave error, so its treatment should be evaded, and if it occurs in the extremities or head, it must be avoided.)
However, for one whose injury is due to the inflammation of the archery opening, make an incision in the longitudinal section of the intestine; and approximate the section with sutures and open the archery, delivering it from the layers beneath until it is exposed. (In modern English: But if the injury is due to the inflammation of the intestinal opening, make a longitudinal incision in the intestine; then approximate the incision with stitches, open the intestinal area, and deliver it from the underlying layers.)
And place a needle on that wound and make it penetrate through the other side; tighten the intestine with strong double knots in two places, which causes you to extract two intestines located in the temples. (In modern English: Place a needle over the wound and make it pass through to the other side; tightly knot the intestine with strong double knots at two places, resulting in the extraction of two intestines located in the temples.)
And punch the area between the ligaments with a spatula until all the blood that is in it comes out and the boil is resolved. (In modern English: Punch the area between the ligaments with a spatula until all the blood that is inside it comes out, and the boil is cured.)
And administer treatment that generates fire beneath the ligaments, and cure the one with appropriate remedies until it is healed. (In modern English: Administer treatment that produces heat under the ligaments, and cure the patient with suitable treatments until it is healed.)
If it is a boil caused by a vein section, you must have at hand whatever is possible for the boil and incision, and insert the needle next to the area that you had next to your hand; then make it penetrate through, using the same thread to withdraw from the other side; and tie the boil with two strong ligaments as I told you in the previous instructions regarding the two-part ligament with double ends of the thread. (In modern English: If the boil is caused by a vein section, you must have at hand whatever is possible for the boil and incision, insert the needle next to the area that you had near your hand; then make it penetrate through using the same thread to withdraw from the other side; tie the boil with two strong ligaments as previously instructed regarding the double-ended ligament.)
If you fear that the thread will be extracted, then insert the strong thread with the needle through the entire boil; make the first incision of the needle at the beginning of the boil, and tighten four strong knots on the thread. (In modern English: If you fear that the thread will be extracted, pass the strong thread through the entire boil using the needle, make the first incision of the needle at the start of the boil, and tighten four strong knots on the thread.)
Cut the boil in the middle, extracting what is inside it; then make an incision of the intestine and leave what is connected to it. (In modern English: Cut the boil in half, removing the contents inside it; then make an incision on the intestine and leave what is attached to it.)
Place a poultice made of wine and oil over the affected area and administer the treatment made with warm and gentle remedies until it is healed. (In modern English: Apply a poultice made from wine and oil to the affected area, and administer a treatment made with warm and gentle remedies until it is cured.)
Capital letter A for a boil that occurs due to nerve twisting. (In modern English: Letter A for a boil caused by twisted nerves.)
Similarly, boils occur in the intestines and veins; they also occur in nerves when they are struck or overworked, and similarly. (In modern English: Boils can occur in the intestines and veins, and similarly in the nerves when they are struck or overworked.)
The majority of them occur in the joints of the ankles or feet, or in any location where joints are injured. (In modern English: Most of them occur in the joints of the ankles or feet, or any area where joints are injured.)
The boil is severe, and it resembles the color of other parts of the body; it occurs in larger areas, and when it swells with intensity, the patient appears to be in a state of confusion. (In modern English: The boil is severe, its appearance is similar to that of other parts of the body, it occurs over larger areas, and when it swells intensely, the patient appears confused.)
The boil is not added to the front of the body, and therefore it is left open; it affects everything and does not go to the sides in front or back. (In modern English: The boil is not attached to the front of the body, so it remains open; it affects everything and does not spread to either side.)
Therefore, one in the joints should not be wrapped with iron, for this could lead to a contraction. (In modern English: One affected by joints should not be wrapped in iron as it may cause contraction.)
However, one with a head or forehead wound opens the intestine with a spatula. (In modern English: But if the injury is in the head or forehead, open the intestine using a spatula.) If it is a small boil, remove it with forceps and excise it carefully. (In modern English: If it is a small boil, use the forceps to remove it and make an incision to excise it.)
If it is large, suspend it with a hook, excise it, and remove it; then sew the wound shut and cure it until it is healed. (In modern English: If it is large, use a hook to hang it, excise it, and remove it; sew the wound closed and treat it until it heals.)
Capital letter L for boils that are located on the head or forehead. (In modern English: Letter L for boils occurring on the head or forehead.)
From incising a boil that occurs at the corner of the mouth in the abdomen. (In modern English: Incision of a boil located at the corner of the mouth and appearing on the abdomen.)
Endevour to examine closely many men who have abdominal or other parts of the body affected by what is called fungus in a manner similar to those with fungus in the mouth; the wound is subtle and its head is large, but the lips are soft, some are small, and others are greatly enlarged. (In modern English: Examine closely many men who have abdominal or other body parts affected by what is called fungus in a manner similar to those with fungus in the mouth; the wound is subtle, and its head is large, but the lips are soft. Some are small, while others are greatly enlarged.)
And you have already seen one, and in his belly were two things which resembled mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white ones, of small size.
And the lips of them were turned inward and split open, and moisture ran from it all the time.
Therefore, you should incise those and tie one in ten inches. And the other in two inches.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
The given text appears to be a continuation of a medical treatise, and "Capitol .lii." is likely just the title or numbering system used in the manuscript for organizing the sections. Here, I will provide a translation of the following sentences:
Treatment of the prominence at the navel.
The navel prominence is formed by various causes: either due to a hernia on the abdomen and from which tissue or intestine protrudes as in other ruptures; or due to bleeding from a vein or artery as mentioned earlier, or due to compressed indigestion.
But if it is due to a hernia of the abdomen and the protrusion of tissue, then the color of the abscess is similar to that of the body, and it is without pain, and it appears in various positions. If it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then position that one in the place where you have previously recognized, with a more violent variety, and when you press on it as you mentioned, it is hidden and returns; and there is less pain there, and you must introduce warm water and work it violently.
But if it is due to moisture, then there is no pain and it is not hidden when pressed with the hand, nor is it compressed or hardened.
And if it is due to bleeding, then observe these signs of the abscess darkening and descending.
But if it is due to rotten flesh, then the abscess is heavy, large, and hard, and filled with a certain quantity.
But if it is due to wind, then there is no touch sensation.
And the treatment in that place is to consider whether the navel prominence is due to bleeding from an artery or vein, or due to wind; it is necessary to be cautious about treating it because there is fear and terror as you were told in the chapter where it was stated that abscesses due to arteries and veins are dangerous.
If the navel prominence is due to intestine or tissue, then you must command the patient to lie down and extend themselves; then apply pressure around the entire navel using a compress, and command him to lie on his back between your hands and surround the navel with a broad strip of cloth in the circle where you have marked it; then spread the matress beneath the abscess to its edges and apply firm but gentle force and the method of applying should be decent.
And apply the blade of the abscess stretched out on the ligament and insert your finger in that area to feel for the intestine; and if you have not found or guarded it with the ligament, then you extract the excrement and force the intestine back into the abdomen.
And if you have found the tissue, then take it with a certain amount; and incise the superfluous parts of it.
But if it is opposite to your artery or vein, then surround that area and return to your operation; take two needles and put them in the appropriate strong places and pass the needles in the circle you have made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, which you will make to penetrate; and tighten the abscess into four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and let the extended skin fall into place by itself; or incise that part which is thin and tender, and take care of it with ointment until it heals.
If the navel prominence is due to rotten flesh in that place or moisture, then you must follow what has been said and drain the pus or moisture which accumulates there, and take care of it with ointment and consolidate the area.
Chapter 33.
Treatment of cancer.
It has been said in the division, of the species of cancer and in what manner is the treatment of it with medicines, and that it is advisable to avoid surgery on it because it is not ulcerated; and it has been stated that cancer originates from the mother and caution is necessary in its treatment.
And the ancients said that in some cases cancer can be eradicated, such as in the head, for example, in the breasts or genitals, and similarly in other parts of the body where it is possible to remove everything; especially when it begins small.
But when it is old and large, there is no need to approach it because I cannot heal that one nor have I seen another do so; nor will it be achieved.
The operation in that place is as previously stated, that you proceed and let the patient rest and purge black bile occasionally, and anoint it, if there is a clear repletion found.
And prepare the patient with preparation suitable for the operation, and apply an incision to those parts that are necessary for it; and compress all sides with a good dressing so that there is no cause of the reasons for it left behind. And allow the blood to flow, and do not incise it lightly, and press on the places, and cleanse the large blood with your hand or with an instrument that is available for you among the instruments.
But if it is contrary to the large blood to incise a vein or artery, then cauterize that area until the flow of blood stops, and take care of it with other treatment until it heals.
Chapter 14.
On the treatment of edema.
We have already discussed, in the classification, the types of edema from water, and the signs of each type, as well as their treatment with medicine.
That which is cured with iron is not any type of edema except for the type of althitas alone, and iron should not be approached in the case of tympanites or the type of yposarcha, as it is fatal.
And when you have treated this type of edema called tympanites with medicine without success, consider, as if the patient has already achieved weakness or is affected by another disease that is another type of edema, such as if it is in the throat or stomach and resembles those, then be careful not to treat him with iron, as there is fear over this.
But if you see the patient with excessive strength and not another disease except edema alone, and neither child nor elderly, then the method of operation is that you raise the patient on your hands, and administer to him the expression of his stomach with his hand, plug the water in the part below the navel, and take a pointed spatula as follows:
It should be of two pointed long parts, with a sharp tip like a spatula; however, it should be in some small shortness, to prevent entering the intestine during the operation and damaging it.
And consider if the generation of edema is from the intestines, in which case you must be at a distance from the navel by about three fingers below and to the right of the navel.
But if the generation of edema is from the liver disease, then your incision should be to the left of the navel by three fingers.
And if it is due to the spleen, then your incision should be on the right side.
And it is necessary that your incision be over the rib on which the patient wishes to lie, so as not to cause swelling at that place.
Then pierce the abdomen completely with the instrument and enter that incision, raise your hand with the spatula between the abdomen and the intestine and cut out that part; if it is about the size of a nail or larger.
And pierce the intestine into the location where the spatula reaches, and that is the location of the water. And extract that part and insert an instrument with the following shape: And it is similar to a silver needle; it is made of silver, copper or brass, at the bottom of which there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other. The tip of it is engraved like a feather, as follows:
And in the upper part of the instrument there is an armillary, as when the instrument reaches the water, then immediately remove it from the instrument so that it evacuates the water in the best possible quantity, for if you evacuate too much or too little, it may lead to the patient's death due to resolution of their animal spirit, or they will experience seizures that are approaching death.
But evacuate it according to the strength of the patient and according to your understanding of their disposition and the pulse and temperament of the patient.
Then extract the instrument and retain the water that caused it, as soon as it is retained by the abdomen, which retains the hole above the intestine, for you should perforate it according to that method.
Then repeat the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates it, extract a small amount of water, and do this for several days out of fear, and be careful not to leave the water unattended but only in small amounts.
But if you fear the patient and let them drain a large amount of water, then cure him with sand burial in hot water, massage his back, and wait for a long time under the sun; and treat him with drying medications until he is cured.
Cauterize the stomach, and the liver and spleen near the water drainage, as I have already recounted in what was mentioned earlier.
Chapter 15.
On the treatment of children whose urinary passages are not perforated.
Sometimes one of the children is born from the mother's womb and the head of the placenta is not perforated (or it is a narrow hole or it is not in its place).
Therefore, close the incision with suture as soon as it has been made using a subtle sponge in this manner:
Then sew up the wound with a thin leaden pin and tie it, and keep it closed for three days or four.
And when the urge to urinate returns and urine flows out, let it flow again.
If you do not suture the leaden pin, there is a possibility that the urine will leak from this closure.
However, the wound that has been sutured with a leaden pin should be treated with the same as we have said, for several days until it is widened.
However, in those in whom the wound is not in its location, it leads to problems, since in these cases, if the wound is at the end of the urethra, preventing urination at the sides, raise the penis with your hand to the sides until it can urinate; and this is not for procreation, as the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and this is a serious illness.
The method of the operation is that the patient lies on their back, and you extend the head of the penis from there with your left hand using a strong pull, and incise the head of the penis at the location of the foreskin using a sharp instrument such as a feather or any other blade, so that the meat of it comes out looking like the head of the penis and that the wound falls into the meaty area as needed.
And be aware that in your bleeding operation, as it often occurs; stop the bleeding and seal the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 64.
On the whitening that occurs in the foreskin on the head of the penis, and its corruption, blackening, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Frequently this whitening occurs on the penis and is a sign of serious illness.
And one is malignant and the other is not malignant.
Non-malignant, it is necessary to suspend a fine powder and remove it until it dissolves completely; then apply an Egyptian ointment over the affected area; and continue treating it with the Egyptian ointment until it is healed.
And if the whitening is malignant and black, you should provide cauterization at the incision site and remove it.
However, if the whitening is in the uncircumcised foreskin of the penis and one part of the whitening is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, it is necessary that you remove the whitening from the inside first until it consolidates; then treat the outside, as when you treat the foreskin, it is not guaranteed that it will not be pierced.
And the same thing occurs in the genitals and penis blackening and corruption, so it is necessary that you hollow out everything that has already been corrupted or is about to corrupt or has already been corrupted; then apply a line of honey over the affected area, which is coated with flour made from milled grains and crushed herbs.
And treat that area with the other treatment until it is healed.
But if there is bleeding, you administer a lunar cauterization in this manner:
because the cautery helps in two ways at the same time, namely with bleeding and with the corruption of a wound.
And if the head of the penis is rotten and destroyed completely at that time, it is necessary that you insert a lead tube into the meat of the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in those where the foreskin is healthy, and circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to a wound or an abscess), it is necessary to excise with a blunt instrument until the glue dissolves and the head of the penis is completely separated.
And if it is difficult to induce [the urine] from there, then you must stimulate with some means at the head of the penis and the foreskin, because the foreskin, when thin, is easily perforated due to its subtlety.
Then separate the penis and the foreskin with a thin instrument that is moistened in water to prevent them from sticking again later.
Let it be healed with warm poultices until it has been consolidated.
Chapter 77.
On the purification of infants and the treatment of those who experience problems related to circumcision.
Circumcision is not a simple cure like other diseases: however, since it is our operation and our choice, and the problem is specific to infants, it is necessary to choose the best operation and method that causes minimal harm to their health.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not discuss circumcision in any of their books because they did not use it in their laws, but rather learned it through experimentation, which I have discovered that most craftsmen and barbers use to perform circumcisions with a new knife and torches; and they use oil and linen cloth for the instrument and incision with the nail.
And I have already prohibited all these methods and not found a better circumcision with scissors, oil, and cloth that are used in circumcision with the nail, because many times the skin is torn above, because the skin of the foreskin has two layers, and the lower layer remains, and it is easily punctured and ensured pain. And the circumcision that is performed by alphecats (circumcisers), which is digital, used by cobblers, is not secure because it easily enters the cut of the penis tip.
But with circumcision using the nail, you risk damaging and corrupting your operation. And the skin of the infant is naturally short, and many times it does not need circumcision in this manner, and I have seen this.
But the circumcision that is done with scissors and oil and cloth, I have found through experience that it is better because scissors are made for proportional incisions, so that the sharpness above is the same as the sharpness below; and therefore when you press your hand proportionately two times, and cut accordingly in one go, it creates compression of the oil-soaked cloth that covers the entire penis area without any error.
The method of the first operation is that you make the infant lie down, especially if he is small, and do nothing but oil his penis and leave it for another day.
Then let him be cheerful in all the ways that are possible for you to do what is best for his understanding. Let him be with your most trusted individuals, and not be left alone; hide the scissors in your hand or on your lap so that the infant does not see them nor any other of the instruments.
Then place your hand on the penis and blow on the skin, pull it out so that the head of the penis is exposed, and then circumcise what has been added to it due to the foreskin.
The form of scissors used for circumcision, this is the shape:
One part should be not-cutting and the other cutting, so that there is no gap in the handle and the length of both sharp edges is the same as the length of two handles folded together.
But the error in circumcision is that too much skin is torn internally or you must cut it properly.
Therefore, you must stretch that area with your nail before the incision of the location and cut it equally.
And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract that area with a lancet and cut it.
If it has passed three days and what is inflated remains beneath the buttock without the boil being released, then you should lance what enters to cut out the boil carefully, scrape it easily, and incise it according to your preparation.
And beware of the head of the buttock, for it will not be affected by this.
So, cure that which the ulcer has solidified due to the powders recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it is incised into the bone within limits, and you observe the joints above it, it will not notice it.
But cure that which we said should heal.
Chapter LVIII.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction, which can be caused by stones or clotted blood, or by a tumor or a growth, and resembles those described in our discussion on methods of treatment.
And if it is not dissolved as we said before and the cause is severe in the patient, then you should administer extraction using an instrument called a syringe, which has the following form: It should be made of silver and slightly concave, like a bird's pen with the slenderness of a long ray about the size of a palm and a half, to which there should be a thin tube at its tip.
The method of draining the urine using the syringe is that you grasp the tip folded and place it at the edge of the wool or cotton with good lubrication; then insert the edges of the tip into the back of the syringe, and incise if any cause of the wool requires it, but introduce it into the tube forcefully. Then remove the syringe and apply oil and albumen around it.
And make the patient lie down on a bed, and wrap the bladder and buttock with damp oil, olive oil, and water.
Then insert the syringe gently until it reaches the anus of the buttock; then fold the buttock upward at the pubis; and push the syringe into it; then push it further to reach the bladder, and the patient should be moved towards the cause of the disease, not according to this order, but in the opposite direction.
And stretch out the wool gently, as the urine will stick to the wool.
Then remove it and treat the urinary condition using the syringe, continue to use the syringe and insert it until the bladder is emptied and the patient experiences relief.
Chapter LIX.
Of what quality of clysterization of the bladder are clamps and similar instruments that are appropriate for this purpose.
When there is an ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or it becomes congealed blood in that area, or there is a hard stone blocked there, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a clamp, and this is its form:
But if it is outside that area (of the bladder) and it is silent, then it is closed. And in that area there are three cuts: two from one side, like this, sometimes.
At the beginning (of the procedure), a concave area is made, in which the pus is scraped out, as much as it can be, without adding anything, until some cause is drawn from there by the humors, is drawn, and when it is expelled, with what is drawn, it should be pulled out, and when it is expelled long, as a clamp made in battles at sea is done.
So if you want to prevent humors in the bladder, insert the end of the clamp into the humors and draw out with it the pus that is scraped from above, because the humors are drawn into the concavity of the clamp.
And place the end of the clamp on the neck of the bladder as recommended in the catheter; and scrape out the pus with what you are scraping, because that pus reaches the bladder quickly, and the patient feels it.
The shape of the fine clyster (catheter) with which the bladder is clysterized, and this is its shape:
And it should be made of silver or lead, with a cap that is like a small feather on the end and the tube hollow inside.
And take the bladder in motion, and stop its movement when you want to clysterize the bladder, and tie it with strong ligature at both ends with a double knot, and heat the pus that you are going to clysterize over the fire.
And place the end of the catheter in the neck of the bladder.
And press your hand on the bladder with the pus and structure until the patient feels that the pus has reached the bladder.
But if the bladder is not present, then you take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; perforate its entire roundness; and forcefully insert the needle into those cuts, so that they are turned around; and tie the circle in such a way as to make it closed, so that the pus, oils, and waters that you stop from the humors, do not escape.
And tie it in the instrument and do with it as you did with the bladder, and press your hand into it until the pus reaches the bladder.
Chapter LX.
On stone removal.
We have already said in the division what types of stones and their treatment with medicines are, and the difference between a stone generated in the kidneys and one generated in the bladder, and the signs of it.
We have said what stone operation with the hand and section (surgery) is.
And a stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is inserted into the bladder.
And we are narrating that with clear exposure and brevity.
Therefore, we say that a stone generated in the bladder mostly appears in children; and the signs of it are that the urine that is expelled from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in sand; and the patient scratches his penis, and passes blood, and it becomes swollen; and with this, the anus opens more.
And recovery in children from this occurs before they reach 13 years old; and treatment in the elderly is difficult. Younger people are more prone to this condition among them.
And of that which has a larger seed and easier cure is less opposed to it, if it is small, it is contrary to it.
Therefore, when we approach the cure of this condition, at the beginning it is necessary to cleanse the patient with a cisterium that extracts all the wound that is in his hernias; for such a wound sometimes prevents the seed from entering, therefore the investigation of it is required.
And place the patient with his feet and be careful and cautious that the seed descends to the opening of the bladder or sometimes jumps from its place.
And apply that strainer between your hands prepared, and let the things of it be removed, in order that the bladder may be fully made open descending towards the lower parts.
And bring forth that [seed] and everything around it.
Therefore, if you feel the seed in the space, you should immediately cut on it.
And if it does not come out completely by itself with your touch, you must then anoint it with oil from your left hand, if the patient is a child, or with flour if he is an adult male, and insert it in his rectum. Bring forth the seed that was inside your hand. And turn it little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And press on it with your hand, and expel it outward through the parts outside the bladder at the place where you cut.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister with his right hand to stretch out the genitals to the outer parts, and with his other hand lift up the caul that is below the genitals at the place where the cut was made.
And insert spatula that has such a shape: And cut it where it is between the rectum and the genitals, not too much nor too little, along the left side of the thigh; and make the incision on that seed, your hand being in the rectum, making a transverse incision so that the incision outside is wide and inside narrow according to the amount of the seed that emerges from it, but not more, forcibly compressing your hand that is in the rectum the seed must be incised, and do it without difficulty.
And know that from the seed is some part that has an angle and edges, for which the emission of it is made difficult by that.
And from that is a lion-like seed resembling a kernel, and round, and it is made with easy emission.
Therefore, if it is the one with angles and edges, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it is not adjusted, you must then grind on it or compress it properly with a tool, the end of which should be like a file grinding on the seed, and not escape from it; or insert below it a subtle instrument with curved end.
But if you cannot do that, enlarge the wound a little, and if you see blood flow, cut off that in strong vinegar.
But if the seed is more than one, first you should push your hand to the mouth of the bladder and then cut on it; and insert a little instrument near it; proceed in this way if there are more.
And if the seed is very large, ignorance consists in cutting it with a great incision, for one of two things will happen to the patient: either he dies or he experiences continuous urine distillation, because the place is not completely consolidated.
But administer the expulsion of it from inside that is still inside, or grind it in the break with forceps until you extract it in pieces.
Therefore, when you have completed your task, fill the wound with aloes and dragon's blood juice, and strengthen it. And place a cloth soaked in oil and vinegar or rose oil and water on it, or one soaked in warm water, for the abscess to be softened.
And bring the patient back on his bed and do not remove the linen until the third day.
And when you remove it, wrap the area in warm water and oil, and treat it with diaphetic and abscess-reducing ointments until it is healed.
But if in the wound you see abscesses, pus and corrosive, and it appears as if the blood is in the bladder frozen, and for that reason urine is prohibited (and this is known by the passage of blood with urine), therefore insert your hand into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it causes the bladder to corrode and putrefy.
And wash the wound with vinegar and water, salt, and against all kinds of infection, with what is suitable for its cure until it is healed.
It is necessary during the entire cure that you lie down and adjust the medicines that are placed on the area.
And if the seed is small and is embedded in the flesh of the thigh, and it is forbidden to urinate, treat it with what I recommend before you resort to incision, because too many weeks of this cure are accused of incision; and I have already explained that you should take a perforator like this:
From a pointed exterior, sharp, inserted in a rod.
Then grasp the spear, and tie it to the base so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the iron into the urethra, penetrating with ease until it reaches that stone. Turn the instrument slowly in that small stone, and you will perform the perforation on one side until the other side penetrates; for urine is soon released.
Then press your hand on what is broken of the stone from the side of the urethra, as it is cracked and forgotten by the urine, and the patient will be healed.
But if this cure is not suitable for some reason that prevents it, then tie a spear to the stone, and another spear above the stone. And strike the stone in the urethra between two cuts. Then extract it. Then remove the ligament and clean the clotted blood from the wound. This is made in the incision.
A ligament is not necessary for the spear next to the stone, but only so that it does not return to the bladder; and the other ligament above is not necessary because when the spear is removed near the exit of the stone, the wound heals and scars over.
When you lift the stone with the spear above, raise the scrotum above, or you will not be able to complete your task and the wound will heal in this way as we have said.
Capital. LXI (61)
Extraction of stones in women.
Stones in women are rarely generated.
But if a stone is seen in any of those (women), the cure is difficult and is forbidden by various methods.
One reason is that the woman's body is weak and she is a virgin.
The third reason is that you do not find a woman who knows how to examine if she puts herself at the doctor's disposal when she is chaste, or if she has a husband.
The fourth reason is that you do not have enough knowledge of this art, especially the operation with a hand.
The fifth reason is that the location of the incision for stones in women is much longer than the location of the stone, which requires a deep incision, and there is fear in this procedure.
But if necessity requires it (treatment), then you must choose a woman who is well-versed in this art and not rare.
But if you are lacking that [person], then seek a skilled and subtle midwife or present a mature woman experienced in women's affairs, or a woman who is proficient in this art [of healing].
Then make her present and command her to do everything that you tell her, starting with the examination of the stone at its beginning; this is because she will check if the woman is a virgin. If so, then she should place her mouth on the woman's anus and press the stone.
Then, if she finds the stone, pinch it and tell her to incise [make an incision] on it.
But if she is not a virgin, command the midwife to insert her mouth into the woman's vagina and examine the stone. Then, she should place her left hand on the bladder and compress it with good understanding.
Then, if she finds the stone, it is necessary to guide it gradually from the opening of the bladder towards the vaginal parts up to where it reaches the vagina's depth.
Then, the incision should be made at the junction of the cervix and vagina. You must locate the stone in the vaginal area, and the tip of the instrument should not slip away from the pinched stone.
The incision should be small at the beginning; then make an opening with the knife over that incision, and if you feel the stone, adjust the size of the incision according to the amount that you know the stone will be extracted through it.
And you should know that bladder stones are motes: for some are small and large, some have a lion-like or sharp surface, some are long and round, and they often have holes.
So, you should know how many types of stones there are, according to what you mean by that.
If you see blood flow, apply some coagulated vitriol at the site and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding is stopped. Then return to your operation when the stone has been removed.
Prepare the instruments that are mentioned in the procedure for removing stones in men, so that you can be assisted by them during your operation.
If you see blood flow and know that the expulsion of blood is due to the artery that has been incised, then stop the bleeding with powder on the site and strengthen it with pulvils (medicinal powders) and tightening the wound. Do not do anything else; leave the stone alone and do not remove it, for if you force it out, the patient will die quickly. Cure the wound.
Therefore, when the acuity of the wound is given over several days and the site heals, then return to your operation before forgetting the stone (kidney stone).
Chapter 62.
On incision on an inguinal hernia.
An inguinal hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white chyle that contains the semen, and it is called a chyle sac.
Sometimes, the hernia is in the natural fat layer that is prepared by nature near the base of the semen duct, until it becomes another semen duct; and it is the genital sheath between the white chyle, which we have mentioned before, but not entirely correct.
The cause of this hernia is weakness that occurs in the genitals, so this matter accumulates there; and sometimes it happens due to a blow inflicted upon the genitals.
And this fluid has moving masses of various colors: the color of it may be declining towards citrine or blood-red, rosy, black and putrid, or white and watery, and that is what is more common.
The signs by which it is known where this accumulation of fluid is located are as follows: if it is in the white chyle that we have mentioned before, then the abscess is round and gradually elongated like a figure of an egg, and the genital appears, since the fluid contains it throughout.
If the fluid is in the natural fat layer, then the abscess is round at the base of the semen duct and for that reason it is considered another semen duct.
If the fluid is between the genital sheath and the white chyle, cut it down to the centimeter.
And if you want to know the color of the fluid, examine the color of the fluid in the abscess by cutting a small piece from it, and according to what is found inside the abscess, judge what is within it.
Therefore, when we come to the treatment of him with an iron instrument, it is necessary that we command the patient to be bled if that is possible for him, and sometimes empty his body.
Then rest the patient on his back for some reason other than for surgery, and place two or more cloths beneath him.
Place your hand on the left side of him, and command the servant to follow on the right side, who should extend his arm from the lower back area of the genitals to the division of the belly button.
Then, take a thin stick and cut the groin area at the midpoint, near the pubic bone.
Make an incision straight along the line that should pass through the pubic hair, up to the white cartilage.
Peel that out, observe, and take care not to cut into it; and your excision should be compared with the excised part to see if it matches in size and the excision should be examined more subtly according to the amount you are able.
Then, pierce the bladder with a wide opening and drain all the water.
Then, separate the labia of the incision with stitches, and stretch the bladder at the divisions above; do not touch the area around the genitals, and incise the bladder in the manner that is possible for you. Incise it completely or in pieces, especially the narrow part, for if you do not examine the incision carefully, it is not assured that the water will not return.
But if the urine process occurs from outside of its cavity during the operation, when you have completed the bladder incision, return it inside, and then stitch together the two labia of the genital opening with sutures, and care for the wound as you would other wounds, until it heals.
And if the urine is rotten due to another illness, you must remove the instruments that are the support, extract the bladder, and care for it as we have said.
But if the water is gathered in two divisions as an example, you know that they are hernias; therefore, incise that division as you did in the other one; and if it appears to be a surgery, then you perform it.
Place the gauze, soaked in oil or rose oil, inside the incisions and cover it with another gauze that you have soaked in wine and oil; then spread that one over two genitals and the abdomen; cover it with doubled and pulverized cloths and lay them on top of each other as follows:
And take two cloths and fill them with camphor-soaked linen as follows: make the ends by pressing them with cotton or wet linen; join them in the armpit of the sleeves, one end at the anus to the buttocks, and the other at the division of the pubic bone, and two ends on each thigh and two ends on each arm, and all the edges should be sewn in the armpits of the sleeves.
In some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of incision with iron; and you should take a subtly sharp cautery and incise the genital opening with it, igniting it as we have recommended until the white cartilage containing the water is exposed, and then you take caution as follows: It resembles Greek letters.
Then, pierce that bladder and ignite it until all the moisture is expelled.
Then stretch the bladder with stitches, excise it with scissors, and excise it with a sharp cautery that is ignited; incise it as possible until you have removed everything; take care not to let the fire touch the urine.
You should know that this operation is safe and lengthy without blood flow, and better than an operation with section.
If it happens that an abscess occurs during the time of section or cauterization, or bleeding, then you must treat the cause of the problem as appropriate, according to what has been said.
If the patient is weak and does not hope for a second operation due to its horribleness, then administer perforation as recommended; and this is when it is certain, according to what you have said about signs, that the hernia is cystic.
Then you must seize the patient on some raised cushion, then perforate the abscess in the lower part of it with a lancet and let the pus flow out; stop the perforation according to the length of the body.
And make the opening wide enough so that all the water runs out.
Then place a cushion over the affected area and leave it, allowing the remaining water to drain. Then treat the affected area until the wound is healed.
But if the contraction of the water in that area occurs during perforation, it is not done unless white pus appears in the wound opening and prevents the discharge of the water, then you must put a pen or instrument for extracting the water from the abscess, whose form is preceded; or adjust in the wound opening a small one.
And you should know that the water returns, and is blocked for about two months or longer; and when it is full, then it should be perforated according to that method, because the patient will pass away in their days.
Chapter LXIII.
On cutting through a fleshy hernia and its treatment.
You should know that in the cutting through this hernia there is fear of loss in the greatest cases; therefore, I recommend dismissal and being saved by another method.
And I remind you of the operation in that case and the characteristics of abscesses.
Therefore, say that abscesses originate in the bodies whose genitals are composed and this is done for many causes; either by acute angry excess which is infiltrated into the genitals, or by injury.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not found in pain, and this is a severe abscess.
A flat abscess is lithified, whose color is dark, and it is not healed.
Some examinations are made due to the nodes of the arteries, and inflammation of those in such a way that the memory of it is already perceived, or inflammation of veins.
But what is caused by inflammation of the arteries can be recognized by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers, and it does not have to be touched.
But what is caused by inflammation of veins is not dispersed due to any cause, it must be compressed with the fingers.
And it is possible that on this type of tissue cutting can be done and on others made from flesh; and if you incise the cords of the genitals, place a gauze over the openings, and extract that white pus, remove the suspensories of the vessels, tie them up, and incise the suspensories that you have removed from all sides of the openings of the pus.
Therefore, if the pus has already been consolidated with these fleshy attachments, then you must extract the pus and incise it.
And if there is an adhesion for any reason of the pus or between vessels, then you must remove all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
But if there is native tissue in the location of the adhesion that is behind it, then you must incise everything that is from it and extract the pus as we have said.
Therefore, when your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool soaked in warm oil and wine; and treat it with other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter LXIV.
On the treatment of a hernia that is of the bladder.
Bladder is an abscess enclosed by some covering similar to the scrotum with softening of the testicles, and it causes difficult exercise and walking for the patient.
And in the treatment of this disease, there is fear due to which a reminder is given.
However, it is necessary to say operation in that case as we have done before.
And say that it is necessary to seize the patient on a raised cushion; and cover the suspensories of the testicles at the openings below; and cover the cord of the genitals with fingers at the vessels that are found in the groin, and have another servant who holds them tightly extended.
And place a lancet with a sharp point for transverse section through the vessels until they are exposed.
Then remove all parts of the scab in such a way as you said during the removal of an arrow, which are in the temples.
Then put a double-pointed needle into it and insert it first at the point where life has occurred, and then observed the other end. Then insert the scissors straight into the middle point according to the length of the body, and extract what has been added by the putrid and corrupt humors.
Then take care of the wound with treatment for other wounds where you want to heal using either of two methods, as one does not harm.
If all the vessels are affected, it is necessary that the testicles are removed or the testicles are tied off with the vessels, in order to deprive them of any nutrient through the closure of the vessels, and to make them atrophied, or tied off so as not to be beneficial for them.
Chapter 16
On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The onset of this hernia is due to a division that extends across the abdomen near the arch of the abdomen, so that the intestines are damaged by the rupture of one of the hernias.
This rupture is either due to incision or excess expansion of the abdomen, and this type of rupture occurs for various reasons: impact, shaking, shouting, lifting heavy objects, or similar causes.
The symptom of this type of rupture, when it is due to abdominal expansion, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time and not suddenly, and it is an abscess that grows under the skin because the abdomen compresses the intestine.
The symptom of this type of rupture is that it occurs suddenly at the beginning and causes intense pain; an abscess appears in various places, both near the proper opening and far from the abdomen, which is due to the intestine itself, and the body parts beyond the abdominal area.
Sometimes the intestines are forgotten outside the abdomen, and this type of intestinal hernia is called "zirbal."
Sometimes the intestines are opened with ventosity, and sometimes they run in the hernia opening and are contained within it, and this is dangerous for the patient, and sometimes they cause pain that worsens and especially when pressed.
In treating the types of this disease with iron, caution is required because it can be dangerous to hunt in that area.
The method of the operation for that condition is to order the patient to return the intestine with their hand inside its cavity if possible, and then wrap it around his waist with a cloth and lift his legs.
Then seal the opening of the intestine, which is located near the testicles, and incise the entire length of the intestines; then insert two lips of the incision with stitches as necessary to close the incision with them.
And if it is not possible to close the incision entirely, leave the opening as small as possible.
Then remove the ciphaquethes that are located near the testicles until the white hard abdomen is exposed in each area.
Then you insert your finger into the testicle that is between the abdomen and where it joins the white hard abdomen, which is located behind the opening, and release any adhesion in the area.
Then place your hand over the intestines outside and extend the white abdomen with your left hand, raise the testicles to the incision area; and order the assistant to extend the testicles outwards while you dissolve the adhesion that is behind it with complete solution.
And search for the cause that the intestine is wrapped in the hard white abdomen. But if you find no cause, lay it back on the abdomen.
Then incise the section below the codpiece of the testicles in a way that pus and blood flow out, as we have recommended in what has been said before.
Then administer wool soaked in oil and stop the wound; and administer the ligament that we have recommended (and sometimes the white cord is cauterized, which we have said to prevent blood flow, because this often happens), and leave the ligament inside until it falls by itself.
But if the hernia does not come out on its own, then boil water and wrap it, and apply it over that area until it falls as we have said before.
And cure the wound with another remedy for wounds until it is healed.
Chapter 66.
On windy hernias.
In this hernia, no one has been seen to be healed by iron surgery.
And the first said that this is done as we have recommended in hernia caused by wind: lay the instruments near the section on that side with ease; and then cut in the middle place around the abscess with what opens that, until the instruments fall.
Cure the wound as we have said before until it is healed.
Chapter 67.
On the separation that is done in the anguonars (a type of hernia).
Sometimes there is a rupture in anguonars as we have said before, and then move on to the next step.
Do not give any cause of hernias to the genitals; and if it happens, that is rare; return it to its place at all times.
But if the time is prolonged with that, a fissure is made in the codpiece until the hernia goes back into the codpiece; and this happens due to the extension of the codpiece, which is in anguonars as we have said before, which causes it to be stretched, softened and filled with abscess and then moved.
And the cure of that is with cautery, as we have described before.
And sometimes it is cured with iron in this way: the patient lies on his back between your hands, and then cut the place of the hernia abscess rupture with a section according to the thickness of three fingers.
And tie the white cord that is below the codpiece until it is exposed.
And then take the rod and place it on the prominent part of the codpiece, and press it against the navel.
And then sew the two prominent parts together at the end of the rod of the codpiece.
And then extract the end of the rod, but do not incise the codpiece from all sides, nor extend the hernia, nor any other cause as you know in the treatment of internal hernias.
And cure that with the treatment of wounds, and when you incise the folds, clean it and restore the wound until it is consolidated; because the codpiece is contracted and not sewn shut the prominence of rupture.
Cautery is better in this place, because it is near health.
Chapter 68.
On softening of the codpiece of the testicles.
More often the codpiece of the testicles in some men is softened in this way because the flesh that is between it is softened and the care of it is neglected.
Thus it is necessary for the one who is being treated in the healing of that, to make the patient lie on his back, and incise the entire softened codpiece over the natural codpiece; and then sew two lips together with sutures.
And if you wish, sew the excess of the softened codpiece at the beginning with three or four stitches and a firm suture.
And then incise between the stitches, and cure with the treatment of other wounds until they are healed and the flesh falls.
Chapter 69.
On Castration.
Know that castration in our law is prohibited, but I remind you of it in this book for the purpose that I may recall it; and it is necessary to remember it only in two cases: one when the doctor is asked about it, knowing the cure of such a case that has occurred; and the other reason is when we have had need to castrate other animals for our benefit, as with horses, cows, pigs, and similar animals.
And therefore I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by strangulation, or by incision.
But in the castration that is performed by strangulation, the method of the operation is that we tie the animal's testicles in warm water until they become soft and hang down. Then take them with your hand inside so that they do not reappear afterwards.
But in the castration performed by incision, first you must have the animal and press its scrotum with your left hand.
Then take the suspending cords and incise each cord with one cut until two halves emerge.
And then make an incision around the entire circumference of each half that has been severed. And do not let any air enter into the scrotum, but rather the subtle cautery that is used on the veins.
And this method of castration that is performed by strangulation is better because strangulation causes less damage to the testicles, so the animal does not desire coitus.
Then treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter LXX.
On the Cure of Hermaphrodism.
In men, hermaphrodism occurs in two ways: one is when a cunt appears in the space between the testicles, where there is a figure of a female penis.
And some observations of that organ pass urine within the scrotum.
But in women, there is a special case: and it is that the cunt of the woman on the perineum is similar to two testicles of a man, slightly smaller at the bottom, like the foreskin of a man and two testicles.
The cure is of three types: two for men and one for women. And it is necessary that you make incisions in the surrounding flesh, cutting as close to the edge as possible, and when curing that area, cure the other wounds as well.
In the second type of men's hermaphrodism, in which it passes urine within the scrotum, there is neither cure nor operation to be performed on it.
Chapter XXI.
Of loins (kidneys) and flesh prominently due to female causes.
The loin is placed under natural circumstances where it becomes prominent and swollen; and sometimes it is magnified in some women to such an extent that it spreads like in men and goes into the genital area.
Therefore, you should have the excess of loins with your hand or a spoon and incise it.
And do not go too deep in the incision, mainly at the point of the blade, to avoid bleeding.
And take care of it with cure for the sores until they are healed.
However, the flesh that is born inside the mother's womb until it fills up is meat, and it comes out at the delivery as appears (and for this reason, some call it "cadaveric disease"); therefore, we should incise it like we do with loins, and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXII.
On the treatment of leprosy.
Leprosy is when the skin of a woman is not pierced or if it is pierced only slightly. And it can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental is when the disease has preceded, and that can be due to unattached flesh or subtle or thick scab.
It can occur in the point of the mother (i.e., the cervix), or in the costae (ribs) of her, or in the pus above her, or in the pus below her, and it is forbidden to copulate, engage in sexual activity, or conceive, and one must also avoid menstruation.
The recognition of this condition is made by examining the mother, if the opening is obvious, it can be diagnosed; but if not, you must search for it with fingers or a rod (i.e., a speculum).
But if the opening is due to subtle scab, and it approaches the two labiae (lips of the vulva), you must cauterize and split it open.
It is that you place your fingers on the two lips (of the vulva), and then move them apart carefully.
The woman should be on her back, legs spread apart, and apply force to separate the two labia until the subtle membrane is ruptured and the opening is widened.
Then take wool, dip it in oil and place it over the incision to prevent it from healing quickly.
If the membrane is thick and large, then you must incise it with a lancet or a myrtle leaf.
If the opening is caused by a tumor, then suspend it with an uncinus and incise it.
And you shall give the patient medicines that stop blood flow without pain, such as opium, dragon's blood, and mastic resin, mixed with honey.
Then administer a wide lead cannula to prevent the wound from healing lightly.
Keep it for several days and apply hot compresses.
And let it heal with the other healing treatment until it is healed.
Sometimes there occur various growths in the mother's womb during childbirth, and then it is necessary to incise them in this manner. If it is an abscess of cancer, do not create opposition to iron in any way with the abscess of cancer in the mother.
Chapter LXXIII.
On the treatment of diarrhea, tail and red buttock that occur in female genital area.
Diarrhea is recognized when there is constant bleeding from the openings of large veins, and when it has been continuous for a long time and is chronic.
And I have already said in the division the types and signs of these (diarrhea) and will say those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Therefore, I say that diarrhea and tail that are in the womb of the mother and do not appear to the senses should not receive treatment with iron.
But those that are in the openings of the mother's womb and can be felt are the ones that should be treated.
And it is necessary to put the woman in a warm bath and separate the vagina with forceps or sharp cloth, and incise it with scissors.
Then pulverize the blood flow from one of the inscissive powders without pain, such as opium and similar to those.
And immerse her feet for an hour, then place it in cold water.
If the bleeding continues, then you must prepare a decoction of sumac and horseradish root, black cumin and similar things.
And take barley flour, mix it with honey and wine vinegar, and make a plaster to apply on the back of him.
If the bleeding is separated, it is good; otherwise, apply two adhesives, and scarify the nipples.
And take wool and immerse it in the juice of colandre or colic root or blackberry root or wild fig root with peppermint and apply it to the wound; and let the wound heal with honey until it is healed.
Let it heal until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
This appears to be the beginning of Chapter LXXIV, which discusses the treatment of accidental perforation of the episiotomy in the mother. The text provided is a medieval medical treatise and should not be used for modern medical advice or practices. Always consult a licensed healthcare professional for any health concerns.
This passage appears to be discussing the different types of abscesses that can occur in the mother, such as cancerous abscesses, lapis abscesses, ulcers, eruptive abscesses, fistulas, perforating abscesses, and other abscesses. The text provided is a medieval medical treatise and should not be used for modern medical advice or practices. Always consult a licensed healthcare professional for any health concerns. The passage appears to be reminding the reader that they have already discussed these diseases and their types and signs, as well as their treatments in the previous section or division. The text provided is a medieval medical treatise and should not be used for modern medical advice or practices. Always consult a licensed healthcare professional for any health concerns.
This passage appears to be discussing a cautery operation for an abscess in the mother that is caused by pus-filled abscesses. The text also mentions how this operation should be performed using iron, but does not specify the exact method or technique. The text provided is a medieval medical treatise and should not be used for modern medical advice or practices. Always consult a licensed healthcare professional for any health concerns.
This passage appears to be discussing the consideration of whether the pain from an abscess in the mother begins suddenly with sharp and stabbing pain, fever, and swelling, and if there is tenderness on palpation. If this is the case, then it is not advisable to perform perforation of the abscess. Instead, treat it with a substance that promotes maturation until the symptoms subside. The text provided is a medieval medical treatise and should not be used for modern medical advice or practices. Always consult a licensed healthcare professional for any health concerns.
This passage appears to be describing the procedure for performing a cesarean section on a woman who is in labor. The text instructs the physician to place the woman on her back, spread her legs apart, and position her feet near the edge of the bed. The arms should also be positioned as appropriate for the procedure. The text provided is a medieval medical treatise and should not be used for modern medical advice or practices. Always consult a licensed healthcare professional for any health concerns.
Approach the midwife following the straight path and administer the instruments with which to open the mother's orifices, the shape of which will come as needed in those cases.
It is necessary when administering this instrument that it be inserted into the woman's vagina, and whatever part of the instrument enters the woman should not exceed the width of her vagina and hurt her. But if the instrument is larger than the width of her vagina, then it is necessary that you place powder on the texture of her vagina to prevent any instrument from entering her vagina.
It is necessary that the midwife pour the warm water that runs through the instrument from above and the person administering it should have the instrument and pour the warm water into it until it opens the mother's orifices.
And when the birth begins, and it is touched with the hand and loud noises are made, then it is necessary that you cut the cord of the head with a sharp knife.
And when the child is born, it is necessary that you place a warm compress soaked in rose oil or oil with some stimulating properties on the wound and put the sock on the section in the vagina.
Cover the woman's belly and over the navel put a clean wool cloth soaked in water in which must be boiled mallow.
And let her be healed for about two days with an enema, which is necessary until she recovers.
Some days the woman is washed and her wound is cleansed with water and honey, and with water in which are boiled daisy root or long-rooted aromatic herbs, and it returns to the enema.
If the wound is deep within the woman and swollen, then it is necessary to prohibit treatment with iron, having care as mentioned in the division.
Chapter LXXV.
To teach midwives how to treat ectopic pregnancies according to their figures.
It is necessary for the midwife to recognize at the beginning the figure of a natural pregnancy by certain signs, and it is that when you see the woman pushing on her contractions and desires to smell the air, and above her is lifted by what comes out during birth, and she rushes towards the childbirth, then you know that this part is according to natural figure, and it is its exit over its head, and the second one under or suspended or hanging from the navel.
Therefore, when you see these signs, it is necessary that the woman's belly be compressed gently so that the child comes out easily, for when it emerges from its head, it delivers the second one, and it is cleaned of those superfluidities with good cleaning.
But if it is another part, it is unnatural and unacceptable, because when the child is born on its feet and its body comes out before its head and its feet, and one of its hands or foot. or it is born with its head and one of its hands or on its belly, and it is forcefully turned over its neck, and similar to the figures of unacceptable pregnancies.
It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these matters, and to avoid errors and disappointments.
And we are showing you the entire figure of these, and what method is in them for it to be understood and to stand on that.
When the child is born on its head naturally, and it is violent towards the woman and difficult to deliver, and sometimes its strength has already weakened, then do this procedure, or what women have, and evaporate its congee with fenugreek oil and humid oils.
And the midwife enters between her own small sponges and cuts the second one, or sews it up with her nail until what is in it dries out. Press the woman's belly until she delivers the child.
But if it does not come out, then it is necessary to cleanse the woman with chicken broth and fenugreek broth with scissors.
And you command it, cleanse it, that it be compressed and make it vomit with a ginger concoction; and open its mouth and nose for an hour, because the child will soon forget.
And if the two more of the child are forgotten at the beginning, then it is necessary that you reduce them with little ease gradually. But if it does not obey the insertion, the woman is placed on a stool and her legs are lifted up, and the stool is pressed down on the ground; the woman should be held so she does not fall forward.
And if the two more are turned inside out and the child dies, you insert them back in and extract the remains of the child or grab its body with cloth and pull it out, because it will soon forget.
When the child is born on its feet, then it is necessary that you press them upwards, and turn the child over gently, and grab it, and take one of its feet and slowly stretch out the legs.
However, since it is inside the thighs, you command him to express himself, and make him strain with control, because forgetting will happen if God wills it.
And if what has been recommended is not forgotten, then you return the small object little by little into its original position according to the natural figure, because it will be forgotten easily in this way.
And if everything that has been recommended is prohibited, then take alum and dissolved gum, and grind everything well in the mortar with good crushing, and apply the mixture to the woman's cunt and the bottom of her stomach, the man's penis. Then, apply that ointment in tepid water, until the hips are achieved.
And when the separations (of an incision) are softened, then subfumigate it with myrtle and pause the subfumigation. When the subfumigation has been made for an hour, then apply the ointment on a lancet, and make it swell and expand the mouth of it, and lift it off, press the lower part of the stomach gently with light compression, because the healing will be quickly forgotten.
Immediately place the small object longways on one of the hands. Manage the reduction of his arm, but if you cannot reduce it, then raise the woman and make her run.
If she cannot run, then lay her on the bed and strike her buttocks violently with a strong blow, and administer the remedies that I and have recommended of mucilages (or emollients).
If the child is born, then apply the ointment on a lancet, and study the reduction of the arm, and maneuver the small object according to its natural figure, and make it swell and command him to compress himself until it is forgotten.
Immediately place the small object on the bed with expanded hands and the wound is at her husband's feet. The midwife must have the child's arm and gently roll the small object back and forth until it slips out easily.
And when it is fully inserted (or reduced) and when the small object is held in place with what has been recommended of oil and emollients, then pause over the opening of it (the wound).
And command him to move the small object little by little, and when you have achieved that, apply the ointment on a lancet and command him to lean to his right side, and command him to press (or compress); and make it swell with control. Delivery is prepared for the side (of the bed).
When the mother dies horribly according to this method, consider (or assess), and then you incise the second one with your nail until it is emptied of moisture.
And if the small object is suspended from her face and neck, then incise the umbilical cord so that it is not retained and she dies.
And return the small object to the incision (or wound) little by little until it falls out on its own accord, and command the woman to compress herself a few times, and it will be forgotten quickly if God wishes it.
Delivery of twins or multiple fetuses. You should know that twins born prematurely are often stillborn, and sometimes three or four (twins) are born, but it is rare and unusual; however, the causes are natural, not living.
And separate the placentas, whether they are multiplied or not, one at a time, and cut the cord around each umbilical cord with a knife; sometimes they are forgotten naturally as it happens in childbirth quickly due to natural causes, but sometimes they are forgotten unnaturally as we have recommended.
And if they are difficult to deliver and you reach what we have said about unnatural figures, then treat them as we have recommended.
And if the mother is thin and makes it easy with skill and subtlety and delays, and is ingenious according to all figures as she prepares for health, then take care of him accordingly.
Recall that it is formed in the womb from embryos and aborted.
Certainly, some weeks can last one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten or even more than ten days. It must be noted that a woman can abort after the fifth week and another one after ten weeks, which is caused by the measurement of the wise.
And it is necessary that this should be in the science of midwifery since the lightweight appearance resembles that of a child, and thus caution is required with regard to it.
Chapter 66.
On the extraction of the dead fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus with the medicine we have mentioned in the division of treatment and it has not yet come out, and you are considering using force, then it is necessary to consider if the woman is healthy and not afflicted by any of the accidents for which danger is feared.
It is necessary that the woman be turned on her side on the bed, and let the head of the fetus be inclined downwards, and let the hips of the woman be raised.
The minister (midwife or assistant) should hold the legs together from both sides, or tie them down on the bed to prevent the body from stretching during the extraction of the fetus.
Then you should moisten the mother's mouth with humid oil and alum, and fennel, and seeds of that kind.
Then you should anoint the midwife's hand with those oils and salves, and insert your hand into the woman with ease, and then seek the area where the fingers will be inserted in the fetus.
In appropriate places: then consider if the fetus is prepared so that it should be cut at its head; and then you will make incisions in the heels of the fetus, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or below the beard, or in the furcula of the fetus, or in the appropriate places near the ribs, or below the hipbones.
If the incision should be made on the feet of the fetus, then do so in the instep, or in the middle of the ribs.
The patient should hold the index finger with the right hand and bend it at the place where it is hurt, which is between the little finger of the left hand, and insert the finger into one of those places that we have mentioned, until it reaches the wound.
Then place another index finger, or the third one if necessary, next to it so that it acts as a splint and there is no extension in its length.
It is good all around, so that the swelling of it may be alleviated in this way as dental extraction is performed.
It is necessary to do this where there is swelling, so that it may be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife should anoint some of her fingers with oil and insert them skillfully and massage the area where it is retained.
If the parturition is forgotten, then the fingers should be tied in the area that is close to it; and do this until everything is forgotten.
But if the hand is swollen before the other and cannot be reduced by compression of it, then a cloth should be wrapped around it; and extract it from there until everything is forgotten, and incise it in the joint or at the wrist.
And thus you must do the same for the other hand and both feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large or if compression in the swelling occurs on it, or if water accumulates at the head, then insert between the fingers a sponge soaked with vinegar and cut open the head and extract the water, or break it with an instrument called "alundat," the shape of which will come in the section that is related to this.
And do the same if the fetus is of large head by nature: and then you must cut it with an instrument, or take it with the alundat as we said; and extract the bones with forceps.
If the head is swollen and compressed, you must cut it until the moisture that is in the feet has been drained.
But if it is not complicated and there is no swelling, you should cut the head immediately as soon as possible.
If the placenta is exposed or there is an umbilical cord prolapse, you must penetrate it until the moisture that is in it has flowed out.
But if the fetus is on its feet, you must easily draw it and the direction of it to the mouth of the mother is easy.
But if it is compressed in the abdomen and feet, you must extract it with cloth that you will have wrapped around your hand, and cut open the abdomen and feet until the moisture that is in them has run out.
If the other members return and turn its head, then the midwife must insert her left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is obstructed, insert your right hand into her rectum, search for the head with it, pull it towards the mouth of the mother with the fingers, and place a finger or two inside, and pull it with them.
And if the mouth of the mother is compressed by an obstruction caused by a hemorrhoid in the anus, you must not press on it; but instead, administer moisture with greasy substances. Apply plasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
If the fetus is on the patient's side, try to pierce it; and administer the liquid that has been mentioned in the living fetus.
If that is not possible, you must cut it into pieces and extract it.
It is necessary to leave no cause inside the second one (the placenta).
And when you have completed your entire operation, administer the liquid that has been mentioned for the treatment of the hemorrhoids that occurred in the mother.
If there is bleeding, you must send it into stypic waters and administer the other treatment.
I have seen a woman in the womb who was dead, and on top of that fire, another burning observed, and that fire was the fetus too. A long time ago, there was an umbilical cord prolapse in the man's belly; and it swelled until it became fire, and began to give off smoke.
I was called upon to treat him, and I treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Then I put some strong plaster over him for various causes, and extracted a bone from him, and after several days, I extracted another bone; and I was amazed, because there are no bones in the belly.
And then you think they were bones of the dead person.
Then you consider that the swelling was full of rotten bones, and remove from it any existing worms, and let it heal in such a manner for a long time, correct the affected arm with a small splint.
And do not doubt that this is strange, but rather know that in such a case there is knowledge and aid for the doctor to administer the hand-crafted care.
Of the forms of the instruments required to remove the rotten matter.
Form of a screw, which is opened with:
This is the form of a plier, in which the jaws are closed by two pivot points on opposite ends of two arms. However, this pivot point should be more delicate than that of a straightener, and made either of wood or metal.
And each arm should be divided into two parts, with the width of each part being one finger's width, and the length of each being about a palm and a half; in the middle of the two arms there should be two adjustments for that arm, which are already fixed, with the length being approximately equal to the width of one and a half fingers.
And these two adjustments should be inserted into the mouth of the plier to open it when you turn the prescribed pivot points.
Another form resembling that but more delicate and lighter:
Made of wood or metal, similar to a pair of tweezers. However, on the ends of these arms, there are two additional adjustments, and the length of each adjustment is approximately equal to one palm, while the width of each is about two fingers.
And when you want to open the plier, you should press down on the ends of the arms so that they close, exposing the jaws. And then place your hand on the plier, as you would with a pair of scissors, adjusting the amount according to the size needed for the opening of the plier to accommodate the matter you want to remove.
The form of a screw that the ancients called:
The form of a lever, which is used to push the matter:
The form of an amputation saw used for cutting off a large limb or bone:
Resembling forceps, with teeth at the ends, and sometimes made long like forceps according to this form, with teeth similar to those of a saw blade, used for cutting through and removing material. The form of a small amputation saw:
The form of a pick or awl, having a sharp point:
The form of a double-edged pick or awl:
The form of a spatula with two ends, where one end is detached:
The form of two spatulas that are laid side by side:
All these tools should be mastered, and when more of the same tool are needed, or different versions are prepared, the craftsman must ensure that they are as lightweight and easy to use as possible, according to their purpose, and provide as many of them as necessary for the task at hand.
And do not neglect any of these tools, for their necessity cannot be excused.
Extraction of the second tooth.
When the second tooth is retained, you must command the patient to open their mouth wide, and then make them gag slightly with your hand over their lips and nose, if necessary, but this is acceptable.
If necessary, you take a bowl and pierce it through the covering, placing there herbs that are burning at the mouth of the mother, such as camomile, rue, anise, and cinnamon, Arabian and wood cassia, and saint-john's wort. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the bowl, and place it on the fire.
Then insert a syringe made of cane into the mother's mouth and hold it so that the vapor emerges into the cavity of the womb.
Then make her vomit as we have said, and the second one (the fetus) will be expelled with speed.
But if this treatment remains without success, you command the midwife to immerse her left hand in oil of sesame or in an emulsion of alum, and enter it into the womb and search for the second one (the fetus), and when you have found it, take hold of it slowly. But if it is attached to the cervix of the womb, you enter her right hand as we have recommended, and when you have found the second one, extract it gradually so that the woman does not suffer from excessive bleeding. Moreover, both sides of her body must be bound with ease.
If the mouth of the womb is narrowed, we have already recommended the treatment with vomiting and the herbal infusion in the bowl.
But if it is not expelled with all the causes we have recommended, you must be careful not to overdo the extraction, but rather let what has come out from it reach the woman's body, and then cauterize it with lard and tetraherb (a mixture of four herbs). As this will make it soften in about three days and dissolve and be expelled.
But when it becomes soft, it rises to the head and stomach, and the patient feels better; therefore, it is necessary that they are administered sub-fumigations and suitable remedies for that purpose.
Moreover, some of the ancients have already spoken about the sub-fumigation of garlic and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated must be designed to stop menstruation and expel the fetus:
It should be made of glass or earthenware.
Place the narrow end inside the cervix and the wide end on the fire, and the sub-fumigation should be placed over the arms of the fire.
And keep it inside until that sub-fumigation is consumed and another one is introduced.
Treatment for the anus of the unborn child.
Newborn infants whose anuses are not perforated, which are fine and smooth. Therefore, the midwife must pierce that fine anus with her finger; and if it is not possible, she should pierce it with a sharp probe, taking care not to touch the rectum.
And place a wool soaked in vinegar and oil on it; and treat it with lard until it is healed.
But if you fear that it may become rough, place a probe in the hole for several days and remove it when the infant wants to defecate.
And it often happens that the anus becomes rough due to ulcers or abscesses; therefore, that consolidation must be incised, and it should be treated with what we have said about the cure and lead.
Treatment for fistulas (abnormal passages) that appear later on.
Fistulas that appear after a delivery of the placenta have a bad smell and are large, those that appear near or outside the anus or in the space of one of the deliveries.
It is a fistula or abscess.
When that lump is old and corrupts with foul damp white pus or subtle abscess, sometimes some of these fistulas penetrate.
These penetrations are recognized by what is emitted from them through the opening and by windy feeling; sometimes the patient uses evacuation, and it is often emitted from worms.
Sometimes in the space of these fistulas, they penetrate into the bladder and into the meat of the penis; and sometimes they penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the neck of the scrotum.
What is known as a fistula penetrating the anus but not penetrating is that you place your finger in the anus and attempt to touch the fistula with a thin probe or iron when it is not too deep.
But if it is too deep, then you attempt to touch the fistula with a thin probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or hair in your finger.
If you do not feel it at all or if the probe does not cause evacuation, worms, or windiness (as previously stated), then you should recognize that it is not penetrating, and you should seek advice on treatment.
When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the penis meat, the significance of this is indeed of urine from that area and prohibition of sexual activity until the location with medicine is solidified.
But if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and encounters pain in the area, then the sign is that the probe enters there if it is not too deep into the bone, and pain in the circumference of the parting; and that pus appears immediately from that area; and that the medication is of no use and is not consolidated with gargling.
In all of these penetrating fistulas, there is no cure, and the cure of these is labor and vanity of foolish doctors on which they persist.
But in the one that is not penetrating and is not old, healing with iron is expected according to what I will recommend to you, and what I have already told you.
The patient lies with his face between your hands and raises his legs towards you, the thighs are inclined towards his belly, and then place a probe of lead or iron in the area where you feel the fistula.
And if the patient feels around his neck, then you should place your finger in the anus.
If you feel the probe penetrating with your finger already exposed, or if you feel something between your finger and that flesh, then you should know certainly that it is penetrating; and do not work on that one, for there is no cure in that, as previously stated.
However, some say that it heals in some men after a long time.
And of the medication which is expected to help in that area is that you ignite a thin cautery according to the size of the fistula, as previously stated, and insert it into the fistula until it goes around the anus; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all the tissues surrounding the fistulas are adjusted have been properly healed like a feather of a bird.
And cure that one with bandages wrapped around it until all the tissues surrounding it have healed, and cure that one with medicines to generate and solidify the flesh, and if it is healed, good; and if not, you should recognize that it is not cured within a certain period by another treatment.
And if the probe is inside and does not penetrate into the anus, which is covered by a layer of flesh or cyst, and sometimes the fistula appears on the surface of the scrotum, you should dry the scrotum from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see that it dries with the probe, and let the probe go until the secession reaches the location where the tip of the probe is released and caught.
And clean those fistulous tissues that are similar to the feather of a bird's pen and do not remain for any reason.
But if bleeding often occurs between you and your operation when penetrating those tissues, you should use the milk and lightly instrument for cauterizing with fire or with sharp medicine, because cauterizing with fire heals well: it solidifies the tissues surrounding the fistulas, and removes the blood by drying out the moisture.
And cure that one with bandages wrapped around it or with boiled cloth until the wound heals, and then cure the ulcer with tough meat broth generating and solidifying the flesh.
And such medications are constipating and drying; when they are restored, they are cured and there is no need for repetition.
But if the fistula has already penetrated to the rectum of the anus and is extended from the surface of the body, you should place your finger in the anus and investigate it with that.
And thus, if you feel the probe and it is close to a cyst or flesh and appears to be on the verge of penetration, then it is not an operation in that area but rather by faith and hope.
The cause can be administered in one of three ways: either to cauterize it as we have said; or to excise the affected area so that you can achieve its hollowing for easy penetration and treatment; not by excision if it causes the scrotum containing the anus to tear open, and this may happen accidentally on the patient without their consent; and apply care to that which we have said earlier will heal quickly; or to elongate the covering and clean the pus that was excised near the anus, as we have said, or with a sharp tool or another instrument of sharp extremity, and then clean the fistulated flesh found in the excision area, near the anus; and then force yourself to make the restoration of the entire wound by excision, and if the openings of pus do not consolidate, and the fistula remains open at the anus incision site, it will be easier for the patient. Sometimes the fistula is closed by this method: when you insert the probe into the fistula, do it near the anus on the surface of the body with a cane and along the edge of the anus. Then take a pointed probe like a threading needle to perforate its edge.
and insert the probe into the surrounding five fields or around those [five fields]; then insert the probe into the fistula to achieve its hollowing.
But if you penetrate near the anus internally, then you pull out the cord to such a point that you insert your said probe into the anus; extract the tip of the cord and align both ends, tighten each one, let it be for a day or two, and when the cord penetrates deeper into the flesh, tighten it further so that those fleshy parts that are between the two ends of the cord are also pulled.
Then take care of the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
But if the fistula opening is not penetrating, you must make it penetrate somehow, as long as it is not too deep so that it does not tear the scrotum; and apply care to it until it is healed.
The way to treat the fistula with a pointed sponge: the curve of which is very sharp and the other end is not sharp, so that it does not tear what is not necessary, as sometimes happens.
Stitching of hemorrhoids where blood runs out during the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are of two types, as they can be like coal on the anus or those that are like fat from the pimple. And they can be small or large and the blood runs from them constantly or occasionally, and they are found outside or on the edges of the anus.
But those that are found outside the anus are according to the dry months, from which a yellowish liquid or a little blood with continuous flow comes out, and according to the color of the body.
And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is to command the patient to sit and wait until the anus relaxes and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you take hold and hang them with thread or whatever you have at hand, and carefully cut off their roots.
But if the threads are not available on those due to their humidity and softening, then take them with rough cloth or a piece of canvas or flannel and pull them out with your said tool; then carefully cut them and sprinkle some caudal powders around the incision, so that they are at the site instead of cauterizing; or cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterization. Take care of those with the other treatment until they are healed.
And if the anus does not obey evacuation, then you should apply a little pressure to the patient with a cyster in which there is a slight bite, and wash it with water that will stimulate easy evacuation when the patient squeezes.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, the cause is simple, and it is that you grab them with your nail or thread, insert them, and apply care to them as we have said until they are healed.
And for those that have an incision, it is necessary to administer suturing of them in this way: take a cord enveloped with thread and insert it into the hemorrhoid with a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids from above, and make the needle penetrate into the root of the other side with the needle; wrap the two ends of the cord longitudinally around the location farther from the needle, and tie the hemorrhoid strongly and then knot the thread and remove the needle.
And do this for all of them, leaving one untied and not sewn, so that the excess blood can flow from it.
And place a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the anus and place it there; and place a cloth soaked in olive oil or wax over the anus and command the patient to rest. And return it to its place within that cavity; and when it is dislocated, cure it with ointment or other treatment until it is healed.
And if they are old and that medicine is of no avail, then you must cauterize them with the point of a lancet or your nail, until they become moist and are stopped from exuding pus, which prevents consolidation; and then cure them when they have consolidated.
Then, when the pain is very intense and the first treatment has not yet caused bleeding and they are scabbed over, cure them until they are healed.
Know that alamermar (probably a misspelling of "alamir") is crucial and not to be ignored if one observes redness in the body similar to the head of a nail, and it occurs all over the body but more commonly in the thighs and legs, and it indicates pain.
Therefore, it is necessary to incise that which is around the nail, keep it with forceps or oil, and remove it from its root; and then heal it.
And if you wish, cauterize the following that is described in its chapter. This suggests that the treatise may provide instructions on cauterization as a method for treating certain conditions, such as abscesses or other types of wounds.
A verruca is a small rough, fistula-like protuberance on the surface of the body, and many times it occurs in children. This suggests that the treatise may cover topics related to common skin conditions, particularly those affecting children.
The cure for a verruca is to stretch and incise it, or to squeeze it with a lancet or a thumb until it is inside the cavity. This suggests that one method of treating a verruca may involve stretching and cutting it open, or squeezing it to force the material within it out. If you wish, cauterize it, as I have said, with fire or with an acute medicine. This suggests that cauterization may be used to treat a verruca, and the use of both heat (fire) and medication is mentioned as options.
A formica is a small, furrowed or fistula-like elevation on the surface of the body that moves towards the nail, and when it is touched, it contracts like a bite from an ant, and it is found around the body. This suggests that the treatise may cover topics related to common skin conditions, particularly those affecting the hands and feet.
The treatment for a formica is to use a hard cannula with a sharp end or a swollen end, and place it on the formica until it is contained within the circle of the cannula at its base; and then rotate your hand with the cannula until you incise what is around the formica, and press it onto the skin fold (preon) of the flesh, and remove the formica by the root. This suggests that one method for treating a formica may involve using a cannula to make an incision around it, and then removing it by the root.
If you wish, do this with an iron cannula or a steel cannula in the following manner:
The area above the cannula should be made thin, blunt (not perforated), covered with a substance that is smooth and allows for the sensation of the cannula's movement and rotation. This suggests that the treatise may provide instructions on how to prepare and use a cannula for treating certain conditions, such as formicas or other types of skin growths.
And if you wish, cauterize the formica as described in the chapter on cautery of athlete's foot. This suggests that cauterization may be a recommended treatment for formicas, and the treatise may provide additional information on this topic in another section.
Of the instruments that are administered for healing wounds. This suggests that the treatise may cover topics related to medical instruments and their use in treating various conditions, such as wounds or skin growths.
Sometimes a silver or copper instrument is heated or hammered and used for cauterization; and sometimes small and large instruments are used according to the type of wound being treated, as the one administered in treating small wounds in children should be small, and the cristeris (cauteries) of those with loose or painful ends should be small. This suggests that the treatise may provide information on various types of cauterization instruments, their uses, and the appropriate sizes for different types of wounds.
The form of crystalline (gallstone) small and few:
The head of the catheter above, where the sac is tied, should be wide in this manner; and it should have a distinction where the sac is tied as sometimes observed.
The end of it (the catheter) that is inserted into the anus, which penetrates the rectum, should be closed (not open), carefully, to finesse; and in one side there should be two holes, and in the other side one hole, and the size of the hole according to the thickness of the rays and smaller the thicker.
The sac in which are placed the bladder medicines of animal or sheep wool should be one span (approx. 9 inches) in length.
It should be perforated with many holes, as it is rolled (twisted); and if the space between the holes is thicker than a finger.
And insert it (the catheter) strongly through the holes of the bladder stones that are small or surround them; and adjust the sac; and when the sac is tied, it should be tight at the head of the stone between two distinguishing marks with strong pressure, and sterilize each hole; but the quality of sterilizing it (the catheter) is that you fill the sac with the medicine, which should be heated according to the tolerance of the patient; and be careful not to make it too hot or too cold.
Then turn the patient over on their back, lift their legs up and place a pan (or cloth) under where men usually sit or use a basin; then anoint the end of the cautery with oil or lard or mucilage of fenugreek or similar substances; and insert it gently into the rectum with ease, and the assistant takes the sac and presses it with two hands and forcefully pushes everything in the stone out through the intestine; then remove the stone and the patient lowers their legs to the wall.
And if the medicine is missing (not available), have as much as possible; and if it lasts for an entire night, it is more helpful later on.
But if you sterilize it (the catheter) in the diseases of stomach solution and the exit of the intestine, then you continue to insert the cautery until it is healed.
And if in the anus there is a hemorrhoid or abscess, then use a fine and gentle catheter, the kind that pediatricians use.
On treatment of sores.
I have already said in the division of treatment for sores what is appropriate for the free person, and I will now say the treatment for those with more serious conditions and medications according to their need.
Therefore, I say that sores are varied depending on what causes the sores and where they occur.
And the causes for many times sores are made by injury from stones, or incision of space or sword, or blow with a spear, staff, arrow, or similar means.
But the sores that are in the parts of the body are such as a sore that occurs on the head, neck, feet, abdomen, back, and similar members.
And I recommend the treatment for certain sores based on this reasoning and rule regarding other sores.
And I will begin with simple sores of the head, for the memory of complex sores will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say that when a simple sore occurs on the head and it is not a fracture, you should consider: if it was caused by injury from stone or similar object, and the wound has already been bandaged but is large and you fear that the patient may develop an abscess, then you take and lance the cephalic vein as soon as possible, and do not delay this; and drain it according to the amount of its strength if no other reason prohibits lancing, especially if the blood that came out from the sore is little.
And the lancing should be on the opposite side of the injured area; and protect the patient from food, drink, and heavy meals.
But if there is any reason for minimalism, then reduce the food intake and avoid meat and wine.
Wait over the sore if an abscess forms, apply oil of roses or wine that has been stabilized to it.
But if you are sure of an abscess, wait over the sore, if it is new with its own blood and the air has not yet changed the powder that I recommend you use in small amounts.
And if the air has changed, then pause over certain openings until it is healed.
If the wound is large or due to an incision of space and not properly sutured, then adjust those with stitching according to what I will recommend regarding the suturing of them.
In cases where the wound is already exposed to the bone and is not obstructed but only a small splint, then incise it, treat the wound with medicine and restore the flesh in its place using sutures, and instruct the patient to eat foods rich in groats: heads of cattle and similar animals, until it is healed.
If there is decomposition in the wound and it does not adhere to the bone, then you should incise all that appears and remove it, and treat it with care.
If in these wounds it is an artery or vein from which bleeding can occur and has not been severed by medicine, then you should probe the artery. If you find an unsevered artery, you should incise it with a spatula, or tie it; and if necessity requires that what I said does not help, then you cauterize until the blood is severed.
If these wounds are simple and small, the cause of them is light. Sprinkle this powder over them, because it solidifies them before the air changes those.
The method of the powder is as follows: Take equal parts of oil from crushed snakeskin, dragon's blood, and non-extinct herbs; grind everything together and sieve it, fill the wound with it, tighten it with good tension until it adheres, and let it coagulate with blood.
Hold it up with plasters and leave it, and do not undo it until it is healed, because the medicine does not penetrate it until it is healed.
And sometimes only use cautionery when snakeskin and dragon's blood are not present.
Now perform this operation on large wounds when it is necessary to pause over them and tighten them, and only on recent wounds with their blood, which the air has not yet affected.
If the air has affected them, especially during summer, then do not apply this powder, but instead treat them with what was said earlier, that is, you pause over certain openings or wait for the plaster of wheat flour and water to dry; and treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
But if it is a bone fracture wound that is small, you should extract it with forceps.
I will tell the treatment for skull fractures that are poisonous.
On wounds of the neck.
But if the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment and it is similar to a simple skull wound.
But if the nerve of the neck is incised or an artery, then if it is a nerve, do not cut it but avoid treating it with anything that causes violent stiffness such as zinc and vinegar and similar things to them because they harm the nerves and constrict it. And do not pause over the wound with anything that freezes because the substance of the nerves is cold and its continuation is with the brain, which is the softest part of all members.
If it is treated with light medicines such as being washed with sweet water, sometimes immersed in rose oil or unscented oil, and similarly when it is washed with sweet water and other things are applied following this method and moist openings, then it heals.
But if the wound is large, then you administer stitches or sew the lips of it, and treat it with powder until it is healed.
But if the wound is deep or occurs in the lower part where it is powdered, you should perforate it in the most depressed area.
But if the wound has already incised an artery and there is bleeding, then separate it or dry it, tie it, or cauterize it if necessity requires it.
If the sacroiliac joint (golayro) has been dislocated and the veins of the back are saved, then you adjust the labia of the coccyx with suturing on the sacrum of the golayro without touching it; equalize that, reduce it to its natural figure, strengthen it with a decent structure, leave it for several days; and care for it with warm compresses until it is healed.
If the fracture has already occurred in the bone, then percuss it, and if there are fragments of bones that you can remove, remove all those that you can; and that which is not accessible to you, leave it until the fracture heals, separate it, and the swelling should be relieved.
And if the fracture is recent, sprinkle on it the powder that has been recommended to you. If there is a fistula in the fracture, then care for it with that which will come to mind in its own chapter.
If it is a wound by lance or sword, and sometimes of deep penetration, then consider more if the fracture has windiness when the patient complains about it; then you know that the fracture is fatal.
And if the wound is not deep and the fracture is recent with bleeding, then pause in it for the first hour with powder, and do not press on it so that the bleeding does not remain in the depth of it and returns to the heart and causes the patient pain, but rather pause in it with warm compresses, and remove the dressing two times a day.
And if the wound is not present, then pause in the orifice of the fracture for an old cloth to drain what comes out of the humors; and make the patient sleep on the fracture so that it runs what is in it and settles.
But if three days or more have passed since the fracture and the patient does not experience spasm, tremor of the heart, nor contraction of the limbs, sometimes with other good conditions, then you know that the fracture is healed; and care for it with heat and other treatments until it is healed.
But if the healing is delayed and it has been opened for a long time, then you know that there is already a fistula; care for it in its own chapter.
And if the fracture is caused by a saw or sword and is simple on the surface of the foot or the back, then care for it with that which precedes suture, if large, or with powder, if small.
If there is an injury in the bone and it has already been fractured, then you twist the fracture and try to extract those fragments, if they are separated. If the fragments are not separated, leave them until the fracture heals, as the extraction of them is relieved.
And the treatment for other injuries that occur in other members is the same as what has been said before.
Of the abdominal fractures.
The condition that occurs in the abdomen can be large, small or intermediate.
A small disruption is difficult to perform in another way, and it is known that the reduction of them is more difficult, unless you do not avoid the protrusion of them into their place immediately, because it opens up and becomes swollen, making the entrance into it more difficult.
Therefore the best disruption is intermediate, because in that there is not much difficulty in reducing the intestine, as it is difficult in both of the previously mentioned types.
You should know that the suture of the abdomen is in four ways, but two of them are common and apply to the sutures of other wounds in the body.
And two other sutures are specific to other injuries, but they are more appropriate in the suture of the abdomen.
I recommend that you have exposure and declaration to each one.
Therefore, say that if the fracture is small and there is some cause for the intestine because of it, and it is difficult to reduce that, then that is in one of two ways: either due to the small size of the disruption as has been said before, or when the intestine comes inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
And therefore when that is so, then it is necessary that you warm it up to the point where you immerse a sponge or cloth in hot water alone, or boil it in water and cyperum, and spike, and bind it with that until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes find a case where there is obstruction, and it is better that water alone in the resolution of inflammation.
And therefore when the inflammation is resolved, then you humidify the intestine with water in which is contained alum and malva, as it is relieved from entry with little cause.
If the intestine is obstructed near this treatment, then cut open the obstruction using a small instrument with which you can incise purulent abscesses.
The first treatment is better when it is appropriate that it not be cut open, and there is no need to cut open if the situation does not require it.
Of the instrument, cut off its shape from him:
One part should be sharp and pointed, the other not pointed and blunt, and its end should be thin but not as thin as a needle's point, rather slightly rounded.
And when the wound is enlarged and the intestine is protruding, it should be reduced according to its natural form in its proper place, if possible on top of it, for that is better.
But when the obstruction is wide and in the lower part of the abdomen, you should have the patient lie on his back and raise his legs as high as his head; if it is higher than the abdomen, you should lift his head and feet accordingly.
And similarly, if the obstruction is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, you should pay attention and consider where the wound is higher than the other.
You must administer this in large wounds and moderate wounds.
And in small wounds, use what you have prepared for this purpose, and ensure that the one who administers it is among your most trusted assistants, who should hold the obstruction with its entirety and adjust the lips of it, and approach the incision from the opposite side to the one where some cause for suturing arises.
This is the common method of suturing: take a needle or a large needle depending on the size of the wound; place it near the tip of the obstruction of that finger, and tighten the needle one time, without inserting it into both ends of the skin, rather between the two ends of the ligature that is inside the incision, until you make it penetrate from there; then you have gathered the two ends of the ligature and the two ends of the suture, making four orders.
And tighten the needle twice around its circumference, and several watchful observations of both sides together, and gather the two lips (incision edges) and the wound together by appropriate suturing; and leave the finger thick and insert another needle in it, and tie it as you did with the first needle; do not stop doing this if necessary until you have completed all the contractions of the wound.
And the needles should be of moderate thickness between coarseness and thinness, for thin needles easily penetrate the flesh; and thick ones are difficult to pass through the skin, so they should be of moderate thickness in both regards.
And it is not necessary that the needle be inserted into the incision too deeply, so that the flesh is not easily pierced and the wound does not open before its healing.
Do not prolong the suturing so that the wound is prevented from healing.
And incise the tips of the needles so as not to injure the patient in his sleep; place pulvillus pads over the entire suture, which should hold the tips of the needles; leave them there until you know that the wound has healed.
These methods of suturing with needles are more appropriate for small wounds because they require only one or two needles to suture them.
But the second method of suturing is common: and you administer four parts with suture - one end of the ligature and both ends of the skin, in one observation, with a needle that is wrapped around in coarseness and thinness.
And when the needle has penetrated these four parts, reduce the needle from that same part where you began, to draw the thread from the purulent side of the wound towards the healthy part, so that the suture is like a seam with fabric, which strengthens it.
Pause between each stitch the thickness of a small finger's width.
This is known by men.
And such a suture will heal the wound that occurred in a man's stomach, which was struck by a sword, and it was the rupture of a large wound of about one palm width, and it had spread around two palms of the belly from the same place and the rupture was in the middle of the member; and then I reduced that which the intestine had been protruding for 24 hours.
The wound healed in the space of 15 days or more, and it was cured and healed; and keep this in mind for many years, and it will recover and be converted to its normal state.
And the other doctors had judged that it would not be healed; but by miracle, for I did not cure it with salve, because it was in a place where no salve or any medicine could be found, but rather I stitched over the wound twice each day and washed it continuously with honey water until it was cured.
But I will tell you two types of stitching according to the Gospel narrative.
And it is that you begin with the linen stitch, and insert the needle from the outside to the inside.
And when the needle pierces through the linen and in that place you place thread according to rule and the length of the body, and leave the tail end at the end where the needle has been inserted; then insert the needle from the inside to the outside at the other end of the stitch.
And when you have made the first penetration, then make that penetration again in the same place at the opposite end of the stitch; and leave the tail end that is on this side, and insert the needle from the inside to the outside at the other end of the stitch.
And make your penetration with that one which you used to penetrate the tail end in the eye of the needle that is inside the hole, where everything will penetrate.
And return the needle from the linen that has penetrated, and bring that one back to the linen and sew the tail end on the other side with this eye of the needle; then remove the thread from the linen that was placed there.
And do this one time and another, and do this one time after another until you have sewn everything that is on the outside according to this example.
And the entire method of this type of stitching is that you sew with the stitch of skins, by which you sew the skin, in such a way that you sew the tail end once from the side of the linen, and then leave that other one until it is completed.
But the second type of stitching, which is called Gallic and is about this and recommended by it, is that you sew according to a semilunar shape, as some doctors sew in this way, placing all pieces side by side according to their corresponding places by nature; and they apply the end of one to the other and the eye of the needle to the other end, and this is done according to what I have recommended.
It is necessary that you place the needle in the eye of the needle at your own discretion from the outside edge, and make it penetrate into the inside in that spot; and leave two tail ends; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside in the two tail ends.
And turn each one, and make each one penetrate from the inside to the outside at the two opposite ends of the needle.
And this method of stitching is better than the common light stitch, and is the stitch that is mentioned in remembrance.
This is the Gaulish saying
And others say that the abdominal stitch is corrected with two needles, so you insert one in each one and begin with the entry of the needle on your side, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the stitch of those who sew the heart.
And know that when the rupture is in the middle of the stomach, the stitching of it is more difficult than in other places of the stomach.
But the remedy for wound is also the judgment for other wounds.
When you succeed in treating the fresh wound before the air alters it, and return the intestine and close it properly, then pause over that carnivorous powder.
If the wound has already been altered by air, then pause over that alum solution until it becomes hard and sets the flesh, consolidates and is observed; and apply care to it as for other wounds until it is healed.
But if you are not present with the medicine, pause over it immediately, because as soon as it starts to exude pus, old flesh and change color twice a day, observe it in this way as you have been shown, until it is healed, because for simple wounds, no other medication is needed in most cases.
But if you fear that the wound may communicate injury to the main members, it is necessary for you to immerse wool in boiled oil of quality, or rose oil, and apply it in the circuit of areas between the joints and leave it until it is applied.
If there is pain or putrefaction in your intestines, which often indicates this, then you must cauterize it with black, thick tea-like vinegar, especially if the purulence has reached the intestine and has penetrated into its cavity.
And know that those in large intestines heal more easily than those in small intestines.
It is difficult to heal because the intestine called "jejunum" does not receive healing from wounds that occur in it; and this is due to the great number of veins present there, as well as its large size, and the subtlety of its tissue, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if what comes from the wound is the membrane, and you manage to obtain it in its fresh state, return it as instructed with the same procedure used to repair intestines.
But if it has passed the space and is already rotten or black, you should tighten it with a thread around the affected area so that blood flow is produced, since there are veins and arteries in the membrane.
And apply a ligation to the affected area, and pause both ends of the thread on the side of the wound incision, so that the tension of the membrane and the discharge of blood from the wound are alleviated.
Remember the wounds that occur in the intestines.
When there is a small rupture in the intestine, it may be possible for it to be restored in some men, since I have seen one who was plagued in his stomach with a sword wound and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was ancient and had become a fistula, and it was treated with great care and patience.
Therefore, I continued the treatment since it was not yet healed, but continued to care for it until the wound was healed and the area consolidated.
And I saw the area consolidated, I treated the patient who had suffered an accident in his stomach; and no one should suffer from this accident because of it, and he continued with his usual diet and drinking habits, and immersed himself in water and exercised his limbs.
And experienced people say that when a small wound occurs in the intestine, it is necessary to ligate it according to this method: you take large breadcrumbs; and place the two lips of the wound together and place one of these over the opening of the wound, so that when you grasp it with your hand, the cap is removed, since it adheres and does not dissolve.
And pause another breadcrumb near the first one, and do not stop making them according to the size of the entire wound.
And return it and close the wound, leaving the attached caps in the intestine until it is healed, and do not harm the patient with any damage.
And it is possible that the intestine can be ligated with a thin thread made from animal intestines, since they are smaller in size; and you take the end of this thread from the intestine, making sure it is well stripped, and tie the end of it to the thread, wrapped around, and insert the thread into the intestine through a needle and sew the intestine with it, and return it to its rupture.
And this method of suture using breadcrumbs is not without trust and hope.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially in one of the thin intestines, it is not simple suturing, but rather a difficult task, and healing is not achieved in all cases.
Treatment for ulcers and fistulas.
You should know that every wound and abscess that becomes old and ancient turns into an ulcer, does not consolidate and exudes pus constantly and does not break, it is generally called a fistula and we call it an abscess.
And fistula, in truth, is hardened and durable whitish nodule, which does not cause pain, but has a depression like the depression of a boil; and for this reason, it is called a swollen abscess.
It is in some men that moisture, which drips from the arm, is exuded and within a few hours it is absorbed. Sometimes this moisture becomes moved, and it is little, thick, and subtle.
I have already shown all those causes, their signs, and the remedies for them in the division.
And so you should know the healing of fistula which is made by surgical means with a knife.
You should know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body, because there are fistulas that reach veins and arteries, nerves, spleen, intestines, bladder, ribs, vertebrae of the spine, or joints composed in such a way as by hand and foot; and those are the ones that give proximity to the main member and similar parts.
And therefore, the fistula of this kind is one of those diseases with difficult healing and it does not receive cure, and occupation with that is labor and ignorance.
If one of the fistulas has such depth that it does not reach those places mentioned earlier and you hope for its healing and wish to learn about it, then take the attempt to burn or cut and if the fistula follows the correct path, and you pursue it with this, you will learn more about it.
But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with thin lead, because lead, due to its lightness of body, is relieved and curved in accordance with the twisting.
And if the fistula has multiple frightening openings, it is not within your power to cauterize it.
Then cauterize the openings with your fingers, for the moisture by which you cauterize that one will go to other openings and run out of them.
Then you must examine it very carefully, according to the method by which you can discern if here you have bones or nerves, and whether the fistula is deep or shallow, or whether it has multiple openings and lies entirely on the surface with all your strength, your attention, the care of the patient, and the discovery of the pain, you must compress it with your hand on the area, and similar signs and causes of abscess.
And as you stand over all those causes with attentiveness, then go to the healing based on confidence: and it is that you consider whether the fistula is superficial or deep, distant from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of the places which I have told you.
You then dry out the fistula as was said earlier in the description of it, and remove what is in that filtration and of putrefied flesh, and what has been born in the openings of the flesh, or thorns and similar things, and cure that within until it is healed.
But if the fistula is deep and follows the correct path, then it is necessary to puncture that one as far as possible for you, and clean it of all its putrefied flesh; and administer hot poultices wrapped in medicines with an acute effect, and place them inside the cavity of the fistula, which you have grasped with iron.
And do that for a few days until the acute medicine burns everything rotten in the cavity of the fistula with corruption.
And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by this, then you cauterize it as you had recommended.
But if the cause of fistula is bones and it is within your power to confirm this, then you investigate that one and dry it out as recommended, unless there is any cause of vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
But if the bone is discovered and there is corruption and blackness in it, then you cut that one until all corruption has been stopped; and heal that with what causes it to whiten until it is healed.
And if it does not heal and drips from the arm as before, then you should know that you have not achieved complete eradication of corruption; and therefore investigate it again carefully, make a diagnosis and cleansing of it with your last strength, and then heal it.
If it heals, it is good; otherwise, you should know that the corruption is deep within the body, which could not be healed, and therefore it is not hopeful but rather letting it be.
If the corruption in the bone is small, or if it can be removed, then you should remove it using fine forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
If the bones are moving, you should extract all of them very carefully and leave no cause for your strength to fail.
But if any cause of moisture opposes you and there is no fear or error in its incision, then incise the liquids or flesh where it is needed, and deliver the bones.
But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at your time, then place pressure on the wound where it is necessary so that the wound heals, and leave it surrounded by flesh and liquids until it is in the vicinity of those bones, guard the wound so that it does not solidify, and constrict the section you have incised during your operation.
If you are afraid, place pressure on the wound submerged in oil-soaked straw, or a wound submerged in Egyptian balsam, or one of the other soothing ointments, because when those liquids will be burned, and the bones will be separated from their abscess, and the attraction is relieved.
But if it is a large bone such as the thigh or hip bones or similar to those, and what is rotten in it is only the surface of it, then you remove that with resin only behind where the blackness and corruption remain, and restore the wound.
But if what is rotten in it is a large part and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then you must cause it to be closed and the whole thing incised into the location where the corruption is found, and then cure it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you what often happens in a man's groin that you should press on it and support your operation in this manner.
A young man of about 30 years old suffered pain in his abdomen, and from the internal parts, pus has formed inside the body to reach the groin area, and this matter is an abscess with a large abscess, and it was not caused externally.
Therefore, the abscess spread over time due to the error of doctors until the abscess burst, and then discharge came from it, and its healing was delayed until the hernia became fistulated, and faeces were produced in the motionless orifices which all had putrefaction and liquids of the body.
And many doctors cured it for about two years, but not in wisdom, but in art, until I was called.
I saw the hernia of it and the materials that were running out of those orifices due to large cracks, and already the body of this man was completely stabilized, and its color was yellow.
Then I entered one of those orifices with my probe and reached the bone.
And I immediately examined all the orifices and found them to come from all parts of the hernia.
And I chose and incised one of those orifices to find a fracture in the bone, and discovered that it was rotten, already covered in earth and rotten; and there was already a part of the hernia that had penetrated into the abdominal cavity.
And I then tied up what I had discovered and prepared from the exposed bone.
And I cut that corruption away that was not in the bone but what had been abscised and tied up, and I had already drained it.
And then I restored the wound with a medicine that would heal for a long time, but it was not healed.
And I returned and found the bone again, and discovered continuous corruption on it.
I cut out that which appeared to me of the corruption, and then I was perforated to make its healing and restoration, but it was not restored.
And then I discovered again and continued to incise the bone little by little, especially and perforated its healing and restoration, but it was not restored until I incised around a palm of it, and that extracted with its marrow, and I restored it with medicines, and it healed slightly and was healed.
And it is not necessary to repeat the operation and incision of him except for the preparation of his frailty and the scarcity of his tolerance and fear of death, because at all hours it happens in him due to excess of bad syncopes evacuation.
And he is cured by complete healing, and nothing should be in the place of hard bones; and it is done well that he is properly placed in his body and returns the virtue to him; and it is kept under control in its dispositions and not made contrary to him in any walking or harm in any cause.
But if the bone is protruding from the body and broken, then it is necessary to perform this procedure: take hold of the end of the protruding bone with strong force, and order someone to pull it out; wrap the linen bandage thickly around that part; place a cloth over the skin near the bone, stretch the protrusion to separate the skin from the bone, and cut the skin open in the desired location to make an incision without damaging the skin.
Place a splint or table next to the bone correctly, because when you perform this procedure it is not forbidden to cut the rotten flesh with a knife.
And the incision should be made slowly over the rotten spot, because if it is in the hollow of the decayed bone and does not appear in its usual sensation, then it may be necessary to re-examine it later.
If the bone is decayed but not protruding, then the incision should be continuous between the two sides, and the decay is in one or several locations within that area; in this case, cut open all of the skin; place a splint next to it, and make an incision on the first side where the decay is until it is continuous with the incision on the other side.
And make the incision according to the location of the decay, as previously stated.
If the decay is at a joint, incise that decayed joint, and saw the bone where it is connected to the other side.
And if the decay is at the connection of two joints, then it is not reasonable but rather deceitful.
And if the decay is in the hand or foot, it is difficult; however, it is necessary that you explore the decay using your own method and cut it open, clean it as best as possible according to your abilities, and with each trick be corrected so that it does not interfere with veins or nerves.
Know that the incisors and saws for cutting these bones are suitable according to the position of the bones, their preparation, their size, and their sharpness or thickness; therefore, it is necessary to prepare all types of instruments appropriate for each operation.
Know that this operation depends on the type of tool you need; when you have great experience and knowledge of these methods, and are familiar with the signs of diseases, then you can apply what is appropriate to each tool for all illnesses.
And you are the one forming, at the end of this chapter, the number of instruments that you will need and the ones you will consider simple, with which you will proceed according to your own discretion as you gain experience through practice on others. Form of saw:
Form of another saw:
Form of a large saw:
Form of a ruler (or straightedge): The head of this rod should be in the shape of a star-shaped cap, and its points are similar to the points on an astrolabe.
It is not necessary, unless the heads of the joints are crushed when they are corrupt, or the opening is wide.
The shape of a smaller razor:
The shape of a long razor:
The shape of the other saw should be made appropriately: a curve higher up and its sharpness of iron, and the limbs of it should be fashioned like a dagger's point. Shape of it:
The shape of a concave razor:
The shape of another thin razor:
The shape of another curved-tipped razor:
The shape of a small razor resembling a tent-like structure:
The shape of smaller incisors:
The shape of another incisor, resembling a rod with a saw-like edge, and it is used in various places in the bone cutting process:
The shape of a rod that should be used for drilling bones:
The end of it is triangular with a sharp point.
It is made of Indian iron, and it seems that all the causes we have mentioned concerning razors, incision tools, and saws are similar to this.
It serves for cutting extremities and the setting of bones.
If an extremity is injured intrinsically or extrinsically, or if you have treated a corruption but the cure does not help, or if the corruption causes the member to become diseased without any apparent cause, then it is necessary for you to cut that member into the corrupted area so that the patient can escape through that opening from death or from malice which is a greater harm to the member.
And the sign that it belongs to is that the member turns black before it is cut, or it may burst open before the decay reaches the member and spreads throughout the body; therefore, you must amputate that member at once.
Similarly, if the corruption is caused by poisonous agents such as a scorpion, viper, or cuttlefish and similar things,...
If the corruption or injury is at the tip of the finger, then you shall amputate the finger and give no space to the corruption to enter into the hand.
If it enters the hand, you shall amputate at the base of the finger, and give no space to the corruption to enter into the arm.
If it weakens, you shall amputate the arm at the shoulder joint.
If the corruption spreads elsewhere and sometimes surrounds the shoulder, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and administering another cure to him is useless.
If the corruption weakens the foot, then you shall amputate that part of it near a toe.
If it swells on the instep of the foot, you shall amputate the entire foot. But if it swells in the ankle, you shall amputate the leg at the ankle joint.
And if the corruption has reached the knee, it is not remediable; instead, you must abandon the patient to death.
The method of amputating or sawing off a member is that you tighten the ligament on the side from which you wish to amputate, and tighten another ligament on the other side; and extend one ligament to the side you wish to cut, and extend another ligament above it; and separate the flesh that is between two ligaments with a knife handle until the flesh is exposed entirely; and hold it close, and make the amputation or sawing.
It is necessary that linen be placed on all sides so that it does not touch the raw area, and that it come to the patient in a fitted manner with a cauterized dressing.
But if bleeding occurs during the operation, you shall cauterize the area promptly, or place on it some restraining powders to stop the blood flow; and apply your medicine again when it is complete.
Then wrap the affected member in linen as appropriate, and cure it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you that which is appropriate for a man with his foot, this you shall apply the remedy which I and you recommend, which is that blackening occurs in his foot due to burning similar to fire.
And that corruption first occurred in his toe before it threatened the entire foot.
And so the man prepared himself by taking more than he needed for the cure to go to the member with the intensity of it that caused burning pain and swelling, and he amputated the foot at the joint, and it healed.
For a long time, that same remedy has been causing corruption in the finger of the hand indicated.
And so it comes to me that the superfluity of that remedy on the hand of the medications will be repercussed and corrected by cleansing the body of it, and the superfluity is not repeated and begins in another finger before it begins in the hand.
And he asked me to amputate his hand, but I did not want to do so fearing the repercussion of the superfluity, and instead I feared the amputation of his hand was death for the patient, because the power of the disease was weakened.
And since he lost hope with me, he returned to his land and informed me that the man prepared himself and amputated his entire hand, and it healed.
I have not added this narrative except as a guide for dealing with this disease, and to signify the meaning of it and according to which it should be treated.
Regarding the treatment of the sinuses and quality of enema with medications.
If an abscess occurs in any fleshy member and the space of the abscess is prolonged before it collects pus, and it is broken and perforated, and the pus is released from there, and the cavity remains empty like a vessel, and a linen dressing is placed over it as finely woven as possible, and no further corruption occurs, and does not press on bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and not a fistula.
However, if the space is extended before corruption sets in on any member, it is then called a fistula and not a wound.
The treatment for it is that the tube (meaning the fistula) is inserted entirely as it is turned, especially when it is thinned out and made like cloth, and make sure that it does not adhere to the location due to its corruption.
But if you hope that the tube will adhere and that the corruption has not succeeded through the wrong sequence, and there is swelling in the tube, then you care for it with an enema.
And if you consider the sinus (the cavity of the fistula), and it is large, and the discharge from the tube has a bad odor, then administer an enema with the Egyptian medication which consists of oil, wine, and garlic crushed into pieces, and they should be placed in a vessel, and strained over the fire until the medication becomes warm and reaches body temperature.
Then take from it what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; administer the enema to the sinus (the cavity of the fistula), tighten the orifices of it, and leave the medication inside for a duration of two hours.
Then extract it with care; do so for several days until the sinus (the cavity of the fistula) is cleansed and the smell is gone.
Sometimes it is administered an enema with ashes of vine, when this medication is not available; and it is that you take the vine ash, put it in water, and then collect it and administer the enema to the sinus (the cavity of the fistula) until you feel sure that the fistula has stopped.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medication or vine ash water, then administer an enema with water and honey mixed with crushed garlic, or with wine and honey mixed, because by nature, honey cleanses and washes, and wine makes the sinus (the cavity of the fistula) sticky, especially when there is an excess of stiffness and dryness in the wine.
And when you do this for several days and feel sure that the fistula has stopped, then administer an enema with water that makes the flesh swell in it.
And take diaphthorine and dissolve it in rose oil and wine-infused starch, or you may administer other medications and enemas that have properties already mentioned in the treatise on enemas.
If the orifice of the sinus (the cavity of the fistula) is narrow and cannot accept the cannula of the enema, then you should gradually widen it with a small iron tool, and pause at each point wrapped in Egyptian or Basilicon enema until it is widened.
Similarly, if the orifice is wide, then you should attach the lips of it with stitches and leave the quantity inside in which no additional medication is added during the enema.
And if the orifice of it from which the discharge runs upward to the legs is elevated at the groin, then dry that part with sulphur or some other remedy in that location so that the discharge runs down below, because when the discharge is obstructed in the fistula, pus (pus-filled abscesses) may be created.
And if it is not possible to dry the fistula around the bone as you desire, then prepare the limb with preparation for which the discharge flows gently as needed and that there is no obstruction in the flow of the discharge.
But that which is over the fistula opening, which remains moist all the time and allows exudation of what is placed in it on the discharge from the fistula. And so that you know whether the discharge from the fistula is scant or abundant, or whether it digests or does not digest.
And examine the location of the fistula to see if the patient feels pain there, and whether it contains an abscess.
And when your medication is prolonged in this manner and the matter that has been placed over the fistula opening has adhered, or has become attached, you should then remove it or wait three days, and when you remove the plaster, you change the cloth and renew the enema.
But if the fistula has little space to extend, do not despair of adhesion, because healing is near, because some men have slow generation of flesh in their wounds, and it is among these that this occurs.
If the discharge from the fistula has not digested for many days, then you know that the fistula does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the fistula is delayed and its cause prolonged, then you should dry out the medications, and if the medications are moist in their substance and in their nature, they become dry like diaphthorine, when there is an excess of addition of zinc.
The most recent patient to be treated is to take a soft diaphanous cloth, soaked in warm olive oil, and apply it to the affected area as an ancient remedy for it, then wrap that around it, and use it.
It resembles that action when there is no balm, take diaphanous cloth, honey which has been thickened and use it; or take myrrh and aloes and grind all together to powder over the honey that is above the fire, then line that over a cloth and press it on the affected area; and line the honey that you have thickened with a cloth, and powder over a cloth and press it.
It is sometimes administered with long-acting aristolochia and the root of celestial lily (and that is the celestial lily), and wheat flour and centaury, use those simple ingredients or adjust them as necessary, grind and sieve them, then powder it over the honey that has been recommended; and hold it.
If the sinus persists and does not heal with this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the bone of the affected area, and it extends to the hard bones or other parts; then you should treat it with a fistular cure as mentioned above.
Treatment for paronychia and removing calluses by scratching the nail, making an incision in the digit, and cutting it open.
Paronychia is an abscess that forms under the nail of a finger or toe, and it often extends to other areas as well, if it persists without healing for a long time, it becomes an abscessed paronychia or corrupted, and the root of the nail rots, causing complete corruption of the affected area, and the odor spreads into the bone, eventually leading to the loss of the tip of the finger, and the color of the affected area turns black.
Therefore, if the treatment described above does not work, you must incise with an iron all the excess growth of the nail and cauterize the wound around it as well, since cauterization is helpful in this case.
If the bone is healthy and the nail is sound, but the addition of the nail presses on the surrounding flesh at the joints, causing pain, you must first puncture the nail with a thin needle where it is pressing the flesh, then push it back gently and incise the flesh around it with ease, and apply corrosive medicines to the remaining flesh; and cover that area with ointment until it heals.
If the corruption has already spread to the bone, then you must incise and extract it because a bone that is infected does not heal within a short time.
If the corruption and inflammation spread to the affected digit, you must incise it in one of the nails according to your memory, then cover that area with ointment until it heals.
If the nail is pressed or scraped and causes intense pain, you must first anesthetize the patient, then cut off the affected nail using a sharp scissors in a transverse section from top to bottom, ensuring that the incision does not reach into the skin beneath the nail, as this may cause further pain for the patient and lead to excessive growth of tissue in the affected area; and cover the wound with ointment.
A digit that is maladjusted, which is common in many men, is completely flesh, or it is completely bone, or it is completely nail.
They are born in the joint or the malformation of the digit occurs in some nails of the fingers and toes. If it is born in some nails of the fingers and toes, it is not harmful, but if it is born in the joints, it is very harmful.
And of those who are born fleshly, the section is easy, and it is that you should incise that one with a lance point (literally: "you must incise it with a lance tip in its reason with a spatula").
But of those who are born in the reason (or cause) of the joint, the cure is difficult, and so beware of draining it (literally: "the cure is difficult for it, and therefore beware of draining it").
But in that one who is born with it (the joint problem), cover that you incise the flesh at first with a round lancet into the bone, and apply an appropriate saw to it, and heal it (or care for it) within that which should be healed so that it becomes healed.
But the consolidation that happens to those between their joints (or among them) observed or due to a man's birth or consolidation of plague or burns, or similar, therefore it is necessary to cut (or incise) that consolidation into which they return to their natural form.
Then place a cloth soaked in red oil between them (the affected joints) to prevent easy consolidation, and separate them (or apply a separation between them), or place a thin sheet of lead between them until it is consolidated as required.
And similarly, if consolidation happens in any of the joints with the palm (hand), then you should cut that consolidation according to its preparation and as appropriate for the member's figure.
From incisions (or cuts), they are varicose veins.
Varicose veins are varicosities, and are swollen veins filled with melancholic fluid that move in the limbs of the body, and the major occurrence of them is in the legs, and especially in the legs of travelers, laborers, and carriers (or porters).
Therefore you must administer purging of the body with black bile (or purge the body strongly) on some occasions and let the patient bleed from the basilic vein (a major vein in the arm).
But the cure for them (varicose veins) with iron is according to two methods: one is that it should be incised and the black blood drawn out, and the other method is that the vein should be raised and all of it extracted.
The incision of it (varicose vein) is according to this method: first, wrap the leg with hot water until the thick blood is resolved, which is the foulness from the leg, and then tighten the patient's leg above the knee with a bandage, and then cut the vein in one place or two places or three places with a wide incision, and then lift the black blood with a strong hand from below the vein upwards and downwards until the desired amount is drained out, and which will draw out the power of the patient.
And apply that (treatment) and command him to abstain from foods that cause black bile.
And repeat the cure by phlebotomy (bloodletting) when the veins are full, and observe that the patient experiences relief.
But the elevation of them (varicose veins) is according to this method: you should examine the leg of the patient, if there are swellings, and immerse it in hot water and wrap the leg with warm water until it becomes swollen and the veins overflow; or exercise it with strong exercise if bathing is not available, until the limb is heated.
Then cut the cord on the correct side of the vein with an incision in length or in the lower part of it, or at the ankle (foot) in the case of the thigh (leg).
Then open the cord with scissors and remove the vein from all sides until it is felt, and you must recognize that the pain is decreasing and becoming darker.
And therefore when you see (the removed vein) white that it is a cord (or ligament).
And then you should place the thread back in its place and tie it off with silver wire (or strong thread).
And then make another incision close to that incision for three fingers (or about 3 inches), and remove the cord above the vein as far as it appears.
And then lift that and incise it in the lower incision at the ankle, and remove that and lift it until it is drained through the second incision, and remove that from above the incision.
And do this until the cord is completely removed from the upper incision or all incisions, until it is fully drained out, and then make that incision again.
And if it does not come out easily and lift up, then insert a strong double-edged needle (or awl) through it and tie it off, or insert the thread underneath it and turn your hand in all directions until it is tied off. And beware that it is not incised; for if it breaks, it will make it difficult to lift it up and cause harm to the patient due to it (the breakage).
And when that (the varicose vein) is completely outside the body, then stop at the site of the wound and immerse it in wine and warm oil (or olive oil), and treat it until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted with a bend (or curvature) where there is a covering of the knee, and it is not straight as previously mentioned, then it is necessary for you to make an incision along the entire length of the bend and at the sites of the covering, and tie it off until it is lifted up completely.
You must be careful with your section to not pierce the vein and avoid causing harm there, for it will be difficult for you to lift that one; serve your prudence in that matter.
Avoid piercing a vein during the incision, for it may cause problems. Use caution.
It should not be inserted as with an enema nor be of sharp point form so as to avoid hitting the vein; and it is made of thick flexible material, for if it were thin, it would pierce the vein due to its thinness; having excessive thickness in this manner as we have said.
Extraction of leg vein.
This vein is generated in the legs in southern lands, such as Al Andalus in Arabic lands and India's dry and hot territories with little rainfall and without herbs or grass.
And strong veins are generated elsewhere in the body apart from the legs.
The gestation of it is of putrefaction that comes from the loins thus, as snakes and worms and lice and vermin breed between the loins and flesh.
The sign of the onset of its occurrence is that of this vein which happens in the thigh inflammation, and the place is swollen; and it begins for the vein to issue from the location of that swelling, which seems similar to a plant.
When the limb appears, you should immediately wrap it in lead weighing approximately two pounds (around 0.9 kg). Put it inside for 2-3 days and then remove the lead, leaving the limb suspended from a pole or support.
And as long as any cause is present at the outlets outside, cover it with lead and leave it there. If the illness persists, you should cut a part of it and cover the rest; do not cut it out unless it is outside, for if you cut it out, it becomes contracted and enters the flesh, causing an abscess, pustule, and bad ulcer at the location.
Therefore, it should be treated gently and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the body and there remains no cause in the body.
From this vein, it has issued in some men who are in its length of five palm-widths and of ten fingers, and I have heard that one has reached twenty palm-widths.
If it is cut at the time of treatment, insert the thumb into the opening and pierce it deeply with a long probe until all that is in the material is evacuated, and apply putrefaction of the location for several days with medicines; and care for it as if curing an abscess.
This vein sometimes becomes inflamed, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and causes many offensive odors, and it has been known to issue from each opening of the foot.
Therefore, cure it as I have said in the division and with what has been said above.
From the incision of worms generated under the skin, it is called "bovine illness."
This illness is called "bovine disease" in some places because it often affects cattle and is a worm that is born between the loins and flesh, which grows and spreads throughout the body, and is manifested by symptoms of various limbs until the intestine bursts and comes out.
The generation of it (something) is due to putrefaction of some humors, such as worms, snakes, worms and parasites in the stomach.
It is feared for the malice of it (something), because when it goes through the body and rises to the head, and reaches the brain, then it causes a very violent vomiting and enters the brain, which leads to frequent observations (convulsions or seizures).
Therefore, when you want to cure it and remove it (the object), first you must know its movement and appearance, and then it is necessary that you strengthen what is on it and what is under it strongly and tightly, and apply pressure on it and extract it.
If it is embedded in the flesh and does not swell (abscess), then you pause a cautery with fire on the spot where it is located, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it, which corrupts the place as we said before.
If you find that being (the object) approaching the head near the brain, then strengthen the forehead with strong constriction, apply pressure on it and extract it; and the patient must use purification of the body with medications expelling bad, putrid humors, and be careful about foods causing putrefaction.
By cutting (incision) over the ailment of the nose.
This disease is called "nafir" in our land, and it is pain that occurs in some members (parts of the body), and it is transmitted from one member to another.
And you have already seen it according to what I recommended. You were summoned to a sick woman in a village, and you found her arm and saw a small inflammation on the vein of the arm, and after it was cut for an hour, you saw that inflammation swell like worms rising, but less noticeably than lead flowing from one place to another, like live silver running away.
And then the pain moves to that location and settles in the muscle, and here it stays for an hour.
Then it runs into the other body and reaches the other arm.
Then I recommended to myself that he rotate his entire body according to what I saw; and it was very surprising to me of the transference of it (the object) and the speed of one member to another. And I have already seen before that in the most important veins according to that method, but I saw more (cases) where pain was transmitted from one member to another. But not with the veins as in the woman's case.
And I thought it was not that (the object) but because the woman was old, where the body and veins were dry and visible, and in this case the windiness (inflammation) was perceived as being transmitted.
And it is necessary that it does not occur according to this treatment in those who are delicate and have bodies with soft veins weakened.
And when you want to cure it (the object), and the patient feels that pain, then do not appear at the vomit as we said before, but strengthen it and leave it slightly and press on it until the inflammation is released, and cauterize the spot.
But if you do not see it (the object) in your veins, then cure it with body evacuation and the things that expel inflammations, and sing (recite) charms with pills made of figs and pills of Serapion and similar ones.
By extraction of teeth.
Teeth are diversified according to the species, and according to the locations of the bodies in which they occur, because their diversity is that some have large points, small, concave, or flat; some have three angles, and some with tongues; and some without roots (wisdom teeth).
The signs of the skull are when you catch a tooth and pierce the bone, and exit from the sutures that is over the brain, because it happens with fever, blindness, dizziness, burning in the veins, inflammation and burning of the tongue, spasm and confusion of understanding, vomiting of bile, and sudden loss of speech and destruction of voice, and there is released from the wound site moisture white like powder, and eyes like watery flesh.
And therefore if you see these signs, then you avoid the cure and the extraction of the tooth, unless it is absolutely necessary.
But the signs of the tooth when it is in the heart, which is near the left breast, and feels like it is hardened (impacted), and not loose; and its movement is similar to the movement of a pulse, and bleeding from the wound is black, and feverishness spreads there, and sweating, and fainting; and therefore know that death is imminent.
When the arrow has pricked the lung specifically with foamy blood from the wound, and the instruments near the neck are applied, and the patient's color is changed, and he breathes heavily, and requests fresh air in distress.
If the arrow catches in the blanket that is at the feet and the pain occurs near the small ribs, it causes great and violent pain with deep sighs, and the patient cannot move all the limbs of the muscles.
If the arrow hits the stomach, it will cause strong blood to flow from the wound carrying some undigested matter.
If the arrow hits the abdomen and penetrates it, causing a tear or wound in the tissue that is torn apart, there is no hope for recovery in extracting the arrow.
If the arrow hits the bladder and comes out with urine, causing some inflammation outside, and strong pain is felt by the patient, then you know that it is fatal.
However, the other parts such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, and their similar members like the spine, vertebrae, hip, pelvis, and limbs are saved according to the best treatment if the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not venomous.
I recommend that you pay attention to the nature of these arrows, as this indicates their healing properties.
The reason for this is that in a man who has been shot by an arrow in the lacrimal duct of the eye through the nose, I extracted it from the other side, leaving the eyelash behind, and he recovered with no damage to the eye.
I also extracted another arrow from a Jew who had been shot in the eye through the eyelid, leaving only the eyelid behind, and the arrow was already hidden and not found except for a small tip attached to its shaft, and it was a sharp Turkish arrow with a lion's head without feathers.
And the Jew recovered, and no harm came to his eye as a result.
I also extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had been shot in the throat, it was an Arabic arrow with feathers; and then I cut it open, and it was already submerged in the throat of the patient; then I carefully removed it, and the Christian recovered.
I extracted another arrow from a man who had been shot in the stomach, thinking that he would die because of it; but after passing thirty days without any change in his condition, I cut it open and carefully removed it, and he recovered with no further harm.
I saw another man in whom an arrow had been shot into his back, and the wound was healed over it, and after about seven years, I extracted the arrow through the incision in the chest.
I saw a woman in whom an arrow had been shot into her stomach, and the wound was healed inside it, and there was no change in her condition for many days, and the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural functions.
I saw another man in whom an arrow had been shot into his face and the wound was healed, but when the arrow was removed, there was no further pain, and similar symptoms occurred.
I also extracted the arrow from the man of the king's son who had been shot in the middle of his nose and it had already declined slightly to the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
I was called to treat him within three days of the shooting of the arrow.
And then you probe the wound of the arrow called "straight shaft"; and then you test that area with a subtle probe, and do not feel it; but you feel the prick under the right ear, and then suspect that the prick is at the end of the shaft.
And anoint the area with a plaster containing drawing and digestive properties, so that the area may open up to reveal the location of the arrow shaft, in order to cut it off.
Do not happen any accident in the affected area that the arrow has reached; and continue anointing it with the plaster for several days without any incident; and if the wound is healed, let the patient remain without moving from his bed for several days until the arrow emerges through his nose and inform me of this.
And then cover the wound with a sharp, corrosive medicine for several days until pus comes out; and with a probe, find its tip, and carefully extract the arrowhead that is attached to the shaft.
And then adjust the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until the arrowhead becomes visible to me; and wait for four months for news from you about this matter.
As the wound heals and becomes larger, it will be possible for me to insert forceps into it, and leave them there without obstruction; then do not stop searching for and devising ways to remove the arrowhead with instruments specially made for this purpose, until a day comes when such tools can be used to pull out the arrowhead using the method described at the end of the previous chapter, until it is extracted; and then restore the wound.
And some physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I will restore it when the wound is healed, and the patient recovers completely without any complications.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting certain arrows as a rule and significance about what I have not said, for their parts and definitions are not understood through narrative or freely available books.
The wise craftsmen compare a little with much; and what is present with what is absent; and they discover new operations and new instruments to deal with unusual causes of the art when they arise.
And therefore, I say that arrows are not forgotten in the limbs where they are placed except in two ways: either by attraction of the location it penetrates, or by the contrary action of the other side.
And the one that is shot into a location where it penetrates, or the arrow coming from a fleshy area and shot, gets lost.
And if you cannot remove it immediately when you catch it, you must leave it for several days until the surrounding flesh can be softened and its removal becomes possible.
And similarly, if it is lodged in bone and you cannot remove it immediately, leave it for several days and apply traction and movement to it each day, and then it will come out.
And if you cannot remove it immediately, you must then pierce the area around the arrow in all directions with a thin drill until the location is enlarged by the arrow, and extract it.
But if the arrow is already hidden in the chest and is not felt, you must probe it with a probe, and if you feel it, you should shoot it out using appropriate instruments suitable for pulling it out.
And if you cannot get to it because of the constriction of the wound and the length of the probe, and this is not bone, nerve, or vein, you must open the wound until it is enlarged enough to extract the arrow.
And if it is hidden in ears with which caution must be taken, you must cut the flesh surrounding it from all sides with all the means possible; and devise ways to remove it, if you cannot get through the exit of the flesh by breaking the ears and twisting them until it becomes possible.
And when you administer the removal of an arrow in any location where it is, you must use twisting with your hand and forceps on all sides until it becomes possible; and subtly devise ways to prevent the arrow from being broken during extraction and make the removal as difficult as possible.
And if you cannot move that (thing) at your time, then leave it for several days until the parts in its vicinity can recover, and approach it when it is relieved. But if the flow of blood opposes it (the treatment), then you administer what was said in its (the treatment's) chapter for cure.
Keep your incision of vein or nerve, or cordage, and administer every means possible to prevent the escape of pus; perform it with ease, calmness, slowness, and firmness as I and you recommend.
Therefore, constrict the pus in such a way that the patient is shaped like the figure in which the pus should be squeezed out, because it is more beneficial. But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible based on the figures (pictures).
But when pus has escaped from one side or is causing another part to swell in the parts outside, or when it spreads beyond the incision near the surrounding skin and sometimes even more prominently; then cut it (the pus); the incision should be according to the amount that forceps can grasp; and hold it, because it is easily detached.
But if it is held in the bone, then twist the lancet counter-clockwise until the pus enters the bone, and gradually increase the opening and extract it (the pus).
If it does not improve, then leave it for several days, and approach it again when it comes out.
And if the pus's thread is in that area, then press it (the pus).
But if the thread is cut and you want to administer pressure, then enter and press it (the pus), if it is hard, use a concave instrument so that it enters the concavity of the thread and apply pressure on it with the instrument.
But if the pus is concave, then press it forcefully with a strong instrument entering into it, because the pus is relieved by that (pressure).
If the pus is surrounded by hardened flesh, then you must squeeze all the surrounding meat (puss) if it is possible to do so, and take care of it with whatever method is appropriate.
If the pus is in the foot, abdomen, bladder, chest, or side and is close enough that you can touch it with the thumb, and if it is possible to cut (the pus) over it, then cut it and guard against incision of vein or nerve, extract it, and sew up the wound if necessary, and take care of it until it heals.
Make a pair of forceps for draining the pus (abscesses):
Make them (the forceps) with long handles shaped like bird beaks, made with scissors, when they grab onto the pus, so that it is not dropped.
And from those (forceps) are made various types, large, few, and medium-sized, according to the size of the abscess and its scarcity, as well as the width of the wound, and the constriction of the area.
Like a ram's horn, to relieve the pressure in the concave abscess and press down hard on it with that (instrument).
On incision of veins (phlebotomy).
The veins for phlebotomy, it is customary to cut them (the veins) every 30 days. of which there are 16 in the head, These are the translated lines: And the veins that are to be punctured in the arms are numbered 5 (in the previous translation, this sentence was not provided). This is a continuation of the translation from the earlier lines. The translation for this line is:
And in the foot and calf there are three veins; the first one is the one that goes behind the bend of the great saphenous vein; the second one is saphena, and its location is at the back of the domestic artery calf; the sciatic vein, and its location is at the back of the great saphenous vein calf; and in the calf there are other veins similar to these.
The assistance of the veins that are close to the ears is beneficial for ancient catarrhs, migraines, and old sores of the head.
And the quality of bleeding from those veins depends on what I recommend to you: it is that he should shave the patient's head, and wash the patient's head in the occipital area where both veins are located with a clean cloth soaked in warm water; then make the patient hold their neck tightly with a bandage that covers the location of the veins near the ears in two areas depressed on the sides of the head; and ask for the one you want, and if you feel the pulse of those veins as you have indicated, here is your sign.
Then take the surgical lancet, which is pointed, and insert it into the vein at the angle where it connects with the bone. And then lift your hand above the vein and the angle, and make an incision in the vein with a shallow incision. And the length of the incision should be adjusted to about two fingers or around that size, and draw out as much blood as you want.
And then hold the pulse and let it stop bleeding until it is healed.
And it is mentioned at the beginning of this text that the incision of those [veins] and their cauterization should be done.
Furthermore, of the two arterial veins that are in the temples, the benefit of puncture is for ancient migraines and chronic headaches, and eye diseases that occur frequently and sudden fevers affecting the eyes.
And the quality of puncturing those veins depends on what I recommend to you: tighten the patient's neck gently until both veins appear clearly and palpate their pulses as you have indicated, and then make your decision.
Then lift the angle above the vein as you have indicated and insert the lancet shallowly, lifting the vein upward, and make an incision in it as you did with the other two veins; then let blood flow according to your need.
Approach the patient's constriction (hernia), place your hand on the vein for an hour, then place your hand on that spot and press firmly to strengthen it, let it be inside until it is healed.
Now recall their (the hernias) location and the incision made for them, and begin with the introduction to the treatise.
And therefore, the benefit of facetomy (trepanation) of the forehead vein is similar to trepanation of the frontal vein in ancient facial diseases such as migraines, headaches, abscesses and foul ulcers.
The quality of the trepanation depends on what I recommend to you; that is, the patient should strengthen their neck with a bandage until the vein appears; then take the instrument named 'fossor', which has this shape:
Place the tip of the instrument (fossor) at the end of the incision on the vein and strike it with a hammer or another method as required, allowing the blood to flow according to the quantity you desire; then release the perforation of the patient and hold it until it is healed.
Sometimes it is opened with a large trepanation, but not necessarily with an acute incision like other trepanations, but rather with a broad incision, and trepanate it transversely because the bone is nearby and quite strong; otherwise, the trepanation would break when it is thin.
The benefit of the two veins that are in the eyelids for scrofula (inflammation) of the eyes due to headache and swelling in the eyes, and for facial diseases.
The quality of the trepanation is that the patient strengthens their neck with a bandage, and you then trepanate them while standing over their head.
Make the trepanation transverse and short to avoid damaging the brain because there is little tissue in that location; if the trepanation is too shallow, its edge will be broken.
Allow the blood to flow for as long as it is necessary for you, then press on that spot and hold it for a new day, then release it.
The trepanation of the nasal vein is useful for acute fever and violent bleeding, as well as facial diseases such as migraines, headaches, and abscesses that occur in the face, especially when they are old.
The quality of the trepanation is that the patient strengthens their neck and places your left hand on their nose, take a thin long trepanation and place it in the middle of the nasal cavity according to rectitude because the vein cannot be felt there and the blood begins to flow immediately.
It is necessary that you end the trepanation gradually and allow the blood to flow according to your need, then hold it for a night because it will heal quickly.
The benefit of the trepanation of both eyelids is useful for conjunctivitis, the beginning of leprosy, various diseases and inflammations, and corrosive ulcers such as herpes.
The quality of the trepanation is that the patient strengthens each eye with their neck, and the craftsman stands over the patient's head, and the patient lies on a bed.
Trepanate the vein along its length with a wide, shallow trepanation; then remove blood according to measured quantity or as necessary; and make it similar to the other vein.
Release the eyelids and hold both veins with a moderate compression to prevent the patient from being overheated and allow it to rest until morning when the wound is healed.
The benefit of the trepanation of the veins in the neck is useful for small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, foul ulcers, and fissures, as well as ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
The quality of the phlebotomy of those [veins] is that you position the patient, compress their neck with a bandage, and turn the lips towards you and observe where two veins are located, one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of both, and this is because in the circuit of those veins there are small black veins; and then make an incision in each with a small incision.
If there is doubt about which one it is, and you do not know which of those [veins], then make an incision in the larger one, and observe the blood flow from that one to be sure.
And make the incisions on both sides of the lips above.
And of the two veins that are below the tongue, it is advantageous to apply the phlebotomy of the cephalic to the pharynx rather than the jugular, to the illness of the uvula, and to mouth diseases.
The quality of phlebotomizing those [veins] is to have the patient lie down on their back, raise the tongue, and observe from below the length of one vein and the other vein, and the color of each is fading towards black.
Then phlebotomize each [vein]; and be careful not to damage your hand in phlebotomizing those, because below those are arteries.
And the veins that are phlebotomized in the arm are those which are customary in all men, and the phlebotomy of them is done according to two methods, or they are filled with mistletoe juice or olive oil diluted; or seared with a phlebotomy knife, and an alcohol swab is used if it is not necessary, and this is the method:
And the large, convex veins filled with blood that appear swollen are usually opened, and those containing thick, clotted blood should be avoided.
This phlebotomy is smaller and has a more subtle end, and it is suitable for phlebotomizing small veins containing thin blood from lemons.
Additionally, the phlebotomy of the basilic vein is one of three veins: because it drains the blood from diseases that are below the neck and throat, and from what soaks the feet and stomach.
It is necessary for the phlebotomist, when phlebotomizing that one, to be careful and take precautions because below it is an artery, and if there is an error and adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy, it will incise the artery and cause bleeding, so it is necessary not to phlebotomize it with a phlebotomy needle, but rather to cauterize it with alcohol.
If the basilic vein does not appear by a clear indication, it is necessary that you leave that one and move to the other, or look for any branch; or phlebotomize in the place of the end of the arm, because that one is clear; and cauterize that with alcohol as we have said.
If you want to phlebotomize the humerus, it is necessary near the tightness of the arm that you touch the place between where you know the location of the wrist, and cover it with a cloth; and hold the arm and cauterize the vein with a concave incision with alcohol as we have said; and be careful to avoid hitting the percussion on the location of the artery.
When you see that the limb is tense, swelling occurs in the place where you have previously marked it, then that swelling is a swelling of the artery, and therefore it will drain.
When you see blood flowing from the venipuncture like the urine of a child, and the blood is thin, then know that it is from the artery; then press and hold your finger on it for a long distance; and remove your finger, if the blood is cut off, after several minutes, then tighten the arm and let it be.
Keep the patient dry and be wary of him and do not allow him to move for several days until he is cured.
If the blood is not cut off and it appears that you are not present for the treatment of this, then you should incise the artery, if you see it; because the extremity becomes contracted, and the blood is cut off from there; or you can take scissors, and burn that area, and take a ligature and tighten it on the vein with a narrow constriction close to the limb and around the pulvillus for another day.
If the blood is cut off, it is good; if not, cure that with water that has been previously mixed with powder that stops bleeding from the wound.
The incision of blood in it is difficult due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of the arm limb.
But the venipuncture of the femoral vein is also beneficial because it drains blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; because it is composed of branches of the basilica and of the cephalic, as we have said.
It is important for the venipuncturist to be careful during the venipuncture of that, because just below it is a nerve; and if you adjust in the puncture of the femoral vein and press on the nerve, it will result in numbness, and recovery will be difficult, and full recovery is not achieved in some cases. And this nerve becomes apparent over time; and if it is hidden for some people and subtle and not visible, then you should stop the venipuncture with the one you have already made and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should make the vein longer.
The benefit of femoral vein venipuncture is that it drains blood from the head and helps in the treatment of headaches.
It is appropriate if you want to puncture the olive or myrtle vein; because it is safe from all veins, because neither an artery nor a nerve is nearby.
But it is important to note that in some people, an abscess can form if not punctured during the initial percussion, but it may not be noticed later on.
The first of these is that you should know that venipuncture is only administered for the preservation of health and for hope of recovery and caution against illness, and that it should be done in one of the veins that are in the coyde, which are: cephalic, femoral and basilic; and that it should be done at the beginning of spring, during fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter near meals, when signs of congestion appear.
And the venipuncture should be done on the third day, or at least one day after three hours have passed since the meal.
More fletuotomy (a surgical procedure) is done when it is beneficial and necessary, or if there is no other choice, at any hour and at any time.
It is necessary that the child not undergo fletuotomy until he is 14 years old, and a pregnant woman should not be fletuotomized except in the fourth month up to the seventh, and elderly women who have passed their 60th year should not be fletuotomized.
Before anyone wishes to undergo fletuotomy by any method, it is necessary to clean the intestines in front of the fletuotomy with leon clisterium (leech), if there is a fissure retained in them, so that the superfluous fluids do not enter the fletuotomy of the intestines, which are pure, and do not harm the main members.
Fletuotomy should not be performed on patients with nausea or vomiting, or those suffering from disease or drunkenness until the symptoms have subsided, nor on a patient with dropsy, and moreover fletuotomy is feared near colic pain, vomiting, abdominal conditions, and excessive sexual activity, and exercise of fasting or vigils, and all causes that dissolve virtue, whether corporal or animal.
It is necessary to consider the subtlety of the humors beforehand if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible for him to do so.
Enter into bathing if there is no reason not to do so, or exercise for any exercise to make the blood more subtle.
Stop fletuotomy of the foot during the day, especially in the third hour, as we have said.
Protect the foot of that person on that day from all animal misfortunes such as anguish, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents such as excessive work and pain, sexual activity, and similar things.
And in the patient's bedroom, have the causes that are used by men with aromatization and fragrance, balms, and similar things according to the amount of possibility.
Follow the fletuotomist on a cushion that is higher than the one of the person who should undergo fletuotomy.
And pull the patient's arm outwards and rub it with his hand, the fletuotomist, two or three times; and tighten the linen and wrap it twice.
Let the constriction be moderate, for if it is too tight or there is swelling in the constriction, then you must prevent blood flow; or if it is for softening, then prevent the heart from pumping blood.
And apply the constriction, it is necessary that the person who should undergo fletuotomy rub his hands together between them until the veins are inflamed and are felt by touch.
The fletuotomist should anoint the site of fletuotomy with a little bit of ancient oil specifically; and the doctor's left hand should rest on that vein, at the location where the fletuotomy is to be performed, so that the vein swells slightly, and the pulse is quiet because the veins are the ones that are contracted in this way like cords, and from those come the windiness and when you press the fletuotomy on it, it should contract, and the fletuotomist should be exposed; and the fletuotomy should not open the vein, and if it opens, that is tightened.
Therefore, for all these reasons, the fletuotomist must be firm and attentive in all these matters.
And pause the fletuotomy, but if the vein is torn in one go, that's good; and otherwise, you should wait a little longer at that location or hurry up if it is not evident.
And if the location is evident or the patient becomes anxious, leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the linen, for strong pressure will cause an abscess to form, nor enter into bathing.
Repeat the fletuotomy if necessary.
And if the opening is small and the blood flows slightly subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will come out, then repeat the fletuotomy in that tract according to the rule and adjust the opening slightly, and do it quickly before the location becomes abscessed, because an abscess forms in many people with a large opening.
If it has already abscessed, do not repeat over it, because there is no excuse for you; and pause at some part of the incision with oil, because it relaxes the heart of the blood. And it is better in this location than any other oil.
And administer incision of oil in every fletuotomy where you must prevent the heart from pumping blood, and do tyriaca (a procedure to help draw blood) when it is stopped on one of them at the location, because the blood becomes thinner and is stirred up when it is thick.
And if a large abscess is generated at the site of fletuotomy, which often happens in those who are not stabilized with blood flow for several days or in the opening of the vein with little blood flow, then you should cauterize, and pour sponge infused with water and salt, a little scalded, and hold it for an hour, because it is dissolved.
It is necessary to apply this to the vein's opening of that blood vessel, either by filling it or another vein.
If it remains in the place for some days any blackness or greenness, do not notice it; and if you wish, put on that area some cause of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of mint juice or camphor, or something similar to it.
Frequently, abscesses and growths occur; in such cases, you should perform incision of the basilica (incision over the abdomen).
Therefore, place your hand on it, and if you find it soft, you should compress it, because that elevation is bad and harmful; and then be careful to place on it some cause of what was said above, for fear the blood will flow from the artery.
Apply a plaster with what is stiffening it, to make the area hardened, and place care on it with another remedy until it is healed.
It is necessary to extract blood from all people according to the amount of its strength and according to the color that appears in the blood, as it appears.
Because if the blood is black, you allow it to issue until it turns red; and in the same way, if you see that it is thick, you allow it to issue until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, you preserve its sharpness for a while.
It is necessary for the person who is full and strong and has the necessity of bloodletting on one occasion, to be enlarged the incision of the vein and the laceration should be wide.
And in the one who is weak, the opposite should be done, and it is necessary to extract it too frequently, and the incision should be narrow.
The best way to perform bloodletting in a vein is to make a cross-section incision, not puncture.
This method of bloodletting is safe from bleeding and nerve injury, and it is safer and more secure than bloodletting according to its length and width.
And in the one who is prone to fainting, you should perform bloodletting, and it is necessary that you cure him with a piece of bread infused in wine of milligranes or simple oxymel scaled; and draw from the blood in three or four occasions.
If there is swelling due to compression, you should take a drink before bloodletting with an infusion of myrrh or aromatic honey infused with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and others, or with aromatic infusion and strong odor.
If fainting occurs due to excessive blood, it is necessary to perform bloodletting, and you should drink water of meat and a subtle aromatic infusion; use aromatics with anything, and limit their feet with that.
Use the other causes mentioned in the section on fainting for evacuation.
And whoever wants to relieve his arm and dissolve his blood according to an occasion, it is necessary for the one who undergoes bloodletting for excessive evacuation, and the strength of it is weak, that he gradually releases the blood, according to the amount of its strength in consecutive days.
But whoever wants to relieve his arm, and get rid of blood on several occasions, and his body is strong, then do this around 7 or 9 hours after the first bloodletting.
But whoever wants to increase the blood in his body contrary to the direction of its natural flow, it is necessary that it be relieved on the second or third day.
But in the one whose blood is already heated and sharp and causes fever, it is necessary to release that blood on an occasion and a large amount and enlarge the opening until fainting occurs, because you will have preserved all the conditions of bloodletting; and you should place your hand on the pulse of it, so that the heart does not stop in the case of fainting, for many times this happens when the bloodletter is ignorant and negligent.
And it is not necessary that when you want to relieve the arm and evacuate blood on an occasion, that the orifices of the vein are closed and it is difficult to release blood, that you press hard under it with force and extend it gently, for this is very bad.
Leave it until it is bloodletting again; or remedy this by the sharpness of the laceration that is coagulated in the vein orifices; or place on it alum and turmeric, or sage, and compress it gently until the blood is out.
And if the vein is abscessed, you should leave it alone and not touch it until the abscess is soothed.
And if necessity forces you to evacuate blood again, and there is no excuse, then you make an incision on the same location or in the other arm in another vein.
The vein called "the cord of the arm" is bloodletted in the place of the cubital or basilic, when it is not constricted or hidden, because it consists of these.
The quality of bloodletting is that the patient immerses his hand in warm water until the cannula thickens and the vein appears manifestly.
Approach stringent pressure on that which is obviously narrowed by a stricture (or affected by it); and apply the lancet according to the small transverse, not longitudinally or broadly.
Make the opening wide and let your lancing be such that you lance that joint slightly.
If the flow of blood is forbidden, then you will irrigate your hand in boiling water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your purpose.
But if you are in the summer days, then you are excused from the irrigation of the hand in boiling water, and the body is stopped from bleeding in boiling water during winter months.
The lancing of this vein is safer than all other veins because it has neither a pulsating vein nor a nerve nearby.
The lancing of the ulnar artery in the right hand is given to liver ailments.
The quality of the lancing is that you must firmly grasp the area or your hand, then immerse it in boiling water until the vein is swollen and clearly visible to the eye; then lance it transversely; and if there is no response from this, do not proceed further.
And beware that you do not continue lancing your hand as the nerves of the fingers are exposed there.
And irrigate your hand in boiling water and let the blood run there because if you do not irrigate it in boiling water, the blood will coagulate in the vein opening, and bleeding is forbidden.
And when the blood is drawn according to necessity, you should pause over the oil and salt vein so that it does not solidify excessively; and similarly, you must do this in every tight place.
The advantage of the lancing of that on the left hand is that it is given to spleen ailments.
Do the same in the lancing as you have done with the other.
The advantage of the saphenous vein in lancing is for those ailments that are in the lower part of the body, such as infections in the womb and retention of menstruation, and for lung diseases, ulcers of the abdomen and old sores, and similar ailments.
The quality of the lancing is that the patient immerses his foot in boiling water and makes a friction on it until the veins appear; and he should place his foot on a board; and the area of the vein you wish to lance, you must press down on it, and from there it branches out in the sole of the foot many veins.
Therefore lance the swelling with a broad ram or at the bottom of the cavity you must press down, because it is better and more effective.
If you lance that on the sole of the foot, then you must beware of the nerves that are near it on the sole of the foot, and pause your lancing where you want to lance transversely, as if you wanted to pierce it.
Let the lancets be sharp.
But if the bleeding is forbidden, then immerse the foot in boiling water and let the blood run there until it is evacuated.
If the lancer makes a mistake in the first observation, then immerse it again with the lancing in the same spot because the area is clean; and do not fear the evil, but beware of the nerves as we have said.
And do the same with the saphenous vein of the other foot as well.
And from the sciatic vein, the area as we have said is to be pressed down near the wild thigh joint.
The relief of the lumbar puncture is for back pain when it is due to blood clotting.
The quality of the lumbar puncture is that the patient undresses and lies face down with a pillow under their abdomen from the lower back to four fingers' width above the hips, for this it should be done in this way.
And when it appears, you should perform the lumbar puncture as best as you can and as transversely as possible; or insert it through an incision or cut it through a section, for the location is dry.
It is in old men with a weak constitution; and if it thickens there, and does not appear to the sensation of all, then perform a lumbar puncture on one branch, and it is the one that appears near the heel, opposite the auricle and the ankle.
Be careful of the nerves, and make the blood flow as much as you want.
And remove the obstruction and place your hand over the puncture site and press firmly, for it heals easily.
Concerning ventriculostomy and the qualities of using those instruments.
Ventriculostomy is made from corks, or from horns, or from glass.
Ventriculostomy is performed in two ways: one way is by scratching and extracting blood, and the other is without scratching.
And this ventriculostomy that is without scratching can be done in two ways; either with fire or without fire.
And the locations for the ventriculostomy that is performed with scratching and blood extraction are twelve in the body, of which one is where ventriculostomies are performed, which is at the back of the head; and the middle part of the neck; and ventriculostomies of the chin just below the jaw; and ventriculostomies with two spatulas; and ventriculostomies of the alcohol bottle, which is on the end of the spinal cord; and ventriculostomies of two syringes, which are two feet long; and ventriculostomies of two cannulas; and ventriculostomies of two cups.
Ventriculostomy does not extract blood from the veins, but only from small scattered vessels in the flesh, and therefore it does not have the virtue through these, as is the case with lumbar puncture; nor is it necessary that ventriculostomy be performed with fire or without fire in any disease caused by intracranial pressure before the entire body is evacuated.
But if necessity arises for ventriculostomy due to disease or continuous pressure, administer it at the beginning and end of each month, and in the middle of the month and at any time.
And therefore, when there are symptoms of any of these conditions, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, then command ventriculostomy to be performed after passing two or three hours.
And another benefit of ventriculostomy of the neck is that when it causes heaviness in the head and consequently collapses the eyes, it must be accompanied by the evacuation of the entire body.
And this ventriculostomy is at the location of lumbar puncture in the head.
And it is not right to use those who are of complete purge or with catarr, as this causes great harm.
And therefore it is not necessary to use the elderly, and in heads where there are diseases that cause purge.
But in the case of continuous pressure on it, forgetfulness occurs; and therefore, you should command the ventriculostomy operator to pause his hand slightly on the ventriculostomy at the ends, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
But ventriculostomy of the artery is in the location of lumbar puncture of the vein femoral and basilica: and this causes asthma, constriction of the airway and scissuring of the tracheal tube, coughing, and intracranial pressure.
And it must be cauterized slightly the ventriculostomy of the artery, because if it is left alone, weakness will arise in the body and stomach.
And ventriculostomy of the alhagdahan causes accidental headache and optic neuritis, emigration, inflammation, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is at the location of lumbar puncture of the basilica.
And it is necessary to command the ventriculostomy operator not to press his hand after scratching to avoid cutting the artery and causing blood flow.
Swelling of the mouth is treated with alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and it resembles the ailments that are in the mouth, and they are located where fletbotomy (bleeding) of the lips is performed.
The swelling that occurs on both cheeks is treated with a poultice, which is made by heating a substance.
The swelling of the inner parts of both eyes is also treated by bleeding from three veins, namely the basilic, facial and cephalic, for it attracts the blood from all those veins that are in the flesh, and the smaller veins of the other larger veins leading to the attraction of the three main veins.
And order the leecher not to proceed with cutting, for the location is stripped of flesh, and there are only nerves and arteries remaining.
It is a swelling that occurs on the anus and treats hemorrhoids of the rectum and ulcers caused by other conditions.
And you must order the leecher to make a large incision, and it should be made with an eram (a tool for bleeding), as the location requires deep cutting; and small, delicate swellings should not be cut with a scalpel.
However, small swellings in the arms and legs are treated by lessening them, as they draw blood from the whole body, and they treat old pains in the lungs and uterus, and the bladder; they cause menstruation, and treat both breasts and adenoids; they are located where bleeding is performed on two veins (perhaps referring to the radial and ulnar arteries in the arm), and on the wrists and ankles.
But weakening the whole body may cause fainting in many men.
And the treatment for swellings is similar to the treatment for swellings on two arms (perhaps referring to both arms).
The positioning of the swellings is that you should press the swelling initially and then suck it with early suction, and do not hold the swellings for a long time, but only press them lightly, leave them slightly, and let the humors come to the area by natural means. And do not stop repeating this and continue until you see the location redden and swell, and observe the thickening of blood.
And then you should make small cuts and repeat the suction little by little, while considering the position of the body.
Because that man who has delicate skin with rare pores, it is necessary to make one cut and not more, so that the location is not ulcerated.
Order the leecher to enlarge the incision slightly and make it deep, but be careful with the suction.
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to make two cuts, as in the first cut the way of subtle suction and fluid accumulation is opened. But in the second, with increased scrutiny, the aggressive removal of thick blood should be performed.
And if the blood is very foul, then make a third cut so that you can achieve the goal.
Finally, when we want to extract a little blood at a time or in small amounts, it is sufficient for us to make an incision.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, then make an extensive incision; and if we know that the blood is thick, it is necessary to make a deep cut.
And the term "incision" refers only to the depth of the wound (the word 'codena' in the text is not a standard medical term and may refer to the depth of the cut, but it is difficult to confirm without more context).
If the wound is deep, hard, dark, and its pores are tight, then the locations of swellings should be treated with more oil, such as olive oil, grape seed oil, almond oil, sesame oil, or in winter, use oil from narci (an herb, likely narcissus), lilies, camomile, or blood-letting oils and similar ones.
And if the swelling is large, boil it, then apply oil of amaranth, balsamitum oil, aloe oil, anise oil or similar oils to it.
If the boil is large and tender, it is forbidden to apply oil, and it is necessary that the places of the boils be close to the boiling water with hot water or water from a spring, or hot water of vinegar, or hot water of broth, and similar waters.
The one whose pus is of damp consistency should wash his boils with vinegar or water of myrtle and sumac, similar to those waters.
For the one whose swellings are large, wash his boils with vinegar of antimony, or water of sage, which is majoram, or decoction of anise, or chamomile, and similar waters.
It is necessary that the boil be kept away from bathing; having it administered immediately after bathing for an hour or two, and it must sleep close to the boil.
What is necessary is that the patient be bled before the lancing of the boil.
You must consider at the beginning: if the boil or the one who is to bleed is choleric and winds are present with sharp pus and inflammation, you must take cooling agents such as milk of magnesia, acetic acid, and laytuguas, sejanum, juice, and similar substances.
And pause their food such as peas, gamebird meat, and sour foods, and similar dishes to them.
For the one whose complexion is cold, you must drink elderberry syrup or syrup of ascarid wormwood seeds and sumac, and a moderately fragrant oil between winter and spring; it should also be advised to use little drinking and eating, and pause their pea and cabbage and fish and gamebird dishes.
It is necessary that on the day of lancing and bleeding the drinking should be more than the food.
It is necessary to give some men tisraeus alfaragum or medicines of musc, which are musk or asafetida before the lancing or bleeding, so that the main limbs are comforted and the blood becomes thin; it is not necessary for them to take that scalfat.
However, boils that are not incised are boils that are stopped on the liver, and in the spleen and podagra, and at the umbilicus, in the joints of the fingers, and the ankle, because these members cannot tolerate incisions upon them.
That is not desired except for the attraction of blood from a member, such as stopping a boil on the mammary gland in an illness of blood flow from the nose; and it is used to dissolve cold and thickened swelling in a limb, such as stopping on the abdomen and umbilicus; because that rarefies the limb and loosens it and alleviates pain because it resolves the swelling.
And it is stopped on the cough when it occurs in its opening or in the throat, because by the strong attraction of it, the obstruction is relieved and the inflammation from its place is eradicated.
Similarly, when it is stopped on the liver and spleen it dissolves swelling that has become trapped there.
These boils are treated with juice alone, and sometimes with fire.
Sometimes it is administered full of hot water in illnesses of the spleen.
And this is to fill the boil and make it large with hot water alone or water in which appropriate herbs are put.
The method of boil treatment with fire: the diameter of the hole should be two fingers wide, according to how we have made it; and the depth of the wound should be the size of a palm; and in the length of it, at the location on the circumference, the depth should be the same as that, the probe should be small in proportion to the amount that an awl can fit into it.
It should be made of linen or citrus rinds with thick edges, lion, tongues and sharpened for it not to hurt the limb in its position on it.
And it should be at the middle of it a crossbar of linen or iron, on which the candle is stopped with fire.
And this boil should be much larger than the one we have recommended; and the small amount of it according to the illnesses and the state of the person who uses it.
The boils of children and weakened ones are different from the boils of young men with large bodies.
The quality of stopping this boil with fire on the limb is that it should heat the meat gently in front of a little amount of wax candle, and stop it in the middle of the crossbar in the middle of the boil, so that the fire is ignited around the edges to avoid burning the patient's body.
And it is placed close to the patient's limb, and it should be on the probe that we have said, until when we have the boils and do not need to remove the probe and let the steam rise from the probe, then the boil will soon be dissolved.
Burn the meat according to its method, and if necessary, repeat this action.
Apply the plaster for the disease of plague, with water (leech), in which there is no transverse or round wound, and it is not applied unless it is filled with water, and is placed only on the limb.
And this is its form: The larger the plaster, the better, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Chapter 75.
Sanguisuga (leeches) are not applied to any member except where it is not possible to apply plasters due to their small size, such as gums and similar parts; or to a naked member, such as the nose and its surroundings.
And the quality of using these leeches is to find those in clean water pots.
And let them be laid in clean water for two days, and make sure no cause remains inside them; and let the body be evacuated at first with phlebotomy and plasters; and let the member of the patient be wrapped until it becomes red; and let them be placed on him.
And if they are full and burst.
And if it is possible to suck the wound with a plaster, it is more helpful.
And if not, wash the wound with salt water and rub it with cloth; squeeze it out.
If the bleeding of the patient continues after leeches have been applied, and it persists, put a piece of cloth soaked in cold water on him, and let it stay there until the discharge stops.
If the bleeding increases, sprinkle vitriol triturated (powdered quicklime) or similar causes of stagnation over it until the bleeding is stopped; or place fava beans that have been cooked and soaked in water on the area, and let them stay there until they stick to the area, and the bleeding stops.
And cover, if necessary, the repetition of leeches, when it is possible to change them.
And if the use of leeches is forbidden, let the wound be rubbed with fresh blood or insert a needle into the area until it oozes blood; and let them be placed, because those that feel any blood will adhere immediately.
And when you want to remove them, sprinkle a little powdered alum, salt or ashes over them, and cover immediately.
As we begin the process of the third division: restoration. This chapter is very useful in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations of bones.
Oh, son, understand that the foolish doctors and the common people, and those who pay little attention to the books of the Ancients or read nothing from them, boast about this chapter.
And because of this, the method of the scholars on our land is kept private; and I have not forgotten it for a long time, but have only followed it after long study of the books of the Ancients and understanding of their thoughts, to extract the science from them.
And direct your attention to experiment and study throughout your lifetime.
And I have already described in this chapter everything that contains the main science and on which much experiment has been passed; therefore, I abbreviate it for you and relieve you of occupying yourself with its length; and I abbreviate it at the end of abbreviation; and show it at the end of declaration; and form many forms of the tools that are administered in it, as is done by adding a declaration, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
First chapter.
Summary and collection of the causes of bone fractures, from which a preface is necessary before we begin the restoration of broken members and various others. Therefore, let us begin the preface of this chapter with an overview of its subject matter; and the chapters to which it relates at the beginning are filled with artists and stopped at the truth of these matters; so is it for you and those who can learn or understand this noble art from you.
Therefore, I say that when an accident such as a fracture or dislocation or twist or breakage occurs, you should first take care to perform phlebotomy or bleeding (letting blood) on him, or whatever is permitted, if there is no prohibition, such as weakness of character, or he who has it, or an old man, or in times of intense heat, or intense cold.
And let the diet consist of green vegetables and bird meat (small game) and crabs; and we forbid heavy meats and foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are sure of a cauterized abscess, and if there is no fear of effusion of matter in the member.
And return the patient to his original routine according to what is customary for him.
And since the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient eat nutritious foods with a lot of and thick consistency, in which there is viscosity, such as food made from wheat flour with water, rice, beans, peas, beef, mutton, veal, fatty meat, and similar foods, and with this diet, coagulation of fractures takes place more easily and quickly.
You should know that bones break in men who are elderly or weakened, and it is not possible for them to heal naturally due to the drying out of their limbs.
However, nature repairs and restores broken bones in every direction by means of a process similar to glue, where thick fluid adheres to the inside and binds it together until its strength and firmness return, until the end of inflammation and swelling, such as fire at the beginning, until some cause does not prevent it from performing its work.
And for this reason, it is necessary to rest the patient's meals, meals that are heavy, thick, and viscous, as previously mentioned.
You should know that the types of breaks are diverse depending on the limbs, for a break in the femur bone is different from a break in the skull; and a break in the leg bone is different from a break in the arm; and similarly, all other limbs are diverse among themselves.
And I will remind you of every type of break, described in its own chapter separate from others.
The diversity of breaks can be further divided into subcategories. Bone breaks are further classified into subcategories; for example, some breaks are concave while others occur in stars-like patterns; and some breaks depend on the length of the bone: such as stress fractures and fractures due to overuse or underuse, like a break caused by a pen when preparing to write, or a skull fracture with a cut or disruption, or a small crack in the bone.
Each type of break has its own treatment or method of healing, as I will explain in the separate chapters for each one.
The sign of a bone break is: A bone break is recognized by:
Therefore, if there is no visible deformity or abnormal alignment, and the patient does not experience significant pain when touched around the affected bone, then it is not a break.
However, it is possible that there may be a slight deformity or small crack, in which case you must press and compress the area, wait for the appropriate medicine to be prepared, and apply it tightly with subtle binding.
You should know that the location where the bone is curved but not split in two or where the entire perimeter of the affected area does not appear to be involved, like a round swelling, requires immediate attention and application of a surgical dressing.
If a surgical dressing has been applied, leave it in place for several days until the swelling subsides; and apply gentle heat or other methods to alleviate the discomfort.
You should know that treatment of the affected area and needle therapy is much simpler than treating a broken bone.
Apply the recommended treatment as explained in the relevant chapter for each type of injury or condition.
However, if the bone is broken in two, extension of the affected limb is necessary by using either two ropes or a rope and your hand, depending on the size of the limb.
Your position should be such that you restore the limb to its natural shape, while the parts are extended from the broken member. Then, perform what is necessary to return those additional parts with skill and according to each situation.
Ensure that you do not harm the patient with your operation or injury, and perform it according to your ability so that you align one bone with its companion in the best possible way.
Ensure that at that time you touch it appropriately with your hand, and if you see any other cause different from this, correct it and align it according to the amount of your skill.
Remove violent extension and compression, thus preventing foolish doctors who often cause abscesses or contractions in the member through their operation, as we have seen through the operations of their many watched cases.
The quality of the member's immobilization recommended is as follows: since broken members are diverse in their smallness and greatness, as well as their shape.
For those that are small such as the arm and the thigh and similar limbs, then the wrapping should be of fine soft cloth.
But for those that are large such as the leg or thigh, the wrapping should be thick and hard, since a tight wrapping connects the larger limb firmly in all its parts with immobilization, so that nothing enters there.
Begin, align your position appropriately, stop the appropriate amount conveniently at that location, over the site of the fracture with three or four wrappings depending on the limb's need; and hold it tightly with a small amount of lint.
Place it appropriately above the more superior part of the location of the fracture, and tighten as much as necessary without causing pain at the site of the fracture. Place it appropriately above the location of the fracture and lengthen the wrapping slightly, soften the tight wrapping little by little, until you can feel a large gap in that area.
Place another bandage and wrap it around the broken location with the wrapping, and place the wrappings above the fracture; your operation should be in immobilizing the wrapping and softening it according to what has been said in the first bandage above.
Stop between the layers of felt or cloth to align the curvature of the fracture, if there is a curvature in it; otherwise, do not stop for any other reason.
Stop on the other bandage, and align over these correctly made stitches as soon as possible, if there is no inflammation or abscess at that location; and then stop at the site of the abscess and heal the inflammation; leave it for a few days; and then tighten the stitches.
The stitches should be thick and made of strong cane fiber, or they could be made of pine wood; or of palm tree ramps; and the width of each stitch according to this shape and this form:
However, the stitch that is placed over the fracture should be thicker and wider than the other stitches, and the length of the stitch according to the member's size and proportions; tighten the stitches with another bandage according to your first immobilization; and tie it up with twine or thread correctly as has been said about immobilization, and ensure that your immobilization is more appropriate over the location of the fracture, and as the fracture is longer, the immobilization should be looser.
It is necessary that the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and made of linen; if the threads are thick such as I have seen by the operation of some foolish people using thick ropes instead of thread, this is a great error because the immobilization is unequal.
Subtle threads are not appropriate, as you will not be able to achieve immobilization with them; and it is not necessary for there to be a gap of one finger width between each stitch.
If the patient is injured by the extremities of the stitches near the immobilization in those areas, then stop them with felt or woolen batting until it does not cause injury.
Some fractures are with wounds, and it happens with disruption in the tendon, and I will remind you of that in the section on singularity.
Know that all broken members are not tightened with stitches on the first day; this is because the limb, which is large, does not need to be stopped with stitches for several days or a week or more, depending on your certainty of abscess development.
This method is the way of plasters that ancient physicians used, which were placed on fractures, dislocations and twists.
This is the method of plasters for which ancient physicians restored fractures, which are commonly used for dislocations and twists, especially for women and children because it does not require heat or friction: take powder from grinding, and it is the pulp of wheat flour that should be mixed with the motion of the mill in the walls of the mill.
When the plaster is made as described, if it turns out too thick or thin, sieve it with an album of egg white and adjust its consistency accordingly. Then use it.
Another method of treating fractures and dislocations and twists: recipe for saffron, lupine (Lupinus), acacia, elecampane, myrrh, which is made up of 10 grains of frankincense, 5 grams of myrrh, 20 grains of aloeswood, all ground and sifted, mixed with water or egg white if the patient's complexion is scalded; and apply this ointment, because it has a good composition and restores broken bones lightly, and confers strength to muscles.
Another method of treatment for fractures and twists: recipe for myrrh, althea white, frankincense (Boswellia), aloeswood, acacia, and Armenian bole in equal parts, all mixed with water or egg white.
All the ingredients should be ground in a mortar with millstone, sieved, and mixed with water or egg white, then administered.
Method of plaster for joint dislocations and separated bones in those places, and to alleviate pain at these locations and heal fissures and fractures: take wool yarn and immerse it in vinegar and oil, then place it on the affected area.
But in this plaster, there is no virtue of restoration, rather, it serves as a cure for abscesses and relieves pain directly.
Another method of plaster that restores fractured bones: take wild fig leaves and opium poppy leaves; combine all to make a plaster from them.
Method of plaster for the restoration of fractured bones and when you want resolution of the abscess: prepare a mixture made from clay, chamomile, violets flowers, barley flour, all ground together. Combine all ingredients with wine if the member is not scalded.
But if it's scalded, then prepare it with water from wet colander or water and use that instead.
Another method of plaster with strong resolving power for when abscesses persist and the restoration of the member is needed: prepare a mixture of clay, seeds from flax, balm, melilot, majoram, violets flowers, camomile, all ground together and combine with comfrey leaves or watercress leaves, water from elderflower, or sweet water or wine, according to the quality of the member and the color of it.
More importantly, Hippocrates does not state that a cushion should be placed on the broken member for its recovery, except when it is made of wax and oil and no other cause; he recommends that it should be neither too thick nor too thin.
However, it is seen that cushions should be placed on the broken member for its recovery in cases where there is a lack of heat, such as myrrh, amber, and similar to those causes that we have mentioned.
A method for ointment to treat injury and pain: grind myrrh, cezes, shaved human skin or goose down, and dandelion leaves, and salt into a paste; strain it and sift it and let it cool, then make the ointment.
The amount of time required for the wound to heal and be discharged depends on whether pain or swelling occurs, if the bone is not broken from its place, then you should not remove the dressing for several days. And if pain, swelling or inflammation occurs at the site, you should cut or remove it at that time and take off the ointment from it.
Take a cloth and sea sponge soaked in warm water, submerge it in boiling water, and use that to wash the affected area until the swelling and pain subsides; leave the member to rest for an hour, place wool soaked in vinegar and oil or rose oil over it for one night to ensure that the abscess is cauterized, and to reduce the inflammation of the member, and relieve the pain from it.
Then apply a thin and gentle pressure to the narrowed area and a small amount of ointment, without exerting too much force initially, and continue with subtle pressure until it is healed.
And if the abscess, redness, pain, inflammation and all other symptoms have already subsided completely, and you no longer need ointment or pressure, then continue with the treatment as before.
And if no such cause affects the member as we have mentioned, then do not remove the dressing for three or four or seven days. and in some cases, everything is allowed for twenty days according to the appearance of the member during the removal process, as we have mentioned, until the fracture heals and the flesh adheres to it.
Then adjust the dressing more tightly than your initial dressing and make sure the patient's bandage is tightened as needed, according to what is remembered from before.
If you see the fracture site is drying out and swelling more than necessary, know that nourishment should not reach it; therefore immerse it in warm water every day to keep it moist; let this continue for three days; then slightly loosen the dressing, which will allow nourishment to reach the member, and heal it slightly.
Those who falsely claim to heal a fracture of the member later when it has not been healed at first, according to what is necessary, and heal it in a crooked manner, as they operate, with great fear, if this were righteous they would have enlarged upon it in their books and warned about doing so.
And I have not seen anyone do this, so it is reasonable that one should not do it.
Chapter: On Fractures When They Occur in the Head.
The types of fractures are numerous, and their shapes are diverse, and the causes are distinct, since some fractures occur due to blows from a club, which breaks all the bone into pieces, leaving nothing but the bone, as in the case of the leg, and this type of fracture is called "escal"; or the blow cuts off a part of the bone, and also cuts through the flesh but does not extend beyond the end; and this type of fracture is called "absolute levation."
And the wound of these two types of fractures may be large or small, and whether it is contracted or extended depends on the fracture; and the cause of this is a blow with a hammer or weapon made of stone, as in their case.
And this type of fracture is penetrating and approaches the panniculus, which is left without bone; or it occurs in the face of the bone, and the wound of these two types of fractures may be large or small.
And this type of fracture is hollowed out in the bone, at the small thickness of the hair, and for this reason it is called "capillary" fracture.
And this type of fracture occurs due to hammering or striking with stone and similar, causing one layer of the bone to enter the joints, such as when it occurs in the hip bones when struck and penetrates into the inner layers of the joint.
Furthermore, this is done in wet bone bodies, such as infant skulls.
And for all these types of fractures, they are treated with cautery, such as separated needles. I will return to the topic in its proper place.
And we should know all these types of fracture by observation and examination of them, as well as testing for their characteristics through experiments with rotten flesh that is over them.
A special kind of hair is known because it appears on the bone, becomes visible, and whitens at the point where the fracture becomes black.
In the treatment of fractures, consider first the condition of the patient, and if you see signs that indicate fear such as vomiting of bile, stretching, loss of understanding, abscess of the throat, fainting, acute fever, itchiness and burning of the skin, or similar signs in their greater dispositions, one doubts whether it will heal.
If you see unusual signs, you hope for health, then you begin the treatment of it.
The cause is that if it has come upon you at the beginning as it comes in winter days, then you must study the setting of the bone for the twelfth day according to all disposition.
And if it is in the summer days, then you must take care to set the bone before the seventh day, knowing that if the bone is not set within seven days, it will rot from the fat, and the signs we have mentioned may occur.
And if the fracture has reached the fat covering the brain and is fragmented into small parts and crushed, then you must incise the divided and crushed part, as I will advise you.
And it is that you reason with the patient suffering from the fracture and expose the bone as usual and manageably according to your ability, based on the shape of the fracture, and do not make it difficult for the patient.
If you find that the bone has a discharge of blood or an abscess, at this point you must oppose it with what is necessary and know that you should apply warm cloths infused in wine and oil, let the wound rest until the abscess is calmed, and be sure of the flow of blood; then begin with the circumcision of the bone and removal of it.
And this should be done according to one of two ways of operation.
The first method is that you incise the bone with an incisor of strict size, and this is its form: Apply another incisor of slightly more depth, and this is its form:
And apply more the incisor than the second [one].
It is necessary that you have a number of incisors of different sizes, some of which are deeper than others; and some of them shall be shorter than the others and shall be at the end of their sharpness, made of iron or steel.
Use them with ease when striking the incisors to avoid hitting the head and damaging it.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then you must perform a perforation around it before administering the incisors with the non-penetrating forceps.
They are not called thus because they do not penetrate the end of the bone to that point; rather, at the tip of the forceps is a rounded extremity or edge similar to the margin or small circle that prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
It is appropriate that you take many of these forceps, as many as are necessary for the thickness of each bone, so that it is present in all parts of the brain, and the length and width should correspond to the thickness of the bone.
This is the form of three types of forceps: The quality of perforating around the broken bone is that you place the forceps on the bone and rotate it with your hands until you know that the bone has been pierced; then, remove the forceps to another place, and insert as much as necessary to measure the thickness of the ray or surrounding area.
Then incise with the incisors between each fracture of the bone, and use a thin one so that you can easily remove it, as we have said, until the bone is separated, or using your hand, or any other means using various tools such as chisels and fine forceps.
You must be careful that the incisors do not touch any of the nerves.
And so, when you pierce the bone, if it is continuous with the cartilage and separated from it, you must extract that part, and grind and file it on its roughness with a tool similar to a saw or a chisel, but nevertheless it must be more heated and finer than other saws.
If any small bone fragment or splinter remains, then take it with ease using the tools you have at hand; and care for the wound with linseed oil and ointments that we have mentioned.
The other method of operation is light and painless, called Guaiacum and laudanum for its great value; and this is the meaning: it is necessary for you at the beginning to start uncovering the fracture site where the break is most obvious and pronounced, until when you have uncovered that part and placed a stop on its side with a slow and gentle chisel of which this is the form:
And it is said that the linear fracture is lion-shaped and does not penetrate any further, while the angular fracture extends in two directions ahead, sometimes; that the linear fracture should be aligned with the cartilage, its edge penetrating the bone sharply.
Then strike the chisel of a fracture with a small mallet until the bone is completely cut through with ease as it turns, and you are sure that no panic occurs in any way, and if the patient was the most foolish and ignorant of all men, certainly, and if he was asleep.
If any cause remains attached to the bone of the patient in some parts of the bone, you will cut it with the chisel at an angle and remove it gently, because it is freed from harm and fear.
If the bone fracture does not penetrate into the patient, and what is cut off or left of the bone is its face, and remains rough and subtle splinters, you must grind the roughness and remove the splinters with fine files that you have prepared in various quantities to be able to administer them as needed in all places where it is possible to use the most suitable and correct amount of them according to how you lost your way in the operation of the broken bone and the shape of it.
It is necessary to use your reasoning and grind the bone at the beginning with the most subtle of those files, and continue to do so until you reach administering the more heated and finer of all them.
But in any of the other small capillary and subtle fractures, you must administer care as needed for correction.
It is because it is not limited to all those who have studied in that art. And stay on what we have shown in great fractures.
If the patient is rectangular when you remove the bone, then take linen of the appropriate size for the wound and immerse it in rose oil, then place it over the orifice of the wound; and take another folded or tripled cloth and immerse it in vinegar and rose oil and place it on the first cloth, pressing gently but not too hard on it, to avoid injuring the patient; and administer a dilute lotion over it, but do not press down too much, only as much as the wound requires.
Leave it with this care for a day or two until you are sure of a cauterized abscess; and then loosen it and administer medicines that are excessive dryness, such as linseed oil, flour of eggs, powder of poppy seeds, and similar things.
It is that you make powders of these medicines that are powdered over the wound, such as dry ones; and generally, administer all medicine with the property that it absorbs and does not irritate.
And be careful that the wound in your care is clean; and do not add any unguents or other things to it; nor should you allow virulence to accumulate there; because when it is near the patient's brain, it corrupts it and poisons him, and brings upon the patient a most wicked malice.
And be careful in the head cavity, because when the bone is cleaned and especially when the care of it is administered, it becomes darker on its surface; therefore, consider whether the patient experiences the accidents that we have mentioned, knowing that it is harmful without any doubt.
And if it does not happen blackness, but rather from the medicine that is applied, and it is in virtue of that medicine that the blackness occurs, then you should take honey one portion and three portions of rose oil. Here is the translation for this sentence: And wrap that cloth over the wound; and place that on top of the dressing; take care of it with the appropriate healing spices until it is healed.
This line appears to be a title for the third section or chapter. It seems to have been written in Middle English or Old French, as it lacks articles and conjunctions commonly found in Latin, Italian, Spanish, and modern English. However, without more context, it's challenging to provide an accurate translation. The number "iii" suggests that this is the third section or chapter of a medical text.
Here is the translation for this sentence: On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Here is the translation for this sentence: Know that it's not broken at the nose but two portions split together due to pressure from above, or one of those is observed, because there are two bones in it, as the lower portion is cartilaginous and not broken, and it doesn't happen to it, but rather swelling, twisting, and congestion.
Here is the translation for this sentence: But if one of the two portions is broken, then you should insert a small splint into the patient's nose and hold the fracture within it, and press it from outside with your hand until the nose returns to its natural shape. Here is the translation for this sentence: Let this be done by you with ease, and take care that you do not harm the patient in your treatment.
Here is the translation for this sentence: And if the fracture is in the upper portion of the nose, do not approach it, but rather equalize the end of the bone where there is a slight depression.
Here is the translation for this sentence: And if the fracture is in both portions, then you should do as follows.
Here is the translation for this sentence: And collect yourself with the restoration of it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, you should wait until the seventh or tenth day and rest the wound under a cauterization.
Here is the translation for this sentence: Place a piece of cloth in the end of the nose if the fracture is in one portion, or put two pieces of gauze, if the fracture is in both portions, and let it be thick enough to fill the cavity of the nose.
Here is the translation for this sentence: And some of the ancient restorers say that gauze should be sewn with thread and kept on all days, but I do not find it so; however, you should sew the cloth in linen or hemp fabric with powdered chalk; then leave it there until the bone is set and the cartilage hardens.
Here is the translation for this sentence: At times, you can insert your finger in the nose instead of gauze because it is wrapped in lion's cloth; and it may be that the fracture of the nose is very severe, and the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
Here is the translation for this sentence: This cause is not necessary for you; if you wish, do it, and if you wish, use gauze.
Here is the translation for this sentence: And if there is another wound that requires cauterization, fill the nose with a piece of beeswax or lard infused in vinegar and rose oil, or with quicklime.
Here is the translation for this sentence: But if there is no wound requiring cauterization, you should fill it from outside with flour of wheat and powdered coriander mixed with linen fabric; then place a piece of lion cloth over it, and do not let any fluid enter the nose.
Here is the translation for this sentence: But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small or comminuted fracture, you should cut across them and extract them using instruments suitable for that purpose; then sew the incision, treat it with something that strengthens and consolidates it, and apply appropriate ointments.
Here is the translation for this sentence: And if there is a lesion inside the nose, you should treat it with gauze and administer lead cannula until it is completely healed.
This line appears to be a title for the fourth section or chapter. It seems to have been written in Middle English or Old French, as it lacks articles and conjunctions commonly found in Latin, Italian, Spanish, and modern English. However, without more context, it's challenging to provide an accurate translation. The number "iv" suggests that this is the fourth section or chapter of a medical text.
Here is the translation for this sentence: On the restoration of the jawbone when it is broken.
Here is the translation for this sentence: When the lower jawbone is broken, and the fracture is not accompanied by an ulcer, be careful that the fracture is only on the outside, without being broken in two and curved towards the inside. In such a case, its recognition is easy.
Here is the translation for this sentence: Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; similarly, if the fracture is on the left jawbone, then you should insert your right index finger. Press gently on the swelling of the fracture towards the inside with one hand while applying pressure from the outside of the fractured bone with the other hand, and align it correctly in this manner.
Here is the translation for this sentence: And if the fracture of the jawbone has already separated into two, you should administer extension on both sides according to correct principles until it is possible to align them.
Here is the translation for this sentence: If there is concussion or displacement of teeth, you should strengthen those that you believe will remain with gold wire or silver wire or ivory; then place wax over the fractured jawbone and over the double cloth and over a large needle well made or a piece of sola long enough to cover the jawbone. Then apply it as appropriate based on the nature of the injury and the application, until it is not destroyed.
Command the patient to rest and remain calm, and stop giving them sour lemons (to eat or drink).
If you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, then on the third day you should examine and unbind it; and apply whatever remedy to correct what is already altered, using powder of milled oats, albumen of eggs or flour of chamomile, as you will leave the cotton there, and place woolen lion's wool over the application.
And so, when the plaster is attached and adjusted over it, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it alone until it is healed and the fracture is strong; for this fracture is often strengthened in three weeks.
And if another pus-filled ulcer appears, then administer what was mentioned earlier in its treatment until it is healed, and remove the ulcer as well.
And if the fracture is open, consider whether it is a separated piece of bone or shattered, and you should carefully remove those splinters with what is necessary for the removal of such things using instruments.
And if the openings of the wound are narrow, you should enlarge them with a probing instrument according to your necessity.
Then, when you have removed the splinters and there is no need to remove more, you should close the openings of the wound if they are wide; and if not, place one of the dressings that are suitable for it over it and let it heal.
Chapter V.
On the restoration of a dislocated neck.
In three ways, a dislocation of the neck can be broken through the muscles in front:
For if it is broken, separated, or separated into two parts without splinters; and this is easy to restore; or it is such that there are splinters, and its restoration is difficult; or the fracture is open.
And the operation when the fracture is not open is to have two assistants present, one to hold the broken neck and follow its movement, and the other to extend the neck along that fractured part.
Then bind the fracture with ropes until it is shaped as desired and not in a hollow or concave shape.
And if more extension is needed, you should place a roll of fabric or wool under the patient's back and make it as large as necessary; then stretch and lift the neck and support the head with your hand until the fracture is bound as desired.
And if you cannot bring the extremity of the neck to the fractured part, which is necessary for traction, you should have the patient lie on their back and place a larger cushion on the muscles of it.
The assistant presses the muscles of it towards the fractured part until the bones of the neck are raised as much as possible on the traction hook above, and then you correct the fracture and bind it with ropes.
But if the neck feels painful and is swollen, you should cut it open and remove the splinters easily.
And if it is held in the bones, you should make an incision in it with one of the cutters that you have prepared for this purpose, as you had placed the saw that serves for cutting bone; and the saw is made of wood or iron, and its shape is like this:
And it is similar to the shape of a cauldron, with its concavity facing downwards; and let its width be as necessary for the bone, according to its thickness or thinness.
But the length of it should be as possible for the operation; that is, there should be two extremities in this way, and one extremity should be wide and the other narrow.
If the wound caused by the incision that you made when you removed the splinter from the bone is wide and there is certain pus-filled ulceration, you should close the two lips of the wound with sutures.
If the wound is narrow or there is a fear of pus-filled ulceration, you should fill the wound with cloth and powder according to the size of the wound incision.
If pus-filled ulceration appears, you should place a cloth soaked in vinegar and rose oil on it.
And since the splint should not be above the broken bone; therefore you must observe the patient every day, so that when the limb is softened or the swelling has decreased, then you correct it and strengthen the fracture.
Then place the pillow of the patient under their neck and let them sleep on their side, with their head turned towards one side; in this way, their arm should be raised from the lower part of their body, thus lifting the fracture of the vertebra to the elevation of the muscle; or the arm should be tied to the neck.
And do not loosen the bandage unless there is pus or abscess in the area, within twelve days.
And renew the plaster if you see that it is wet on that side, and adjust it in the narrow place and restore it until it is restored and the fracture of the vertebra is coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some cases are made in men for a longer period of time.
Chapter VI.
Of the healing of shoulder fractures.
The handle of the spatula is broken near its base, but not the blade itself.
Therefore, when the base of the bone is broken - and it is broken in a midway location - and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture prepare it and reduce it according to its natural position in every possible way using any tools that are available to you.
And place a powder of flour and albumen on the broken location, apply a piece of thick cloth; and place the blade of a thin table on it according to the size of the spatula or slightly more.
If the handle of the scalpel is concave in any of its places within the spoon-shaped area, then you plug the concavity with beeswax, and press the handle back to its original position.
Then strengthen it with a long wad of linen and a tight binding around the handle to keep it from moving out of its place.
Consider the wound each day; whenever it is softened, apply fresh linen to it and strengthen and straighten the handle if it has moved out of its place.
Keep the patient lying on their side.
And the spoon-shaped area is healed in twenty days or five weeks.
And when this number of days is complete, then you remove the linen, and know for sure that it is the bones from which the pain began and their dissolution is not feared.
If the pain persists at the site of the bone and the wound is swollen, then you cut it open, remove it, and proceed as I have said in the case of a fracture of the saddle-bone or abscess with cauterization if that should occur here.
Chapter VII.
On the healing of the broken foot.
The foot is sometimes fractured in its middle part and does not heal, but the extremities move and are swollen and crushed.
The type of injury that occurs when the middle part is broken, it declines towards the sides and leads to great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, high fever and vomiting; and it is evident in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
The healing of it is that the patient lies on their back, a cushion is placed between their shoulders; and press the muscles and adjust the ribs with the hands of two assistants, being careful in the operation and position according to all means possible and appropriate for this, until the figure of the bone returns to its proper form.
And place a compress and absorbent material on it and cover it with a thin board of willow or walnut wood and similar materials in thickness, then wrap that over the fractured bone; and be careful not to injure the bone; and go along the contours of the back for some days, strengthening it with tight binding; and consider the bandage at all times, and when it becomes softened, strengthen it.
If necessary to remove the callus or abscess that occurs in the location, you must use corrosive or astringent agents, or pain relief, or cauterization for this purpose. You should cut and remove it, and remove the dressing and correct anything that occurs because of it with methods of treatment; and reduce the dressing if necessary, as well as tighten it until it is healed.
Chapter VIII.
On the healing of the ribs when they are fractured.
Know that the fracture of the ribs does not occur in thin places but only in thicker ones, and at the ends of their parts there is no contraction unless it is because they are cartilaginous. And knowledge of this is not hidden from sensation, and you must seek out the location of it with the fingers.
The healing is as follows: fill the fracture with fingers according to the method possible, until it is filled in as required, and cover and strengthen the broken bone with a dressing and splint if necessary.
If the fracture of the ribs declines towards the sides, then the patient experiences intense pain and puncturing sensation, as with the puncturing that occurs in those who have pleurisy, and this is done by placing a covering over the bones; and it causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, vomiting of blood; and this is difficult to heal.
The Ancients were clever in this with many ingenious methods.
And because of what they said: it is necessary to keep the food of the patient that produces swelling and flatulence, so that the stomach is inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the outside parts.
If we had something to prevent it from causing an abscess, cauterization would not occur, but if it does happen, then help with that.
They say that something should be placed over the wound and squeezed out strongly; it is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that the wound may attract excess fluid because of weakness.
They say: the place should be covered with wool that has been soaked in oil of cauterization, and powders between the ribs should be placed until it is filled; it should be pressed when enveloped according to the curvature; and the patient should be cured with the treatment of pleurisy of food and medicine.
And if the patient experiences vehement constriction which he cannot endure, and the bones are broken through a covering with punctures, it is feared for the patient; therefore, it is necessary to make an incision in that place, uncover the broken rib, and place over it an instrument that preserves the opening (the memory of which has been mentioned earlier), and cut the bones with ease, and extract that one.
And it is appropriate to bring together the two edges of the wound if it is large, by sewing, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
And if an abscess occurs inside (the body), then you must collect and crush pouders in rose oil and place them over the area, and treat the patient with that which is necessary for the abscess to be drained internally.
It should be placed on a bed above the leg that hurts until it is healed.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of the fracture of the backbone (spinal column) and neck.
Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and then the ligaments adhere to them, and similarly with the vertebrae of the backbone. And if you want to know whether it will heal or not when such a thing occurs, then consider, for if you see the muscles already softened and numb and dead and unable to move or strengthen them, and when you tighten them with your hands or prick them with a needle without pain, then you know that it is not healed, and in the case of such dispositions, it is fatal within a month.
And if they move and feel constriction with the hands and pricking, then you know that the nucha (back of the neck) of the bone is saved, and the patient will recover with treatment.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck that resemble such a thing and want to know whether it will heal or not, then consider the weight (of the head).
Then if you see that they have already softened, you should use the same remedies as in the case of the back, and especially when he lies on his stomach, he shows a wound and is unable to move it without pain, sometimes he is placed on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is fatal, and do not labor in treating it.
But if no such cause occurs, the condition is better and easier.
The treatment of it is to perform the cauterization of the abscess that you place on the swollen vertebra, either with oil of roses alone or with plasters of hysops (hysop); leave it for some days until the cauterized abscess is drained.
Then leave one of the comforting and existing plasters, and strengthen it with linament; command the patient to rest and be calm, and not sleep on the side that hurts until it is healed.
And if you have to cut the ligament of the vertebra or any other known cause, then you must saw on the bone and split it open; and bring together the two edges of the wound with suturing if it is large; and treat it with a poultice made from the entrails of animals until it is healed.
But if the lower end of the bone is fractured at the joint and the end of the coccyx, then you must enter the posterior part of the buttock with the left hand, and pull the fractured bones apart with the other hand as much as possible in accordance with the equation; and leave an emplaster and splint over it if necessary, and strengthen it.
If you feel fractured vertebrae, then you must open it, remove the bone and treat the wound with the treatment mentioned earlier until it is healed.
Chapter X.
On the restoration of the anus (anus).
The bones of the anus are broken, and if they break, then their fracture is not a simple separation at their extremities but rather a long oblique fracture that descends into the interior; and the patient feels pain in the area and shows constriction when it is fractured.
The restoration of it is to spread your hand over it until it covers the fracture (of the anus).
If the fracture is only at the end of it, you must pull it back as much as possible in accordance with the equation until it resembles its natural shape.
But if the fracture is in the middle or descends into the pelvis, you must make the patient lie on his stomach until the restoration of that fracture is prepared for you. And when you have swallowed it (the poultice), pause over the plaster, and apply pressure on that wooden or bone splint, and tighten firmly with a binding without fear of fracture or displacement of the splint.
Swallow the concavity with that which fills it to the point of binding, and command the patient to sleep on their back or their side.
But if an abscess is cauterized, then you cease the extension and restoration of it until the abscess is sedated, and apply pressure on that which sits over the abscess as previously described; and return to its restoration in this way and bind it tightly.
If the bones are fractured or shattered, treat them.
Chapter XI.
On the restoration of a forearm fracture.
The forearm is what is between the elbow and the shoulder.
If it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one is that you take a flat splint made of thick iron as follows:
And attach them to the fractured ends with laces, and hang it from a high place.
Make the patient sit on a stool, and then gently lower their broken arm onto the splint so that it reaches the elbow at the same level as the curve of the splint.
Suspend the arm from some heavy object or let the minister extend it to the sides away from the body, and have the doctor who is treating the fracture hold it with their hands until the fracture heals as needed.
The other method is that the patient lies on their back with their arm suspended from a pole placed over the fracture, and two ministers hold the object in place - one above the fracture with both hands, and the other below it - extending to their sides.
If you want the extension to be stronger, tighten the splint and the object over it with cords, and each of the two ministers should extend to their sides.
And if the fracture is near the extremity of the muscle, you should pause half of the cord on the joint and the other part on the bone below the muscle.
Similarly, if the fracture is near the elbow, you should pause the cord on that location and on the elbow as well.
Swallow it easily and without difficulty, and when it is swallowed in the appropriate manner with proper application, tighten it if an abscess does not form as a result.
But if an abscess forms, leave the binding for seven days, and apply a woolen cloth soaked in vinegar and olive oil on it to soften the abscess, and then tighten it.
The method to strengthen it (the broken bone) is to place plaster on the fracture and then place a napkin cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm above it (the splint), and place an open hand over its muscle.
Place a cloth and strengthen the splint around the arm so that the arm is in place instead of splinters, unless there is any reason forbidding it due to the broken bone.
Then use splinters.
And place the splinter that is wider and stronger than the others over the fracture; and place a space between each splinter equal to the width of the finger, and let the length of the splinters be according to the breakage with an addition of three fingers from all sides.
Then strengthen the splints as stated at the beginning of this chapter.
And your splint over the location of the fracture should be tighter. And as the fracture becomes longer, the splint should become looser.
Therefore, when the situation of the splints and the splinting is as described at the time when you restore the member to its proper position, then you do it (the operation).
And if there is fear of an abscess, leave the splinting and the splints for seven days as described (previously).
And consider the limbs on all sides for three days so that no inflammation or pressure occurs in the wound area, or food is prohibited from reaching the member due to excess splinting; and therefore correct everything as described (previously).
But if you are certain that there will be no cause of this, do not remove the ligature except after three days or more.
Let the patient's head rest on their chest, and their hands be on their stomach.
Place the cooked egg full of woolen bandages over the fractured member and consider at all times of the night or day that the shape of the broken member should not be removed or dissolved, or that the ligament should be softened; therefore correct everything with your expertise.
Food for the patient should be given according to the order previously stated, so that the food is subtle at the beginning until it is strengthened; and then coarsen their diet.
For it is customary for the splint and cushion of it (the broken limb) to be strengthened for forty days; and then they should be removed, and a bath should be administered and medication applied with ointments that correct it.
If the fracture is not healing, do not remove the ligament and splint for up to two months.
Chapter XII
On the restoration of a broken arm.
An arm is composed of two bones that are called the ulna and radius; the smaller one is the one that I call the proximal (or lower), and the larger one is the one that is placed below the smaller one, from the distal (higher) part.
When only the major bone (radius) is broken or both bones are fractured together.
And when only the smaller bone (ulna) is broken above, the repair of it is easier and its healing is faster.
And when the distal bone (ulna) is broken below the fracture, the repair of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
Even worse is when both bones are fractured together.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller one (ulna) above, the doctor should make a small extension with ease until the fracture is bound.
But if the larger bone (radius) is the one that is broken, a more forceful extension is required.
And if both bones are fractured together, you must make the reduction less forcefully.
You must make the shape of the hand and restore it with an extension that is extended on a cushion, and let the tips of the fingers be at the sides above, as described before, and the thumb should be lower than the other fingers, and the patient should lie down centered on a low stool.
And place a cushion in front of it (the patient) at the height or incline of it (the fracture), so that the patient does not work excessively.
And extend the arm from the distal side below with your hand or ligament, and another minister (helper) extends above in the same way.
And the doctor should bind the bone until it is reduced to the best shape possible.
If there are any spurs in the fracture, you should make every effort to reduce everything in its place with your skill.
If there is a separated spur that pierces the skin and you are not hopeful for its healing, you should make an incision over it and remove it as described above.
But if the fracture is with a wound, we have already discussed that in a separate chapter, and therefore take care of it accordingly.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your treatment, then you line up a cloth dipped in rose oil and white wax, it should be between thick and thin, and hold the cloth with a tight binding until the abscess subsides; and then remove the wax and apply a prepared plaster made of milled powder and beeswax, and place sterilized needles; and let the needle that is pierced through the fracture be both thin and strong.
And know that the names of the bones in the arm are in the greatest arrangements, or if the fracture is in a joint or in two joints together.
Then place your bandage firmly and forcefully over the location of the fracture, and when the swelling extends to the parts above the fracture or the lower parts of it, loosen the bandage a little, according to the memory of it at the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough, and the one with which it is tied should be of medium thickness, as we have recommended.
Consider the limb and the ligament for several days. And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, such as swelling in the limb, then you must immerse the limb in warm water until the swelling subsides.
Leave the limb unbound until it heals, and then return the bandage.
And if the swelling has subsided and the bone has healed like those, then you correct everything with your skill.
Consider more if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive bandaging, for then you must loosen it slightly and allow it to run for several days until it reaches the nourishment again, and strengthen it.
If the patient does not experience any of the causes mentioned earlier, then you do not need to loosen it for about twenty days or thereabouts.
And let the hand of the patient be suspended due to your skill to prevent agitated movements, and let him sleep on his back.
Know that this fracture heals in thirty days or in forty days, and a small fracture heals in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the complexity and the skill of the treatment.
Chapter 13.
On the healing of the fracture of the thumb and fingers.
Know that at the base of the thumb and the joints of the fingers there is a fracture, but this does not occur unless it is caused by a sudden violent motion.
And when there is a fracture or dislocation in the hand, then you must let the patient continue to lie down and elevate the affected arm at an angle of forty-five degrees, and place his hand on top of it.
And let the doctor extend the broken bones and align them together with good alignment.
Then apply a plaster and stopper, if there is no abscess; and place a needle over the area according to its size, and you have already wrapped it in cloth.
If the fracture is in the palm of the hand, then make a pad-like bandage and tell the patient to hold it with his injured hand; it should be strengthened with a long cloth.
And the needle of the shoulder should be with cloth that has a certain amount of looseness, so that the shoulder is applied to the palm; strengthen it as needed.
If the fracture is at the outer joints, then you must place a needle and another needle from the lower part of the hand on the palm, so that the hand remains open and straight; and then place the bandage, as the hand is turned at the wrist between the fingers and ligaments.
If there is a fracture in one of the joints of the fingers, if it is the phalanx, then align it as needed and strengthen it with the palm; if you want, place a small straight needle under it to raise the fracture and prevent it from bending.
If the fracture is in other fingers, such as the middle finger or index finger, thumb, ring finger or little finger, align it and bandage it to the finger that touches it; or bind them all together, which is better; or place a small needle over it, as we mentioned earlier for the phalanx.
Consider in your treatment and apply the procedure for abscesses as we have explained earlier, according to what is needed when a cause of those arises, following the repetition of the narrative.
Chapter 14.
On the healing of the bone of the hip.
The bone of the hip is broken and declared by feeling when it swells in the area above and below the joint.
The healing of it is done in such a way that the ligament is tightened over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, and the patient lies on his stomach and on his face.
And let the doctor extend all the ligaments to their joints according to quality when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
If it is necessary to open the abscess, then let the ligament be drawn towards the navel at the separation of the incision, so that the extension expands and the other ligament stays below the fracture.
And if the fracture is to be pulled towards the navel, let the ligament be made near the navel and extend it at the incisions.
Then the doctor should align the bones with both hands inside and reduce it according to its natural appearance, so that it joins well. Afterwards, you must apply a plaster and suture, unless there is an abscess on the member. But if there is an abscess on it, leave it for several days until the abscess subsides, and then return to your treatment.
The suture should be done like this: you must cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it two or three times and remove any excess; then wrap the leg around to reach the heel and the abscess incision.
Insert a long iron between the abscess and the leg near the navel at the incision, and let the tips of the iron protrude from both sides as much as possible above the wound, and then turn it over the leg and abscess so that any excess bandage is removed.
Then press on the abscess at the location of that fracture with a probe, and place one probe on the bone of the leg.
And fill the hollow between the leg and the abscess with soft cloths, to coagulate the exudate.
And begin with strong stitches on the location of the fracture with three or four envelopes, and as you approach the ligament of the fracture, your suture should be smaller, lighter, and moister.
Extend the iron to both sides of the incision until it reaches the ankle of the foot, and tighten both ends of the probes from the other side so that the ligament does not protrude from its place.
Let the suture be loose on it so that there is no corrosion or abscess or inflammation and similar to these; and if any such cause occurs, then remove the sutures from it, correct everything as much as possible, according to what has been said several times.
But if there is a tumor in the bone that you have placed, then you must align it as far as possible; and if not, break it and remove it, and treat the one from which the recurrence is preceded until it is healed.
Some days are tightened this thigh fracture more than the stitches that were previously said in the arm and shoulder.
But in the treatment of it in this manner, do not let the patient walk with a limp; and if only one leg is treated, another leg must be applied immediately to it, so that it limps constantly.
Know that the thigh is tightened for forty days or a little more or less, and all of this is according to the variety of complications and other circumstances.
Chapter XV.
On the treatment of the fracture of the foot heel.
Know that the fracture of the foot heel lasts longer, but it happens more slowly.
But if there is a fracture, it is not only a break or crack at the incision, but it may be a wound or several wounds, and over all this is its feeling.
The treatment is to align what is broken at the incision with the tools mentioned above, until it is reinforced and joined as far as possible by calculation and ease of fabrication.
And apply plaster and press on the round probe if necessary; tighten above it with an appropriate suture.
And consider all the arrangements that were recommended in other fractures, such as abscess and similar to those, but beware of any incident that is harmful to it until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the topic of the healing of the femur fracture.
Know that in the femur there are two bones, one of which is large and called the femur; and the other is slender, and called the neck.
And it happens with one of the types of fracture that occurs in both bones of the arm, and for this reason restoration is done similarly to the restoration of the arm and the procedure is the same.
If both bones are fractured together, the femur will be completely shattered.
And if only the smaller bone is fractured, the femur will be partially shattered above.
And if only the larger bone is fractured, move it below and this is one of the causes that you are not familiar with.
Then apply extension, alignment, and ligature of the pins according to the same method.
However, beware if the femur fracture is large and has many stages, that the extension should be lesser and more gentle, and alleviate it with your skill.
And in the femur there is a cause for operation on the arm when you attach the pins and complete all the procedure, then take handfuls of willow sticks which are placed below the causes that have been placed in soles, and they are made specifically from palm branches; align them with those that have a small thickness, and not be rough, and their length according to the length of the femur, and from the neck down to the bottom.
Then wrap each piece of cloth in two layers according to the length, and place one over the fracture of the femur on one side and the other over the fracture of the femur on the other side, and they should be from the neck down to the bottom of the foot.
Then tie the two pins in three places of two extremities and at the middle location, because with this structure the femur is prevented from collapsing to the left and right sides, and this is a good position.
And already administer a splint of wood according to the length of the femur, and it should be placed under the femur to prevent movement.
Furthermore, beware that you do this in a fracture, and when the fracture is an ulcer specifically.
And consider the femur every day and observe it for further study, and keep it from abscess and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any such cause occurs, then oppose yourself to it until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the topic of ankle fractures, foot bones, and toes.
In the ankle, it does not always occur that the entire bone is fractured; rather, some fractures may occur in the foot bones, and in the toes, fractures are rare, and they do not occur except during dislocation.
And if the foot bones are fractured and sometimes these bones are raised above themselves, then the patient should place their foot on the ground prepared in this way (like walking).
And place one foot on what is raised above these bones, and press down, hold it in place until it returns to its original position.
And apply plaster and stop it on top, and place a small table under the stomach of the foot with two flat surfaces.
And strengthen that with the foot in a descending position, as you have wrapped it with cloths and other necessary measures.
And after three or four days have passed, you can remove the ligament, as you will find the bones that are bound together, whether they are fractured or dislocated, and the procedure in these cases is the same.
But if some toes are fractured, you should restore them and bind them in the same way as I have recommended for the restoration of fingers in the hand. Place the fractured toe pin in accordance with the length of the toe and let it be slightly oblique; and place the foot on this table which I have recommended, and strengthen it in an appropriate position.
But if what is fractured are two or three or more bones, you should place a pin of the appropriate size on each toe wrapped in lion cloth, and strengthen the table under the bottom of the foot, and let it stand on one of the table's flat surfaces away from the stomach of the foot to keep it stable.
And it is important for you to remember that you should not overlook any of the causes mentioned to you in other fractures, and oppose yourself to all accidents as needed.
Chapter XVIII.
On the topic of the coccyx, pubis bone, and tailbone of a man.
When the woman's womb is broken, then make it stop bleeding in a bed of rushes and incline it towards the parting of the buttocks, keep it behind.
Then fill the woman's wound with wool and make sure it is sewn up in the same way as expected; then confine the woman and gradually raise her buttocks little by little, because everything inside is forgotten until it is in front of the birth canal as expected and the broken bone returns.
Then place poultices on the buttocks and when she wants to urinate, soak the cotton with ease and make her urinate, then put it back and return it as described in the method in which it was placed at the beginning, and finally return the first poultice.
Do this for seven days or thereabouts, because it will be restored.
If you wish, take an ovine bladder and tighten it over the fracture with a cane tube; then insert the entire bladder into the wound, and inflate the cane tube with air until the bladder is inflated within the wound, because the fracture will heal.
Then fill it with cotton and leave it for as many days as recommended until it heals.
And when the bones of the thigh of a man or woman are broken, then administer in their healing and alignment of the bone what has been recommended for the bones of the pelvis.
What is right should not be hidden in these close fractures and that little more, especially for the one who has some study, practice, and understanding of this book; because that fracture indicates to you in the greatest dispositions of correct restoration and tightening of it, so understand well.
However, in the man's scrotum when it is broken, take comfrey leaf, put it on that; and place a covering of cloth over it, wrap it up, and leave it for three days or thereabouts until it heals.
Chapter .xix.
On the treatment of bone fractures when they are inflamed.
It is appropriate for the one who has a fracture with inflammation, especially if the bone is large like the femur or humerus, or similar to them, that you cauterize and drain it as soon as possible if the conditions for cauterization are present as I have already said.
And if the inflammation discharges pus, then it is necessary that you take care to retain it until you powderize over it with trisacris, unless there is another reason for this.
And begin the treatment of the fracture on the same day and do not delay it unless there is an abscess.
However, if there is a cauterized abscess, you should leave the treatment of it for up to nine days, until the abscess is discharged, and do not approach it on the third and fourth day, because you will cause bad consequences.
If the bone is broken and protruding from the covered area, then it is necessary to perforate it, reduce it and bind it with your hands using minimal extension.
If you are not prepared and the situation requires the use of your hands, then you reduce it with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight fingers, and the width according to the size of the wound; and it is necessary for the doctor to choose among three or four depending on the size that is needed in treating all types of fractures.
It should be round and not too large to prevent it from being bent during the operation.
It should have a sharp point at its edge with thickness increasing towards the top and decreasing towards the joints.
And this is its shape:
It is called "lambrequin volant atalier" in Greek, and therefore it is a small pallet.
To prevent the tip of the splint from being raised above the protruding bone's edge, it should be placed level with its edge.
Apply this to one side until the bone is reduced and bound with some kind of restraint.
Therefore, bind the fracture's edges together and if the broken end is delicate, do not use the instrument as a good rule, instead, insert the instrument into the bone to gain leverage.
If you are unable to reduce the bone completely with the recommended instrument, then use an appropriate cutting tool such as a saw in any convenient manner.
Remove any sharp or rough areas remaining on the bone.
Once the bone is reduced, and the patient feels intense pain gradually subsiding, you know that the bone has not returned to its natural position; therefore, do what you can to relieve the patient's suffering.
Once you have completed the bone restoration process, submerge it in a black mustard-like oil and if it is summer, do not cover the wound with any greasy substance or oil, to avoid infection and corruption.
Provide stitches during the completion of the bone restoration process, and leave the wound open just enough to insert the probe with forceps and apply bandages according to the size of the wound.
Be very careful not to strain the wound with the fracture, as many foolish doctors have caused their patients' death or gangrene by doing this, resulting in their punishment. If the ligature is loose, soft, and different from the ligatures used for other fractures.
If the wound is large or bad and you fear the possibility of other complications as we have warned about, and feel pain in the area, then do not apply stitches but rather use a hard bandage instead of stitches and tighten it with those.
When the wound starts to develop pus after a day or two, remove the dressing that you had placed on it with oil, and apply warm compresses, using the usual remedies for treating wounds such as tetracalcium phosphate (four calcium phosphates) and similar substances.
It is necessary for you to loosen the ligament and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and the limb should be prepared in such a way that the pus drains out towards the joints with ease.
If the wound continues for several days without being consolidated or healed, you should know that it is a sign of infection and require further investigation. In the case of infection signs that are separated and drained, those that do not separate and cause pain and swelling, you should perforate them according to what is possible for you.
If the wound festers or ulcerates, it is symptomatic of a corruption or putrefaction, in such a case, it is necessary to apply one of those treatments that are appropriate for its cure, which is preceded by a description in its respective chapter.
And about that which requires my full attention and you present your case: when the bone is fractured, it emerges from the member like the bones of the thigh or joints and similar to those of large members, and do not presume extraction from there, nor attraction, for many observed incidents occur through this, causing death; leaving it inside which may fall apart by itself within about twenty to thirty days. Then, cure the wound if you see it, and if it does not leave it as it is.
Chapter 20.
Treatment for knotting that occurs in the mark of any fracture.
Many observed this knotting in the mark of healing from a fracture, and it is particularly common near joints, and its figure resembles that of the member; furthermore, it strongly hinders the member from performing its natural function.
Therefore, consider if the knotting is recent and administer medicines that have a styptic effect such as aloe, and enses, mirra, cinnamon, and similar; in this way take some or all of them, and wrap it with linen, or albumen of eggs, or vinegar, and place it on the knotting with gauze, and compress it firmly to achieve good constriction.
Leave the extraction of that knotting for many days; then remove it and apply another one, until the knotting subsides; or strengthen it with a lead sheet properly, for lead has the property of retaining everything that is inflamed in the members.
But if the knotting has already hardened and is tight and necessitates its constant removal, then cut it through the most appropriate division of the place, and excise the excess and inflammation, or cut it with sharp scissors until it subsides; and heal the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
Treatment for the restoration of a fracture when it has been restored and ensure that the member remains subtle and fragile according to its nature.
When a fracture of the bone is restored, and it remains subtle and fragile, it is not made except for many reasons: one of which is an excessive amount of solution of ligament and ligature not in accordance with what is required; or due to excess strictness of ligaments before the nutrient is prohibited from running to the member; or due to excessive embrocaccio (a medical term referring to a type of swelling); or due to superfluous movement not at the right time; or due to a lack of blood in the body of the patient and debility.
Treatment for this is to feed the patient and make his heart tender until the blood is multiplied in him; administer baths; and apply a poultice and oil over it.
Then place a plaster on the member, so that the plaster attracts nourishment to it, or continue the embrocaccio with warm water, until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter 22.
Treatment for the bones fractured incorrectly when they are restored and prevent their operation from what is required.
When the member has already been restored and there is a need to correct its deformation and prominence of the fractured bone and knotting, and it is due to the shape of the member, nevertheless, the member is not prohibited from performing its natural function; therefore, it is not necessary for you to take the word of anyone who claims that the member was newly fractured.
But there are many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is highly criticized and causes great fear of the sign of which death is imminent.
But if the limpness and knotting are recent, then it is necessary to embrocaccio (swell) with warm water in which soft herbs are placed, such as althea leaves, radishes, mallow, and similar; and make a poultice of it with a mollifying plaster like dyallachylon; or take mustard plaster made from the juice of radish and mix it with gum arabic or oil of cumin, and apply it; or take ripe figs and crush them with pigeon feathers, and similar medicines that are called amorcillos consolidation.
Some situations are resolved by gentle and persistent rubbing that is applied to the most moist areas, and continuous movement of the affected limb in all directions at all times.
If tortuosity has advanced and it becomes hardened and turned into a stone and requires surgical treatment, then it is necessary to remove the pus that has accumulated over it and dissolve the bone, and whatever excess growth from that area of the meat should be removed with fine saws, and ease should be given in that area through solicitation and study.
Capital. XXIII. (This line appears to be a heading or title, indicating that we have moved on to Chapter 23 in this medical treatise.)
On the subject of dislocation.
Dislocation is essentially the displacement of one of the body's joints, which prevents movement and causes pain and serious injury to the affected limb.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to act immediately and reduce the displacement as soon as possible, for if reduction is delayed, the joint becomes infected and difficult to reposition.
And for this reason, it is not good or advisable to wait during the time of infection, as many times it causes spasms and prolonged pain.
But when this happens, you must approach the operation of the patient, and be ready to stop the infection before it spreads; wrap the affected limb in hot water and oil, and reduce it with ease.
And let all members be healed by the medicine that will come to its location.
And now we have completed the discussion on dislocation, following the order of fracture from the most superior to the more inferior parts of the body.
Capital. XXIV. (This line appears to be a heading or title, indicating that we have moved on to Chapter 24 in this medical treatise.)
On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
If both jaws are dislocated, they must not be left untreated for long; the dislocation of both can occur in one of two ways: either they return to their original positions with minimal movement, and are slightly loosened; or they are completely dislocated, causing difficulty in opening the mouth, preventing the patient from speaking or closing it, and the tongue is wrapped around itself.
But if the dislocation is minor, then it should return to its original position with minimal effort.
But if the dislocation is complete and total, reduction must be administered gently, without delay.
The physician should position the patient's head, and insert his thumb into the affected side of the dislocated jaw within the mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or insert both thumbs simultaneously, if the dislocation affects both sides, and use other fingers to hold the patient's tongue out of the way. The physician should then instruct the patient to relax their jaws and allow them to move freely from each side, and then manually guide the jaw back to its original position and cover it with a cloth until it is in place.
If reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, administer warm water and oil as an analgesic, and make it easier to reduce both jaws without delay, as previously stated.
Therefore, when they are repositioned and held in place, the patient's mouth should be closed and not loosened, a cloth soaked in wax and oil should be placed over the area, and a thin layer of warm wax and oil should be applied to lubricate the joint.
The patient should sleep on their back, with their head between two pillows to prevent it from turning to either side; do not force the patient to turn in any direction. Let the patient rest and eat light food such as lemon, until the pain is relieved and the jaws are immobilized, at which point you may administer whatever medication is desired.
The medication should be administered gently, and avoid forcing the opening of the mouth during eating, drinking, speaking, or yawning, until the jaw is immobilized and healed.
If the reduction of two dislocated jaws is difficult at any time and they do not return to their original positions, many times fevers and sodium-rich sweating occur, and the abdomen of the patient becomes swollen and filled with bile.
When you see this, you should know that it is a disaster; and many times the patient dies within ten days.
Capital. XXV. (This line appears to be a heading or title, indicating that we have moved on to Chapter 25 in this medical treatise.)
On the reduction of dislocation of the vertebra and the end of the muscle.
The dislocation of the furcula is not in the lower back due to its continuous connection with the legs; however, it can be dislocated at the neck and that is detectable through examination.
The restoration of it (the dislocation) is for the patient to lie down on their back and extend their arms. Then close the area with your palm using strong compression as it will return (to its place).
Place a cushion on that plaster and crush it (the dislocation) strongly.
However, the end of that bone which is continuous with it (the neck) is not dislocated on any day; therefore, it must be reduced and immobilized as previously mentioned and as you are equipped to do so.
Place a cushion on that plaster, apply pressure, and splint it, and command the patient to observe tranquility and rest until they are healed.
And with this treatment method, the end of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capital XXVI. (Chapter twenty-six)
On the reduction of a dislocation of the muscle.
Know that a muscle is dislocated in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated at the neck and the other is below (the neck).
The second is that it (the dislocation) may be at the neck above the muscle, and this happens rarely; it is not dislocated at the back of the shoulder, nor at the front due to the nerves.
Furthermore, it is dislocated and exits at the back of the neck below the muscles, and this more often occurs in those with little flesh, as it dislocates easily; however, in those with a lot of flesh, it comes out with difficulty.
And sometimes, due to blows or accidents, a hematoma occurs on the muscle, which is treated with cauterized abscess and then dressed as it is already dislocated.
Therefore, you must find out what the condition is and then proceed with its treatment.
The dislocation at the back of the neck below the muscles is known; therefore, you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal muscle, as you will find various differences among them; and you apply pressure on the top of the muscle in such a way that it feels like squeezing a hawk's head, and the patient cannot reduce their hand or arm due to all movements.
If it is a dislocation of the foot or ankle, you must find clear evidence of it and not hide it.
The reduction of this dislocation is done easily when it is fresh and the patient is young.
The reduction of it (the dislocation) is for the minister to raise the hand above it; then place your thumbs below the neck of it, and elevate the joint with force towards its place, and the minister raises the hand, extends it; then place it below so that it returns easily.
However, if it does not return by the method previously mentioned, and from the beginning, several days have passed since the dislocation occurred, then the patient must be bathed in warm water and administered a plaster made of mollifying and linen substances such as comfrey, fenugreek, and marshmallow in water, and it should be administered.
Then place the patient on their back and support the neck of it with a pillow that is neither too loose nor too tight, and then the doctor should place his foot on the ball, lift the head of the muscle using strength, pull the patient's arm towards the affected side to prevent it from going out again, and another minister should hold the patient's head so that it does not go out again, as it will soon return to its place.
And if you wish, reduce it (the dislocation) using this method: and have someone present who is taller than the patient, standing on that side, enter their muscle below the neck of the patient and lift the neck of the patient to the top, bringing it above the affected area until the patient is suspended in mid-air; another minister should pull the patient's arm from the affected side of their abdomen. However, if the patient is lightweight, then it must be suspended using something else to weigh it down, as the dislocation will soon return.
It is reduced in the same way using another method: by placing a long pole on the ground, the head of which is rounded like that of a mortar pestle, neither too thick nor too thin, and then supporting the patient below; then place blankets over the top of the pole, with the patient standing according to the length of the pole, and extend the arm of the patient to the affected side of the other part; and extend the body of the patient from the other side using force, as the joint returns to its place quickly.
If the reduction of it is difficult due to all the reasons mentioned earlier, then use this treatment: by taking a pole whose length is two forearms and width of four fingers, and the thickness of it should be reduced near the neck in this manner:
Then cover the rounded head with blankets to prevent the pole from hurting the patient.
And let the patient's thighs be placed and held still, and let your hand or arm be extended into their groin, and let the arm and hand be bound to the support and the extremity of the wrist.
Then let the patient's arms be placed on a ladder of steps according to their length, and let the hand be extended into their groin, and let the other side be suspended from the other, as soon as the joint is dislocated.
When the dislocation is corrected in any way possible for you, then you must hold the thigh still with wool bandage of sufficient quantity; and apply a plaster prepared from powder of molasses and albumen of egg over the entire muscle, so that it is turned over, and strengthen the thigh with a decent ligature; and the limb should be wrapped around the plaster, and the hand of the patient should be attached to its neck, and let it rest, and do not allow the hand of the patient to move for seven days.
And it is necessary that the food of the sick person be reduced until the member is comfortable, because it is more easily healed in this way.
And let food be given sparingly for seven or five days, and let there be exercise, but if it is stopped and does not soften, then it will heal anyway.
But if the joint is dislocated more than seven times due to moisture that happens to it or for another reason, then in that case it should be treated with a cautery with three prongs, as mentioned before in the chapter on cauterization.
If all of this is done and the ligament is not loosened and the joint is not closed for seven days, and the plaster and ligature are reduced, but it is not closed and swollen and cannot lift that arm above the groin, then you know that the nerves of it, which are at the end of the muscle, have become injured or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be properly seated in its place.
To correct the dislocation of that joint, you must press and extend the foot and the back of the leg with your hands until it returns to its place.
And another ligature should be applied there, and cure it until it is healed.
If recovery of the member is delayed or there is prolonged grave illness in the member and slow movement of it, then the patient should be bathed several times until the gravity has subsided and it returns to its natural state.
Chapter XXVII.
On the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all directions, especially in front of the back, and the dislocation of it cannot be hidden from you because it appears swollen or tender according to any figure by which it is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated shoulder as far as possible, this is clearly declared to you, because the joint is concave and the arm cannot bend nor touch the muscle.
Therefore, you must quickly press and reduce the dislocation as soon as it appears to form an abscess, for if it forms an abscess, the reduction of it is difficult, and healing does not occur completely; especially in the back direction, because all other types of dislocations are worse, and more painful, and several days later death can ensue from it.
The restoration of it, when this is possible to reduce, is that the hand of it should be extended with two hands, and the arm should be spread apart, and the doctor's hands are on the shoulder and under it, and he pushes the joint with the tips of his fingers or with the flat of his palm until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is in front, then it returns in such a way that the hand bends with its own hand, until it strikes the shoulder with the flat of its palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then you administer violent extension and strong movement.
And it is that two servants extend the arm, and have another two servants to prevent the arm from being overstretched.
And turn the entire arm around so that it is wrapped with long cloth around the hand of it, or with a bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil to help in lubrication of the joint with ease; and then push the joint with violent force until it returns.
And the reduction of it should be held on a plaster that is stiffened and strengthened with egg albumen, and tightened with a decent ligature, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and let it rest for some days.
And if the joint has formed in its place, then you unbind it and let it rest.
And if you see that the joint is not strengthening, then you should change the plaster and bandage, and let it rest for some days until it has healed; and then unbind it.
But if there is grave illness with the reduction of the joint, and its position is in motion, then administer moist heat in baths and subtle friction, and compression, until it has subsided; or place a poultice on the joint made from greasy material; and bind it, and let it rest on the bones for the day and night. And place that (the hernia or the affected area) back and immerse it in bath; when it subsides, you can treat the joint with tempered friction, and apply a warm poultice on that area three times, once, then twice, and the third time. Corruption has reached the internal intestine of the anus (rectum), up until it becomes narrow.
If desired, press on the wet and scalded cowhide patch with a pincer and hold it there for some time, as it will become soft and pliable from being moist.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder joint, which is between the arm and the hand.
The shoulder joint is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of a dislocated shoulder is easier than other joints, but it is essential to be quick in reducing it during the time it is dislocated, before the location becomes swollen or develops an abscess.
The reduction of a dislocated shoulder is done by placing the patient's hand on a table and extending their arm while placing your hand or palm over the joint area, pushing gently until it returns to its original position.
However, it should be considered whether the palm is already on the patient's belly, in which case you should extend and reduce their hand by having them place their palms on a table; if the dislocation precedes this, then you should position the patient's hand on the table such that the arm of the physician encloses the joint area.
If it returns quickly, that is good; if not, you should apply pressure with a poultice to relieve the swelling and allow it to heal on its own; do not apply any other treatment, as you cannot force the reduction of the dislocation before several days have passed.
However, the joint may return to its original position depending on its twisted nature; and do not inquire of the patient about any cause, but rather soften their arm so that it cannot be hardened by any cause; then you know that the nerves are broken or severed, and you should not attempt to manipulate the area except with a cautery, as it may cause further damage.
Once the shoulder has returned to its normal position, you should apply pressure with a poultice that you have recommended and let it remain for ten days, and then it should be loosened, allowed to rest, and the arm of the patient should be exercised.
If the shoulder remains immobile and there is some gravity in it, you should gently massage it with warm water and friction for a few times until relief is achieved.
Chapter XXIX.
On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Fingers can sometimes be completely dislocated in various directions.
If a finger is dislocated at the base of the palm or on its back, you should stabilize the finger and gently manipulate it to reduce the dislocation until it returns to its proper position.
Support the finger's head and suspend the part that is dislocated, allowing it to rest for two days.
Suspend the affected limb and extend it until it straightens on its own on that same day.
When it is night, let the patient follow that narrative, and do not cease to loosen and exercise the affected limb during the day while keeping it immobile at night; continue this for several days until it strengthens.
If the elbow is dislocated on its back, you should place it in that position and perform the same procedure as described earlier until it heals.
Perform the same procedure for dislocations at other locations.
Chapter XXX.
Treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae in the back.
When complete dislocation of the vertebrae in the back or neck occurs and only a few vertebrae are displaced from their original position, it is not to be treated because death awaits the patient.
The sign of this is that the patient's excretion is involuntary and they cannot retain it; several parts of their body or two sides of their chest or both arms, or one of them, are swollen, or one vertebra has been displaced from its position, as it has been dislocated and moved in four directions several times.
Therefore, it has been dislocated backwards and is called scoliosis.
However, the treatment for scoliosis is that you should consider whether it occurred in childhood, as there is no treatment or healing for it in that case.
More in that which comes by chance or by blow, or similar to those, the Ancients already said the methods of cure with a long speech, from which the most returns; but I have abbreviated it from that about which there is little need for explanation, for closer proximity to clearer explanation, and which I have expanded and formed from various instruments from that one, about which I will show you and expand on it.
And from those, only the one that occurs specifically in the toes is cured with what I recommend.
And it is that the patient lies on his back with his head near a wall, and spreads out below him so that his feet are not touched.
And a straight stick should be placed, fixed in the ground at the end near his head, and another stick at the other end to lift up his feet.
And the servant holds the stick, but not fixed in a hole; and another servant holds the other according to that form.
Then wrap the head of the patient and gently tug on the string fastened to his forehead, extending the end of the string to the stick that is at his head, and tie it there; and firmly hold the other string around his hips, near his waist, and over his chest, and adjust all the strings and tie them to the other stick that is at his feet.
And each servant extends the string to the division of the stick, but neither are the sticks and strings left alone in their places where they are fixed, but rather not fastened as said before.
And the doctor places his hands on the spine with firmness until it returns, or if he places a table under it, then he should adjust his feet under the table until it returns.
If it does not return in this manner, then take a table whose width or length is above three feet, and carve a hole in the wall near the patient where the end of the table fits. Then place the edge of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and tightens it firmly until the spine is bent and returns to its place.
And if you wish, turn the one that is turned with your hand; and it is that you place yourself on the ground facing the head of the patient at the end of the two sticks, whose length is a forearm each, and you place his head at the end of the two sticks in the same way; and the distance between each stick is a palm, and it should be made hollow in each stick so that it can turn easily, and each one should be firmly fastened to the ground so that they are not broken.
And it is a round stick in which there is a hole, and it should be turned in the holes of the two sticks.
And at the end of it is a hole in which the stick is formed, whose length is a palm that can turn; and in the other two sticks it is similar to that one.
And firmly hold the strings that you have stretched in the feet of the patient at the hole which is for his head, and the strings that you have stretched in his thighs at the hole that is for his feet.
And you should place each turn and there should be a servant who turns the ring with his hand, and the doctor bends the spine as said before.
When the spine is returned and closed, it is necessary to apply a dry plaster with powdered alum, and then stopper; and on the plaster place a wooden splint of a table whose width is three fingers or around that, and the length as much as the location of the gout, and over the part of the spine.
And let there be a thread with string as said before, and use the patient for subtle nourishment until he is healed.
And if there remains any danger in the place at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and heal by the administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and now it has been administered in that place lead foil.
Sometimes there occurs danger in the lower part of the spine on both sides, and it is due to dislocation; and it is that bone which was already weakened before so that it is not necessary to make provision for it with this medicine, for heavy labor will cause you to occur death.
Chapter 31.
On the treatment of dislocated hips.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not separate only by dislocation, but it occurs to those joints only when there is great movement and concavity.
The joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways, since it is dislocated at the inner parts, or at the outer parts, or at the front, or at the back.
The joint pain originates deeper within (the body), rather than at the front or back parts (of the body).
The sign of joint dislocation in the inner parts is when, as you align the healthy leg with the affected one, the healthy leg appears longer and the affected one more prominent, and the affected one cannot bend its knee, it must be straightened by pulling, using a cauterized cautery for this purpose so that the head of the dislocation has been reached here.
The sign of the joint dislocation on the outer parts is that the accidents happening there are contrary to this accident (dislocation).
The sign of joint dislocation in the front parts is when the leg expands according to its natural length, but does not bend due to pain at the knee, and if you try to move it forward it cannot do so; the urine is retained and the swelling is incised, and you must walk with it on a crutch.
The sign of joint dislocation in the back parts is that the knee does not expand and cannot bend the front part, which bends easily when swollen; the leg is shorter than the other one, and the swelling is relieved, and the head of the dislocation should be in this area.
However, the reduction of this type of dislocation depends on whether it is old or new. If the dislocation is ancient and has already healed in its position, then the reduction should not be attempted as it may cause further damage; thus, it is not a complete cure, and therefore, no improvement should be expected.
If the dislocation is recent and belongs to one of the four types of dislocations, you should try to relocate the joint and extend it inward and outward on both sides, moving it to the left and right, as this will relieve pressure and may not require additional treatment.
If the joint does not return by this method, you should prepare a strong instrument and extend the affected leg from below or above, using traction on the swelling that forms over the knee; another person should extend their hand above the knee, placing their hands deeper into the wound; another instrument should be used to tighten the bandage around the affected area, and another person should hold the end of the bandage.
The extension of the affected area should be from the knee to the ankle at the front or from the back to the shoulder blades (spine).
The extension of all these joints should take place during a single session, with the patient raised above ground level and hanging downwards.
This type of extension is common to all four types.
If the dislocation returns as described above, it will be good; otherwise, each type may require its own specific treatment.
In the reduction of this type (of dislocation), when the joint is dislocated and the dislocation occurs in the inner parts, it is necessary for the patient to lie down on their side; place bandages over the affected area at the location between the head of the dislocation and the hip, and extend the bandage from the knee towards the most remote part of the shoulder blade.
Another person should grasp the patient's arms and apply pressure to the large portion of the affected area on the outer side by applying strong traction in order for it to return to its original position.
This type of treatment is easier to perform than the others, reducing the affected member more quickly.
However, if you cannot perform the entrance according to this type of treatment in all cases, it is necessary to tie both the patient's feet together with a strong and light bandage around both ankles and knees.
And let each of his parts be four fingers' length, and the sick man's bed extended more than the other by two fingers' breadth.
And let the sick man be suspended over the head of the bed, and [let it] be at its highest point; and let its length from the ground be two arms' breadth.
And command a strong young man to crush the cushion, and let another strong young man hold up the sick man; and another strong young man press the hernia with force, because the joint will return to its place quickly.
But in reducing it yourself, when there is a dislocation beyond the division, you must make the sick man lie on his back as recommended in the previous instructions; and tighten the rope directly on the sick man's stomach and legs.
Then let two bedposts be placed, one at the feet and the other at the head; and let two more bedposts be adjusted at the middle of each post on which damp cloths are wrapped, so that the sick man is not harmed by the bedpost being between his legs, and [the extension] to the sides should not be narrowed.
And let each servant extend his part, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to art.
And when the dislocation is at the front divisions, then the bed should be slightly extended, as described in this narration on the bed; and the doctor places his right hand on the affected hernia, and with the other hand he compresses it, and with that compression he extends the opposite side to the other front division.
And if the dislocation is at the back divisions, then it is not necessary for the sick man to be extended to the sides, and he should be raised on a hard surface; indeed, he must be placed on a solid cause, as it was described earlier when the anus was dislocated to the front divisions, that is, as we said, the two cheeks of the anus must not touch each other, without harm.
And it is necessary to administer compression with a board on the location where the joint is.
Therefore, since the reduction is complex as described - and the sign of the reduction of that member is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend two bedposts for the sick man, and when you see those bedposts aligned and the sick man extends his stomach and expands it without excuse, you will know that the member as necessary is returned; and then you adjust two cushions and apply a paste and compress with bandages in such a way that the anus does not protrude in any division; and keep the patient at rest for three or four days.
And then loosen the rope and paste, and compare one stomach with the other.
Then, if you see those bedposts aligned in their natural position, you will know that the dislocation is closed, and then leave the sick man to move around.
And if you see any cause for softening, then you return and apply a paste, and press it in its original position, and leave it for three days.
And then loosen that, and let him walk slowly on each side for several days, until he is comforted.
Chapter XXXII.
On the cure of dislocation of the anus.
The anus is dislocated in three ways, as it is dislocated beyond the front divisions, within the front divisions, and more to one side behind than to the other; but not in front of the front divisions.
The sign of dislocation is that you command the sick man to press his stomach with his hand; then you will know that the anus is dislocated.
And the restoration of all three types is that you make the sick man lie down straight, so that he extends his stomach if possible; adhere your two hands to the edge of it, and hold his legs between your feet; and let the anus of him adhere to your palms, and keep those fingers pressed firmly against the anus of him until it returns to its place; and another servant extends his leg until the anus returns to its place.
The sign of recovery is that the stomach adheres to the chest without undue effort.
And then apply a paste to it and let the stomach adhere to the chest, and leave them pressed together with a bandage for three or four days, and then loosen the bedposts.
And do not allow the sick man to walk for several days until he is healed and comfortable.
But if the reduction of it is excused, then administer strong extension with ropes as described in the treatment of a hernia that was previously narrated.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the cure of dislocation of the leg.
The leg sometimes becomes swollen by minor movement, and sometimes it is dislocated due to complications, and the dislocation of it occurs either within the front divisions or beyond the front divisions.
The displacement sign is that you often see the thigh inflated, proceeding to separation at the part where it is dislocated.
The cure for displacement is gentle reduction, and it should be extended easily with the hands and guided back into its proper position.
Furthermore, in the treatment of a dislocation, it is necessary to keep the patient still, and to have a strong and capable assistant from behind the patient's back in the same place.
Then you should put your right hand on top of the patient's foot in the uppermost part, and your left hand below the foot at the level of the ankle joint.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and push it twice with your left hand, and extend it; and press the leg of the foot against your right hip with effort.
And do that two times as counted.
Then press the leg of the foot against the hip on the third count, and you are at the ankle joint.
So if the foot returns once or twice in this manner, and you see it is in place, that is good; otherwise, continue the operation, because it will return.
Furthermore, if the reduction of the dislocation is prohibited by what has been recommended, you should have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a flat stone on the ground, with it between the patient's thighs, and you should already have covered them with cloth to prevent discomfort for the patient.
Then the assistant should hold the patient's thighs, and another assistant should extend the foot with their hands or let it lie on the neck of the foot; and each assistant should extend their own part in the same manner, and the stone should remain between the patient's legs to prevent the body from being drawn to the sides beyond its extension.
The doctor should guide the dislocation back with their hands, and another assistant should hold the healthy limb at the sides, because the dislocation returns easily.
So when the dislocation returns and is declared to be the recovery of the reduction, you should then apply plaster and strongly bind it with linen, and tie the foot to the hip.
And beware or protect yourself from the nerves that are behind the thigh, so that the linen binding is not too tight and do not press it heavily.
Leave him like this for two or three days; if the binding becomes soft, remove it.
Then unbind him on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from walking for 40 days. But if it is necessary to go in front of the patient, it is not certain that the dislocation has not been dissolved and corrupted, and it should not receive treatment.
If there is an abscess, it is necessary that you administer the prescribed treatment for the abscess as described in another place of cure and dressing, until it has drained.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the cure of dislocation of the fingers on the feet.
It is necessary that the dislocated one be reduced with gentle extension without effort; if it is not difficult, advance easily.
But if the dislocation is in one of the toes on the foot, it is necessary that you keep the patient's foot still on a flat surface such as the ground or table, and remain like this as if he were walking.
And you stand by the feet, and place your foot on the joint, and press it with firmness into place until it returns, and ensure that it is in place and does not appear again at the prominence.
And you place the foot of that person on a table that holds the entire foot, with two legs, and press it firmly with proper structure for three days; and unbind it and let it rest from walking for several days, until it is strengthened and the reduction is assured.
Chapter XXXV.
On the various types of dislocation caused by wounds, fractures, or other conditions.
When such a case occurs and you engage in the cure of that injury and its restoration, many times deaths occur after several counts.
And therefore it is not necessary to assume the cure of it, but one who is wise in the art, experienced in long use, merciful and compassionate, patient, not hasty or presumptuous; and who uses at first medications that dissolve abscesses only, and allows the patient to rely on divine judgment, not to the one for whom salvation from destruction is hoped, but to the one for whose healing there is hope, and in which some hope appears. And therefore it is best to make the reduction at the beginning of the cause, before an abscess forms.
And if the member returns as desired, then administer treatment that dissolves abscesses and heals the wound with whatever is appropriate for drying poultices.
And if dislocation is accompanied by a fracture in separated bones, then you perforate the opening of those bones, and do what was said about simple injuries at their locations.
And watch out and avoid according to your virtue that which enters the channel in fearful places, following my preaching; for that is better for you because you should serve your Creator, and it will be more permanent for your glory, and it will be more healthy for your true body at those times. Thus ends the perfect words of Alhazen, may God bless him. Amen.
